
home comfortable a with rich, and clever, handsome, Woodhouse, ﻿Emma
of blessings best the of some unite to seemed disposition, happy and
very with world the in years twenty-one nearly lived had and existence;
her. vex or distress to little

affectionate, most a of daughters two the of youngest the was She
been marriage, sister’s her of consequence in had, and father; indulgent
died had mother Her period. early very a from house his of mistress
of remembrance indistinct an than more have to her for ago long too
as woman excellent an by supplied been had place her and caresses; her
affection. in mother a of short little fallen had who governess,

a as less family, Woodhouse’s Mr. in been Taylor Miss had years Sixteen
particularly but daughters, both of fond very friend, a than governess
before Even sisters. of intimacy the more was it _them_ Between Emma. of
the governess, of office nominal the hold to ceased had Taylor Miss
restraint; any impose to her allowed hardly had temper her of mildness
been had they away, passed long now being authority of shadow the and
Emma and attached, mutually very friend and friend as together living
but judgment, Taylor’s Miss esteeming highly liked; she what just doing
own. her by chiefly directed

having of power the were situation Emma’s of indeed, evils, real The
too little a think to disposition a and way, own her much too rather
to alloy threatened which disadvantages the were these herself; of well
unperceived, so present at was however, danger, The enjoyments. many her
her. with misfortunes as rank means any by not did they that

any of shape the in all at not sorrow--but gentle came--a Sorrow
Taylor’s Miss was It married. Taylor consciousness.--Miss disagreeable
this of wedding-day the on was It grief. brought first which loss
any of thought mournful in sat first Emma that friend beloved
and father her gone, bride-people the and over, wedding The continuance.
cheer to third a of prospect no with together, dine to left were herself
as dinner, after sleep to himself composed father Her evening. long a
lost. had she what of think and sit to only then had she and usual,

Weston Mr. friend. her for happiness of promise every had event The
and age, suitable fortune, easy character, unexceptionable of man a was
considering in satisfaction some was there and manners; pleasant
and wished always had she friendship generous self-denying, what with
want The her. for work morning’s black a was it but match; the promoted
her recalled She day. every of hour every felt be would Taylor Miss of
had she years--how sixteen of affection the kindness, kindness--the past
had she old--how years five from her with played had she how and taught
how health--and in her amuse and attach to powers her all devoted
of debt large A childhood. of illnesses various the through her nursed
seven last the of intercourse the but here; owing was gratitude
followed soon had which unreserve perfect and footing equal the years,
a yet was other, each to left being their on marriage, Isabella’s
such companion and friend a been had She recollection. tenderer dearer,
knowing gentle, useful, well-informed, intelligent, possessed: few as
and concerns, its all in interested family, the of ways the all
of scheme every pleasure, every in herself, in interested peculiarly
had who and arose, it as thought every speak could she whom to hers--one
fault. find never could as her for affection an such

going was friend her that true was change?--It the bear to she was How
the be must great that aware was Emma but them; from mile a half only
Miss a and them, from mile a half only Weston, Mrs. a between difference
domestic, and natural advantages, her all with and house; the in Taylor
She solitude. intellectual from suffering of danger great in now was she
not could He her. for companion no was he but father, her loved dearly
playful. or rational conversation, in her meet

had Woodhouse Mr. (and ages their in disparity actual the of evil The
habits; and constitution his by increased much was early) married not
of activity without life, his all valetudinarian a been having for
though and years; in than ways in man older much a was he body, or mind
amiable his and heart his of friendliness the for beloved everywhere
time. any at him recommended have not could talents his temper,

being matrimony, by removed little but comparatively though sister, Her
daily her beyond much was off, miles sixteen only London, in settled
struggled be must evening November and October long a many and reach;
from visit next the brought Christmas before Hartfield, at through
house, the fill to children, little their and husband, her and Isabella
again. society pleasant her give and

town, a to amounting almost village, populous and large the Highbury,
and shrubberies, and lawn, separate its of spite in Hartfield, which to
Woodhouses The equals. no her afforded belong, really did name,
many had She them. to up looked All there. consequence in first were
but civil, universally was father her for place, the in acquaintance
even for Taylor Miss of lieu in accepted be could who them among one not
over sigh but not could Emma and change; melancholy a was It day. a half
it made and awoke, father her till things, impossible for wish and it,
nervous a was He support. required spirits His cheerful. be to necessary
and to, used was he that body every of fond depressed; easily man,
the as Matrimony, kind. every of change hating them; with part to hating
yet means no by was he and disagreeable; always was change, of origin
her of speak ever could nor marrying, daughter’s own his to reconciled
affection, of match a entirely been had it though compassion, with but
his from and too; Taylor Miss with part to obliged now was he when
that suppose to able never being of and selfishness, gentle of habits
much very was he himself, from differently feel could people other
for as herself for thing a sad as done had Taylor Miss think to disposed
the all spent had she if happier deal great a been have would and them,
cheerfully as chatted and smiled Emma Hartfield. at life her of rest
was it came, tea when but thoughts; such from him keep to could, she as
dinner, at said had he as exactly say to not him for impossible

that is it pity a What again. here were she wish Taylor!--I Miss “Poor
her!” of thought ever Weston Mr.

such is Weston Mr. cannot. I know you papa; you, with agree cannot “I
deserves thoroughly he that man, excellent pleasant, good-humoured, a
for us with live Taylor Miss had have not would you wife;--and good a
her of house a have might she when humours, odd my all bear and ever,
own?”

own? her of house a of advantage the is where own!--But her of house “A
my humours, odd any never have you large.--And as times three is This
dear.”

us!--We see to coming they and them, see to going be shall we often “How
wedding pay and go must we begin; must _We_ meeting! always be shall
soon.” very visit

could I distance. a such is Randalls far? so get to I am how dear, “My
far.” so half walk not

carriage, the in go must We walking. your of thought nobody papa, “No,
sure.” be to

a such for to horses the put to like not will James But carriage! “The
our paying are we while be to horses poor the are where way;--and little
visit?”

have we know You papa. stable, Weston’s Mr. into put be to are “They
last Weston Mr. with over all it talked We already. that all settled
going like always will he sure very be may you James, for as And night.
only I there. housemaid being daughter’s his of because Randalls, to
doing, your was That else. anywhere us take ever will he whether doubt
you till Hannah of thought Nobody place. good that Hannah got You papa.
you!” to obliged so is her--James mentioned

not would I for lucky, very was It her. of think did I glad very am “I
am I and account; any upon slighted himself think James poor had have
pretty-spoken civil, a is she servant: good very a make will she sure
always she her, see I Whenever her. of opinion great a have I girl;
you when and manner; pretty very a in do, I how me asks and curtseys
lock the turns always she observe I needlework, do to here her had have
an be will she sure am I it. bangs never and way right the door the of
Taylor Miss poor to comfort great a be will it and servant; excellent
goes James Whenever see. to used is she that her about somebody have to
will He us. of hearing be will she know, you daughter, his see to over
are.” all we how her tell to able be

and ideas, of flow happier this maintain to exertions no spared Emma
tolerably father her get to backgammon, of help the by hoped,
The own. her but regrets no by attacked be and evening, the through
walked afterwards immediately visitor a but placed; was backgammon-table
unnecessary. it made and in

not was eight-and-thirty, or seven about man sensible a Knightley, Mr.
particularly but family, the of friend intimate and old very a only
lived He husband. Isabella’s of brother elder the as it, with connected
welcome, always and visitor, frequent a was Highbury, from mile a about
their from directly coming as usual, than welcome more time this at and
after dinner, late a to returned had He London. in connexions mutual
were all that say to Hartfield to up walked now and absence, days’ some
animated and circumstance, happy a was It Square. Brunswick in well
which manner, cheerful a had Knightley Mr. time. some for Woodhouse Mr.
and Isabella” “poor after inquiries many his and good; him did always
Mr. over, was this When satisfactorily. most answered were children her
Knightley, Mr. you, of kind very is “It observed, gratefully Woodhouse
have must you afraid am I us. upon call to hour late this at out come to
walk.” shocking a had

I that mild so and night; moonlight beautiful a is It sir. all, at “Not
fire.” great your from back draw must

not may you wish I dirty. and damp very it found have must you “But
cold.” catch

them.” on speck a Not shoes. my at Look sir! “Dirty,

rain of deal vast a had have we for surprising, quite is that “Well!
at were we while hour an half for hard dreadfully rained It here.
wedding.” the off put to them wanted I breakfast.

what of aware well pretty Being joy. you wished not have bye--I the “By
my with hurry no in been have I feeling, be both must you joy of sort
you did How well. tolerably off went all it hope I but congratulations;
most?” cried Who behave? all

business.” sad a ‘Tis Taylor! Miss poor “Ah!

say possibly cannot I but please; you if Woodhouse, Miss and Mr. “Poor
it when but Emma; and you for regard great a have I Taylor.’ Miss ‘poor
it rate, any independence!--At or dependence of question the to comes
two.” than please to one only have to better be must

troublesome fanciful, a such is two those of _one_ when “Especially
I head, your in have you what is “That playfully. Emma said creature!”
by.” not were father my if say certainly would you what know--and

a with Woodhouse, Mr. said indeed,” dear, my true, very is it believe “I
troublesome.” and fanciful very sometimes am I afraid am “I sigh.

Mr. suppose or _you_, mean could I think not do You papa! dearest “My
only meant I no! Oh idea! horrible a What _you_. mean to Knightley
a know--in you me, with fault find to loves Knightley Mr. myself.
another.” one to like we what say always We joke. a all is joke--it

faults see could who people few the of one was fact, in Knightley, Mr.
and them: of her told ever who one only the and Woodhouse, Emma in
knew she herself, Emma to agreeable particularly not was this though
him have not would she that father, her to so less much so be would it
by perfect thought being not her as circumstance a such suspect really
body. every

no meant I “but Knightley, Mr. said her,” flatter never I knows “Emma
persons two have to used been has Taylor Miss body. any on reflection
a be must she that are chances The one. but have now will she please; to
gainer.”

about hear to want pass--“you it let to willing Emma, said “Well,”
behaved all we for you, tell to happy be shall I and wedding; the
not looks: best their in body every punctual, was body Every charmingly.
we that felt all we no; Oh seen. be to face long a hardly and tear, a
every meeting of sure were and apart, mile a half only be to going were
day.”

Mr. “But, father. her said well,” so thing every bears Emma “Dear
am I and Taylor, Miss poor lose to sorry very really is she Knightley,
for.” thinks she than more her miss _will_ she sure

“It smiles. and tears between divided head, her away turned Emma
Mr. said companion,” a such miss not should Emma that impossible is
could we if sir, do, we as well so her like not should “We Knightley.
Taylor’s Miss to is marriage the much how knows she but it; suppose
Taylor’s Miss at be, must it acceptable very how knows she advantage;
to important how and own, her of home a in settled be to life, of time
allow cannot therefore and provision, comfortable a of secure be to her
Taylor Miss of friend Every pleasure. as pain much so feel to herself
married.” happily so her have to glad be must

very a “and Emma, said me,” to joy of matter one forgotten have you “And
you match, the made I myself. match the made I one--that considerable
the in proved be and place, take it have to and ago; years four know,
may again, marry never would Weston Mr. said people many so when right,
thing.” any for me comfort

“Ah! replied, fondly father Her her. at head his shook Knightley Mr.
for things, foretell and matches make not would you wish I dear, my
more any make not do Pray pass. to comes always say you whatever
matches.”

for indeed, must, I but papa; myself, for none make to you promise “I
such after And world! the in amusement greatest the is It people. other
marry never would Weston Mr. that said body know!--Every you success,
who and long, so widower a been had who Weston, Mr. no! dear, Oh again.
occupied constantly so wife, a without comfortable perfectly so seemed
always here, friends his among or town in business his in either
spend not need Weston cheerful--Mr. always went, he wherever acceptable
Mr. no! Oh it. like not did he if alone year the in evening single a
a of talked even people Some again. marry never would certainly Weston
the and son the of others and deathbed, her on wife his to promise
the on talked was nonsense solemn of manner All him. letting not uncle
it. of none believed I but subject,

met I and Taylor Miss ago--that years four day--about the since “Ever
darted he drizzle, to began it because when, Lane, Broadway in him with
from us for umbrellas two borrowed and gallantry, much so with away
match the planned I subject. the on mind my up made I Mitchell’s, Farmer
instance, this in me blessed has success such when and hour; that from
match-making.” off leave shall I that think cannot you papa, dear

Knightley. Mr. said ‘success,’” by mean you what understand not do “I
delicately and properly been has time Your endeavour. supposes “Success
bring to years four last the for endeavouring been have you if spent,
But mind! lady’s young a for employment worthy A marriage. this about
means it, call you as match, the making your imagine, rather I which if,
it think ‘I day, idle one yourself to saying your it, planning your only
marry to were Weston Mr. if Taylor Miss for thing good very a be would
why afterwards, then and now every yourself to again it saying and her,’
You of? proud you are What merit? your is Where success? of talk you do
said.” be can that all is _that_ and guess; lucky a made

guess?--I lucky a of triumph and pleasure the known never you have “And
is guess lucky a it upon depend cleverer--for, you thought you.--I pity
my to as And it. in talent some always is There luck. merely never
so am I that know not do I with, quarrel you which ‘success,’ word poor
pictures; pretty two drawn have You it. to claim any without entirely
and do-nothing the between something third--a a be may there think I but
given and here, visits Weston’s Mr. promoted not had I If do-all. the
might it matters, little many smoothed and encouragements, little many
Hartfield know must you think I all. after thing any to come have not
that.” comprehend to enough

rational, a and Weston, like man open-hearted straightforward, “A
their manage to left safely be may Taylor, Miss like woman unaffected
than yourself, to harm done have to likely more are You concerns. own
interference.” by them, to good

rejoined others,” to good do can she if herself, of thinks never “Emma
not do pray dear, my “But, part. in but understanding Woodhouse, Mr.
family one’s up break and things, silly are they matches; more any make
grievously.” circle

Mr. like You Elton! Mr. Poor Elton. Mr. for only papa; more, one “Only
in nobody is There him. for wife a for about look must papa,--I Elton,
has and year, whole a here been has he him--and deserves who Highbury
him have to shame a be would it that comfortably, so house his up fitted
to-day, hands their joining was he when thought I longer--and any single
office kind same the have to like would he if as much very so looked he
I way only the is this and Elton, Mr. of well very think I him! for done
service.” a him doing of have

young good very a and sure, be to man, young pretty very a is Elton “Mr.
any him shew to want you if But him. for regard great a have I and man,
will That day. some us with dine and come to him ask dear, my attention,
to as kind so be will Knightley Mr. say dare I thing. better much a be
him.” meet

Knightley, Mr. said time,” any at sir, pleasure, of deal great a “With
better much a be will it that entirely, you with agree I “and laughing,
fish the of best the to him help and Emma, dinner, to him Invite thing.
a it, upon Depend wife. own his chuse to him leave but chicken, the and
himself.” of care take can seven-and-twenty or six of man



II CHAPTER


family, respectable a of born and Highbury, of native a was Weston Mr.
into rising been had generations three or two last the for which
on but, education, good a received had He property. and gentility
indisposed become had independence, small a to life in early succeeding
engaged, were brothers his which in pursuits homely more the of any for
entering by temper social and mind cheerful active, an satisfied had and
embodied. then county, his of militia the into

his of chances the when and favourite; general a was Weston Captain
Yorkshire great a of Churchill, Miss to him introduced had life military
surprized, was nobody him, with love in fell Churchill Miss and family,
were who and him, seen never had who wife, his and brother her except
offend. would connexion the which importance, and pride of full

her of command full the with and age, of being however, Churchill, Miss
family-estate--was the to proportion no bore fortune her fortune--though
the to place, took it and marriage, the from dissuaded be to not
with off her threw who Churchill, Mrs. and Mr. of mortification infinite
much produce not did and connexion, unsuitable an was It decorum. due
a had she for it, in more found have to ought Weston Mrs. happiness.
due thing every think him made temper sweet and heart warm whose husband
him; with love in being of goodness great the for return in her to
had She best. the not had she spirit, of sort one had she though but
brother, her of spite in will own her pursue to enough resolution
brother’s that at regrets unreasonable from refrain to enough not but
home. former her of luxuries the missing from nor anger, unreasonable
comparison in nothing was it still but income, their beyond lived They
at wanted she but husband, her love to cease not did she Enscombe: of
Enscombe. of Churchill Miss and Weston, Captain of wife the be to once

Churchills, the by especially considered, been had who Weston, Captain
of worst the much have to proved was match, amazing an such making as
he marriage, years’ three a after died, wife his when for bargain; the
maintain. to child a with and first, at than man poorer a rather was
boy The relieved. soon was he however, child, the of expense the From
his of illness lingering a of claim softening additional the with had,
Mrs. and Mr. and reconciliation; of sort a of means the been mother’s,
creature young other any nor own, their of children no having Churchill,
the of charge whole the take to offered for, care to kindred equal of
reluctance some and scruples Some decease. her after soon Frank little
were they as but felt; have to supposed be may widower-father the
and care the to up given was child the considerations, other by overcome
seek, to comfort own his only had he and Churchills, the of wealth the
could. he as improve to situation own his and

and militia the quitted He desirable. became life of change complete A
in way good a in established already brothers having trade, in engaged
which concern a was It opening. favourable a him afforded which London,
Highbury, in house small a still had He enough. employment just brought
occupation useful between and spent; were days leisure his of most where
his of years twenty or eighteen next the society, of pleasures the and
easy an realised time, that by had, He away. cheerfully passed life
adjoining estate little a of purchase the secure to competence--enough
as woman a marry to for--enough longed always had he which Highbury,
of wishes the to according live to and Taylor, Miss as even portionless
disposition. social and friendly own his

his influence to begun had Taylor Miss since time some now was It
youth, on youth of influence tyrannic the not was it as but schemes;
could he till settling never of determination his shaken not had it
to; forward looked long was Randalls of sale the and Randalls, purchase
were they till view, in objects these with on, steadily gone had he but
obtained and house, his bought fortune, his made had He accomplished.
every with existence, of period new a beginning was and wife; his
had He through. passed yet any in than happiness greater of probability
that, from him secured had temper own his man; unhappy an been never
delightful how him shew must second his but marriage; first his in even
the him give must and be, could woman amiable truly and well-judging a
be to than choose to better deal great a being its of proof pleasantest
it. feel to than gratitude excite to chosen,

own; his was fortune his choice: his in please to himself only had He
his as up brought tacitly being than more was it Frank, to as for
assume him have to as adoption an avowed so become had it heir, uncle’s
therefore, unlikely, most was It age. of coming on Churchill of name the
no had father His assistance. father’s his want ever should he that
her governed and woman, capricious a was aunt The it. of apprehension
that imagine to nature Weston’s Mr. in not was it but entirely; husband
he as and, dear, so one affect to enough strong be could caprice any
and London, in year every son his saw He dear. deservedly so believed,
man young fine very a as him of report fond his and him; of proud was
as on looked was He too. him in pride of sort a feel Highbury made had
a prospects and merits his make to place the to belonging sufficiently
concern. common of kind

lively a and Highbury, of boasts the of one was Churchill Frank Mr.
little so was compliment the though prevailed, him see to curiosity
visit to coming His life. his in there been never had he that returned
achieved. never but of talked often been had father his

a as proposed, generally very was it marriage, father’s his upon Now,
a not was There place. take should visit the that attention, proper most
with tea drank Perry Mrs. when either subject, the on voice dissentient
Now visit. the returned Bates Miss and Mrs. when or Bates, Miss and Mrs.
hope the and them; among come to Churchill Frank Mr. for time the was
new his to written had he that understood was it when strengthened
Highbury in visit morning every days, few a For occasion. the on mother
received. had Weston Mrs. letter handsome the of mention some included
Churchill Frank Mr. letter handsome the of heard have you suppose “I
letter, handsome very a was it understand I Weston? Mrs. to written has
and letter, the saw Woodhouse Mr. it. of me told Woodhouse Mr. indeed.
life.” his in letter handsome a such saw never he says he

course, of had, Weston Mrs. letter. prized highly a indeed, was, It
pleasing a such and man; young the of idea favourable very a formed
most a and sense, good great his of proof irresistible an was attention
congratulation of expression every and source every to addition welcome
most a herself felt She secured. already had marriage her which
fortunate how know to enough long lived had she and woman; fortunate
partial a for was regret only the where thought, be well might she
and cooled, never had her for friendship whose friends from separation
her. with part to bear ill could who

without think, not could and missed; be must she times at that knew She
ennui, hour’s an suffering or pleasure, single a losing Emma’s of pain,
feeble no of was Emma dear but companionableness: her of want the from
would girls most than situation her to equal more was she character;
hoped be might that spirits and energy, and sense, had and been, have
and difficulties little its through happily and well her bear would
of distance easy very the in comfort such was there then And privations.
walking, female solitary even for convenient so Hartfield, from Randalls
the make would which circumstances, and disposition Weston’s Mr. in and
in evenings the half spending their to hindrance no season approaching
together. week the

Mrs. to gratitude of hours of subject the altogether was situation Her
more satisfaction--her her and regret; of only moments of and Weston,
apparent, so and just so was enjoyment, cheerful satisfaction--her than
surprize by taken sometimes was father, her knew she as well Emma, that
her left they when Taylor,’ Miss ‘poor pity to able still being his at
away go her saw or comfort, domestic every of centre the in Randalls at
her of carriage a to husband pleasant her by attended evening the in
sigh, gentle a giving Woodhouse’s Mr. without go she did never But own.
stay.” to glad very be would She Taylor! Miss poor “Ah, saying, and

to ceasing of likelihood much Taylor--nor Miss recovering no was There
Woodhouse. Mr. to alleviation some brought weeks few a but her; pity
by teased longer no was he over; were neighbours his of compliments The
which wedding-cake, the and event; an sorrowful so of joy wished being
stomach own His up. eat all was him, to distress great a been had
be to people other believe never could he and rich, nothing bear could
unfit as regarded he him to unwholesome was What himself. from different
them dissuade to tried earnestly therefore, had, he and body; any for
as vain, proved that when and all, at wedding-cake any having from
the at been had He it. eating body’s any prevent to tried earnestly
Perry Mr. subject. the on apothecary, the Perry, Mr. consulting of pains
one were visits frequent whose man, gentlemanlike intelligent, an was
he to, applied being upon and life; Woodhouse’s Mr. of comforts the of
bias the against rather seemed it (though acknowledge but not could
with disagree certainly might wedding-cake that inclination) of
an such With moderately. taken unless people, most with many--perhaps
influence to hoped Woodhouse Mr. own, his of confirmation in opinion,
eaten; was cake the still but pair; married newly the of visitor every
gone. all was it till nerves benevolent his for rest no was there and

being Perrys little the all of Highbury in rumour strange a was There
Mr. but hands: their in wedding-cake Weston’s Mrs. of slice a with seen
it. believe never would Woodhouse



III CHAPTER


to much very liked He way. own his in society of fond was Woodhouse Mr.
from causes, united various from and him; see and come friends his have
fortune, his from nature, good his and Hartfield, at residence long his
his of visits the command could he daughter, his and house, his
much not had He liked. he as measure, great a in circle, little own
late of horror his circle; that beyond families any with intercourse
but acquaintance any for unfit him made dinner-parties, large and hours,
Highbury, him, for Fortunately terms. own his on him visit would as such
parish the in Abbey Donwell and parish, same the in Randalls including
Not such. many comprehended Knightley, Mr. of seat the adjoining,
and chosen the of some had he persuasion, Emma’s through unfrequently,
preferred; he what were parties evening but him: with dine to best the
there company, to unequal time any at himself fancied he unless and,
a up make not could Emma which in week the in evening an scarcely was
him. for card-table

by and Knightley; Mr. and Westons the brought regard long-standing Real,
privilege the it, liking without alone living man young a Elton, Mr.
the for solitude blank own his of evening vacant any exchanging of
smiles the and drawing-room, Woodhouse’s Mr. of society and elegancies
away. thrown being of danger no in was daughter, lovely his of

were whom of come-at-able most the among set; second a came these After
at always almost ladies three Goddard, Mrs. and Bates, Miss and Mrs.
and fetched were who and Hartfield, from invitation an of service the
for hardship no it thought Woodhouse Mr. that often, so home carried
it year, a once only place taken it Had horses. the or James either
grievance. a been have would

old very a was Highbury, of vicar former a of widow the Bates, Mrs.
her with lived She quadrille. and tea but thing every past almost lady,
the all with considered was and way, small very a in daughter single
untoward such under lady, old harmless a which respect and regard
degree uncommon most a enjoyed daughter Her excite. can circumstances,
married. nor rich, handsome, young, neither woman a for popularity of
having for world the in predicament worst very the in stood Bates Miss
to superiority intellectual no had she and favour; public the of much
into her hate might who those frighten or herself, to atonement make
Her cleverness. or beauty either boasted never had She respect. outward
devoted was life of middle her and distinction, without passed had youth
small a make to endeavour the and mother, failing a of care the to
woman a and woman, happy a was she yet And possible. as far as go income
good-will universal own her was It good-will. without named one no whom
body, every loved She wonders. such worked which temper contented and
body’s every to quicksighted happiness, body’s every in interested was
with surrounded and creature, fortunate most a herself thought merits;
neighbours good many so and mother, excellent an such in blessings
and simplicity The nothing. for wanted that home a and friends, and
a were spirit, grateful and contented her nature, her of cheerfulness
was She herself. to felicity of mine a and body, every to recommendation
Woodhouse, Mr. suited exactly which matters, little upon talker great a
gossip. harmless and communications trivial of full

an or seminary, a of School--not a of mistress the was Goddard Mrs.
of sentences long in professed, which thing any or establishment,
morality, elegant with acquirements liberal combine to nonsense, refined
enormous for ladies young where systems--and new and principles new upon
real, a vanity--but into and health of out screwed be might pay
of quantity reasonable a where Boarding-school, old-fashioned honest,
might girls where and price, reasonable a at sold were accomplishments
little a into themselves scramble and way, the of out be to sent be
Goddard’s Mrs. prodigies. back coming of danger any without education,
was Highbury for deservedly; very repute--and high in was school
garden, and house ample an had she spot: healthy particularly a reckoned
great a about run them let food, wholesome of plenty children the gave
own her with chilblains their dressed winter in and summer, the in deal
walked now couple young twenty of train a that wonder no was It hands.
who woman, of kind motherly plain, a was She church. to her after
the to entitled herself thought now and youth, her in hard worked had
Mr. to much owed formerly having and tea-visit; a of holiday occasional
neat her leave to her on claim particular his felt kindness, Woodhouse’s
lose or win and could, she whenever fancy-work, with round hung parlour,
fireside. his by sixpences few a

to able frequently very herself found Emma whom ladies the were These
though, power; the in sake, father’s her for she, was happy and collect;
of absence the for remedy no was it concerned, herself was she as far as
and comfortable, look father her see to delighted was She Weston. Mrs.
the but well; so things contriving for herself with pleased much very
so evening every that feel her made women such three of prosings quiet
anticipated. fearfully had she evenings long the of one indeed was spent

the of close a such exactly to forward looking morning, one sat she As
most in requesting, Goddard, Mrs. from brought was note a day, present
most a her; with Smith Miss bring to allowed be to terms, respectful
knew Emma whom seventeen, of girl a was Smith Miss for request: welcome
of account on in, interest an felt long had and sight, by well very
no evening the and returned, was invitation gracious very A beauty. her
mansion. the of mistress fair the by dreaded longer

placed had Somebody somebody. of daughter natural the was Smith Harriet
somebody and school, Goddard’s Mrs. at back, years several her,
of that to scholar of condition the from her raised lately had
history. her of known generally was that all was This parlour-boarder.
and Highbury, at acquired been had what but friends visible no had She
young some to country the in visit long a from returned just now was
her. with there school at been had who ladies

sort a of be to happened beauty her and girl, pretty very a was She
a with fair, and plump, short, was She admired. particularly Emma which
great of look a and features, regular hair, light eyes, blue bloom, fine
pleased much as was Emma evening, the of end the before and, sweetness,
the continue to determined quite and person, her as manners her with
acquaintance.

Smith’s Miss in clever remarkably thing any by struck not was She
engaging--not very altogether her found she but conversation,
pushing, from far so yet talk--and to unwilling not shy, inconveniently
pleasantly so seeming deference, a becoming and proper so shewing
impressed artlessly so and Hartfield, to admitted being for grateful
had she what to style a superior so in thing every of appearance the by
encouragement. deserve and sense, good have must she that to, used been
those all and eyes, blue soft Those given. be should Encouragement
Highbury of society inferior the on wasted be not should graces, natural
were formed already had she acquaintance The connexions. its and
very though parted, just had she whom from friends The her. of unworthy
the of family a were They harm. her doing be must people, of sort good
large a renting as character, by knew well Emma whom Martin, of name
Donwell--very of parish the in residing and Knightley, Mr. of farm
of highly thought Knightley Mr. knew believed--she she creditably,
the be to unfit very and unpolished, and coarse be must they them--but
elegance and knowledge more little a only wanted who girl a of intimates
she her; improve would she her; notice would _She_ perfect. quite be to
good into her introduce and acquaintance, bad her from her detach would
an be would It manners. her and opinions her form would she society;
her becoming highly undertaking; kind very a certainly and interesting,
powers. and leisure, her life, in situation own

and talking in eyes, blue soft those admiring in busy so was She
the that in-betweens, the in schemes these all forming and listening,
which supper-table, the and rate; unusual very a at away flew evening
and sit to used been had she which for and parties, such closed always
the to forwards moved and ready, and out set all was time, due the watch
impulse common the beyond alacrity an With aware. was she before fire,
every doing of credit the to indifferent never was yet which spirit a of
delighted mind a of good-will real the with attentively, and well thing
and meal, the of honours the all do then she did ideas, own its with
an with oysters, scalloped and chicken minced the recommend and help
civil and hours early the to acceptable be would knew she which urgency
guests. their of scruples

warfare. sad in were feelings Woodhouse’s Mr. poor occasions such Upon
his of fashion the been had it because laid, cloth the have to loved He
him made unwholesome very being suppers of conviction his but youth,
would hospitality his while and it; on put thing any see to sorry rather
health their for care his thing, every to visitors his welcomed have
eat. would they that grieve him made

could, he that all was own his as gruel thin of basin small another Such
constrain might he though recommend; self-approbation, thorough with
to things, nicer the clearing comfortably were ladies the while himself,
say:

egg An eggs. these of one on venturing your propose me let Bates, “Mrs.
egg an boiling understands Serle unwholesome. not is soft very boiled
body any by boiled egg an recommend not would I body. any than better
of see--one you small, very are they afraid, be not need you but else;
a to you help Emma let Bates, Miss you. hurt not will eggs small our
You apple-tarts. all are Ours bit. little _very_ tart--a of bit _little_
the advise not do I here. preserves unwholesome of afraid be not need
A wine? of glass a _half_ to you say what Goddard, Mrs. custard.
could it think not do I water? of tumbler a into put half-glass, _small_
you.” with disagree

much a in visitors her supplied talk--but to father her allowed Emma
particular had evening present the on and style, satisfactory more
was Smith Miss of happiness The happy. away them sending in pleasure
personage a great so was Woodhouse Miss intentions. her to equal quite
much as given had introduction the of prospect the that Highbury, in
with off went girl little grateful humble, the but pleasure; as panic
Miss which with affability the with delighted feelings, gratified highly
hands shaken actually and evening, the all her treated had Woodhouse
last! at her with



IV CHAPTER


Quick thing. settled a soon was Hartfield at intimacy Smith’s Harriet
and encouraging, inviting, in time no lost Emma ways, her in decided and
so increased, acquaintance their as and often; very come to her telling
had Emma companion, walking a As other. each in satisfaction their did
respect that In her. find might she useful how foreseen early very
the beyond went never father Her important. been had loss Weston’s Mrs.
long his for him sufficed ground the of divisions two where shrubbery,
marriage Weston’s Mrs. since and varied; year the as short, his or walk,
to alone once ventured had She confined. much too been had exercise her
therefore, Smith, Harriet a and pleasant; not was it but Randalls,
valuable a be would walk, a to time any at summon could she whom one
of more saw she as respect, every in But privileges. her to addition
designs. kind her all in confirmed was and her, approved she her,

grateful docile, sweet, a had she but clever, not was certainly Harriet
be to desiring only and conceit, from free totally was disposition,
herself to attachment early Her to. up looked she one any by guided
of power and company, good for inclination her and amiable; very was
no was there that shewed clever, and elegant was what appreciating
expected. be not must understanding of strength though taste, of want
the exactly being Smith’s Harriet of convinced quite was she Altogether
required. home her which something the wanted--exactly she friend young
could such Two question. the of out was Weston Mrs. as friend a Such
different a quite was It want. not did she such Two granted. be never
the was Weston Mrs. independent. and distinct sentiment a thing, of sort
Harriet esteem. and gratitude in basis its had which regard a of object
there Weston Mrs. For useful. be could she whom to one as loved be would
thing. every Harriet for done; be to nothing was

who out find to endeavour an in were usefulness at attempts first Her
tell to ready was She tell. not could Harriet but parents, the were
Emma vain. were questions subject this on but power, her in thing every
in that believe never could she liked--but she what fancy to obliged was
Harriet truth. the discovered have not should _she_ situation same the
what just believe and hear to satisfied been had She penetration. no had
farther. no looked and her; tell to chose Goddard Mrs.

of affairs the and girls the and teachers, the and Goddard, Mrs.
the of part great a naturally formed general, in school the
of Martins the with acquaintance her for but conversation--and
occupied Martins the But whole. the been have must it Farm, Abbey-Mill
them, with months happy very two spent had she deal; good a thoughts her
describe and visit, her of pleasures the of talk to loved now and
her encouraged Emma place. the of wonders and comforts many the
beings, of set another of picture a such by talkativeness--amused
much so with speak could which simplicity youthful the enjoying and
good very two parlours, “_two_ having Martin’s Mrs. of exultation
Goddard’s Mrs. as large as quite them of one indeed; parlours,
lived had who maid upper an having her of and drawing-room;
of two cows, eight having their of and her; with years five-and-twenty
Welch little pretty very a cow, Welch little a one and Alderneys, them
it, of fond so was she as saying Martin’s Mrs. of and indeed; cow
handsome very a having their of and cow; _her_ called be should it
to all were they year next day some where garden, their in summer-house
dozen a hold to enough large summer-house, handsome very tea:--a drink
people.”

immediate the beyond thinking without amused, was she time some For
feelings other better, family the understand to came she as but cause;
and mother a was it fancying idea, wrong a up taken had She arose.
it when but together; lived all who wife, son’s and son a daughter,
was and narrative, the in part a bore who Martin, Mr. the that appeared
doing in good-nature great his for approbation with mentioned always
Mrs. young no was there that man; single a was other, or something
little poor her to danger suspect did she case; the in wife no Martin,
not were she if that, and kindness, and hospitality this all from friend
forever. herself sink to required be might she of, care taken

and number in increased questions her notion, inspiriting this With
Martin, Mr. of more talk to Harriet led particularly she and meaning;
to ready very was Harriet it. to dislike no evidently was there and
evening merry and walks moonlight their in had had he share the of speak
and good-humoured very so being his upon deal good a dwelt and games;
her bring to order in day one round miles three gone had He obliging.
in and them, of was she fond how said had she because walnuts, some
into son shepherd’s his had He obliging. very so was he else thing every
fond very was She her. to sing to purpose on night one parlour the
very was he believed She himself. little a sing could He singing. of
while and, flock, fine very a had He thing. every understood and clever,
in body any than wool his for more bid been had he them, with was she
and mother His him. of well spoke body every believed She country. the
(and day one her told had Martin Mrs. him. of fond very were sisters
body any for impossible was it that it,) said she as blush a was there
he married, he whenever sure, was she therefore and son, better a be to
was She marry. to him _wanted_ she that Not husband. good a make would
all. at hurry no in

about.” are you what know “You Emma. thought Martin!” Mrs. done, “Well

send to as kind very so was Martin Mrs. away, come had she when “And
ever had Goddard Mrs. goose finest goose--the beautiful a Goddard Mrs.
three the all asked and Sunday, a on it dressed had Goddard Mrs. seen.
with sup to Richardson, Miss and Prince, Miss and Nash, Miss teachers,
her.”

of line the beyond information of man a not is suppose, I Martin, “Mr.
read?” not does He business? own his

a read has he believe I know--but not do no--I is, yes!--that “Oh
the reads He of. thing any think would you what not deal--but good
window the of one in lay that books other some and Reports, Agricultural
evening, an of sometimes But himself. to _them_ all reads he seats--but
the of out aloud something read would he cards, to went we before
of Vicar the read has he know I And entertaining. very Extracts, Elegant
of Children The nor Forest, the of Romance the read never He Wakefield.
but them, mentioned I before books such of heard never had He Abbey. the
can.” he ever as soon as now them get to determined is he

was-- question next The

Martin?” Mr. is man looking of sort “What

at plain very him thought I handsome. all at handsome--not not “Oh!
know, you not, does One now. plain so him think not do I but first,
and now every Highbury in is He him? see never you did But time. a after
Kingston. to way his in week every through ride to sure is he and then,
often.” very you passed has He

having without but times, fifty him seen have may I and be, may “That
foot, on or horseback on whether farmer, young A name. his of idea any
are yeomanry The curiosity. my raise to person of sort last very the is
do. to nothing have can I feel I whom with people of order the precisely
me; interest might appearance creditable a and lower, two or degree A
But other. or way some in families their to useful be to hope might I
as sense, one in therefore, is, and help, my of none need can farmer a
it.” below is he other every in as notice my above much

him; observed have ever should you likely not is It yes! Oh sure. be “To
sight.” by mean indeed--I well very you knows he but

know, I man. young respectable very a being his of doubt no have “I
imagine you do What well. him wish such, as and, so, is he that indeed,
be?” to age his

the is birthday my and June, last of 8th the four-and-twenty was “He
odd.” very is difference--which day’s a and fortnight a just 23rd

is mother His settle. to young too is That four-and-twenty. “Only
they as comfortable very seem They hurry. a in be to not right perfectly
probably would she him, marry to pains any take to were she if and are,
young of sort good a with meet could he if hence, years Six it. repent
very be might it money, little a with own, his as rank same the in woman
desirable.”

old!” years thirty be would he Woodhouse, Miss Dear hence! years “Six

not are who marry, to afford can men most as early as is that and “Well,
entirely fortune his has imagine, I Martin, Mr. independence. an to born
he money Whatever world. the with beforehand all at be make--cannot to
family the of share his whatever died, father his when into come might
and stock, his in employed all afloat, all say, dare I is, it property,
in rich be may he luck, good and diligence with though, and forth; so
thing any realised have should he that impossible to next is it time,
yet.”

no have They comfortably. very live they But is. it so sure, be “To
talks Martin Mrs. and thing; any for want not do they else man, indoors
year.” another boy a taking of

does he whenever Harriet, scrape, a into get not may you wish “I
his though wife--for his with acquainted being to as mean, marry;--I
objected altogether be to not are education, superior a from sisters,
you for fit all at body any marry might he that follow not does it to,
particularly you make to ought birth your of misfortune The notice. to
a being your of doubt no be can There associates. your to as careful
by station that to claim your support must you and daughter, gentleman’s
who people of plenty be will there or power, own your within thing every
you.” degrading in pleasure take would

Hartfield, at visit I while But are. there suppose I sure, be to “Yes,
any what of afraid not am I Woodhouse, Miss me, to kind so are you and
do.” can body

would I but Harriet; well, pretty influence of force the understand “You
independent be to as society, good in established firmly so you have
permanently you see to want I Woodhouse. Miss and Hartfield of even
odd few as have to advisable be will it end that to and connected, well
still should you if that say I therefore, and, be; may as acquaintance
drawn be not may you wish I marries, Martin Mr. when country this in be
wife, the with acquainted be to sisters, the with intimacy your by in
education.” without daughter, farmer’s mere some be probably will who

body any marry ever would Martin Mr. think I that Not Yes. sure. be “To
However, up. brought well very been education--and some had had what but
shall I sure am I yours--and against opinion my up set to mean not do I
great a have always shall I wife. his of acquaintance the for wish not
very be should and Elizabeth, especially Martins, Miss the for regard
But me. as educated well as quite are they for up, them give to sorry
not better had I certainly woman, vulgar ignorant, very a marries he if
it.” help can I if her, visit

no saw and speech, this of fluctuations the through her watched Emma
but admirer, first the been had man young The love. of symptoms alarming
serious no be would there that and hold, other no was there trusted she
her of arrangement friendly any oppose to side, Harriet’s on difficulty,
own.

the on walking were they as day, next very the Martin Mr. met They
at respectfully very looking after and foot, on was He road. Donwell
was Emma companion. her at satisfaction unfeigned most with looked her,
few a walking and survey; of opportunity an such have to sorry not
eye quick her made soon together, talked they while forward, yards
very was appearance His Martin. Robert Mr. with acquainted sufficiently
no had person his but man, young sensible a like looked he and neat,
gentlemen, with contrasted be to came he when and advantage; other
Harriet’s in gained had he ground the all lose must he thought she
voluntarily had she manner; of insensible not was Harriet inclination.
Mr. wonder. as well as admiration with gentleness father’s her noticed
was. manner what know not did he if as looked Martin

be not must Woodhouse Miss as together, minutes few a but remained They
face, smiling a with her to running came then Harriet and waiting; kept
to soon very hoped Woodhouse Miss which spirits, of flutter a in and
compose.

quite was It odd! very him!--How meet to happening our of think “Only
not did He Randalls. by round gone not had he that said, he chance, a
Randalls towards walked we thought He road. this walked ever we think
yet. Forest the of Romance the get to able been not has He days. most
it, forgot quite he that Kingston at was he time last the busy so was He
Well, meet! to happen should we odd very So to-morrow. again goes he but
him? of think you do What expected? you what like he is Woodhouse, Miss
plain?” very so him think you Do

nothing is that plain:--but undoubtedly--remarkably plain, very is “He
expect to right no had I gentility. of want entire his with compared
so be could he that idea no had I but much; expect not did I and much,
a confess, I him, imagined had I air. without totally so clownish, very
gentility.” nearer two or degree

genteel so not is “he voice, mortified a in Harriet, said sure,” be “To
gentlemen.” real as

been have you us, with acquaintance your since Harriet, think, “I
you that gentlemen, real very such some of company the in repeatedly
Hartfield, At Martin. Mr. in difference the with struck be yourself must
I men. bred well educated, well of specimens good very had have you
company in be could you them, seeing after if, surprized be should
inferior very a be to him perceiving without again Martin Mr. with
him thought ever having for yourself at wondering rather creature--and
not Were now? that feel to begin you not Do before. agreeable all at
and look awkward his by struck been have must you sure am I struck? you
wholly be to heard I which voice a of uncouthness the and manner, abrupt
here.” stood I as unmodulated

and air fine a such not has He Knightley. Mr. like not is he “Certainly,
But enough. plain difference the see I Knightley. Mr. as walking of way
man!” a fine very so is Knightley Mr.

to fair not is it that good remarkably so is air Knightley’s “Mr.
with hundred a in one see not might You _him_. with Martin Mr. compare
the not is he But Knightley. Mr. in as written plainly so _gentleman_
Weston Mr. to you say What to. used lately been have you gentleman only
their Compare _them_. of either with Martin Mr. Compare Elton? Mr. and
silent. being of speaking; of walking; of themselves; carrying of manner
difference.” the see must You

old an almost is Weston Mr. But difference. great a is yes!--there “Oh
fifty.” and forty between be must Weston Mr. man.

person a older The valuable. more the manners good his makes “Which
not should manners their that is it important more the Harriet, grows,
or coarseness, or loudness, any disgusting and glaring more the bad; be
later in detestable is youth in passable is What becomes. awkwardness
Mr. at be he will what abrupt; and awkward now is Martin Mr. age.
life?” of time Weston’s

solemnly. rather Harriet replied indeed,” saying, no is “There

gross, completely a be will He guessing. good pretty be may there “But
of thinking and appearances, to inattentive totally farmer, vulgar
loss.” and profit but nothing

bad.” very be will That indeed? he, “Will

the from plain very is already him engrosses business his much “How
recommended. you book the for inquire to forgetting his of circumstance
thing any of think to market the of full too deal great a was He
to he has What man. thriving a for be, should it as just is else--which
very a be and thrive, _will_ he that doubt no have I And books? with do
disturb not need coarse and illiterate being his time--and in man rich
_us_.”

and answer, Harriet’s all book”--was the remember not did he wonder “I
be might thought Emma which displeasure grave of degree a with spoken
Her time. some for more no said therefore, She, itself. to left safely
was, beginning next

Mr. to superior are manners Elton’s Mr. perhaps, respect, one “In
be might They gentleness. more have They Weston’s. Mr. or Knightley’s
quickness, a openness, an is There pattern. a as up held safely more
_him_, in likes body every which Weston, Mr. in bluntness a almost
to do not would that it--but with good-humour much so is there because
commanding decided, downright, Knightley’s Mr. would Neither copied. be
look, and figure, his well; very _him_ suits it though manner, of sort
set to were man young any if but it; allow to seem life in situation and
think I contrary, the On sufferable. be not would he him, copying about
a as Elton Mr. take to recommended safely very be might man young a
gentle. and obliging, cheerful, good-humoured, is Elton Mr. model.
know not do I late. of gentle particularly grown be to me to seems He
us, of either with himself ingratiating of design any has he whether
are manners his that me strikes it but softness, additional by Harriet,
please to be must it thing, any means he If be. to used they than softer
day?” other the you of said he what you tell I not Did you.

Mr. from drawn had she which praise personal warm some repeated then She
and smiled, and blushed Harriet and to; justice full did now and Elton,
agreeable. very Elton Mr. thought always had she said

young the driving for Emma by on fixed person very the was Elton Mr.
excellent an be would it thought She head. Harriet’s of out farmer
her for probable, and natural, desirable, palpably too only and match;
body every what was it feared She it. planning in merit much have to
any that however, likely, not was It predict. and of think must else
had it as plan, the of date the in her equalled have should body
to coming Harriet’s of evening first very the during brain her entered
sense her was greater the it, considered she longer The Hartfield.
the quite suitable, most was situation Elton’s Mr. expediency. its of
of not time, same the at connexions; low without and himself, gentleman
Harriet. of birth doubtful the to object fairly could that family any
sufficient very a imagined Emma and her, for home comfortable a had He
known was he large, not was Highbury of vicarage the though for income;
him of highly very thought she and property; independent some have to
any without man, young respectable well-meaning, good-humoured, a as
world. the of knowledge or understanding useful of deficiency

beautiful a Harriet thought he that herself satisfied already had She
was Hartfield, at meetings frequent such with trusted, she which girl,
little be could there Harriet’s on and side; his on enough foundation
usual the all have would him by preferred being of idea the that doubt
a man, young pleasing very a really was he And efficacy. and weight
very reckoned was He like. might fastidious not woman any whom man young
her, by not though general, in admired much person his handsome;
dispense not could she which feature of elegance of want a being there
riding Martin’s Robert a by gratified be could who girl the with:--but
by conquered be well very might her for walnuts get to country the about
admiration. Elton’s Mr.



V CHAPTER


Mr. said Weston,” Mrs. be, may opinion your what know not do “I
I but Smith, Harriet and Emma between intimacy great this “of Knightley,
thing.” bad a it think

so?” thing?--why bad a it think really you Do thing! bad “A

good.” any other the do them of neither will they think “I

a with her supplying by and good: Harriet do must Emma me! surprize “You
been have I good. Emma do to said be may Harriet interest, of object new
differently very How pleasure. greatest the with intimacy their seeing
will This good! any other each do will they think feel!--Not we
Mr. Emma, about quarrels our of one of beginning the be certainly
Knightley.”

knowing you, with quarrel to purpose on come am I think you “Perhaps
battle.” own your fight still must you that and out, be to Weston

thinks he for here, were he if me, support undoubtedly would Weston “Mr.
yesterday, only it of speaking were We subject. the on do I as exactly
a such be should there that Emma, for was it fortunate how agreeing and
not shall I Knightley, Mr. with. associate to her for Highbury in girl
live to used much so are You case. this in judge fair a be to you allow
no perhaps and, companion; a of value the know not do you that alone,
of society the in feels woman a comfort the of judge good a be can man
imagine can I life. her all it to used being after sex, own her of one
woman young superior the not is She Smith. Harriet to objection your
wants Emma as hand, other the on But be. to ought friend Emma’s which
more read to her to inducement an be will it informed, better her see to
know.” I it, means She together. read will They herself.

old. years twelve was she since ever more read to meaning been has “Emma
of times various at drawing-up her of lists many great a seen have I
lists good very through--and regularly read to meant she that books
arranged--sometimes neatly very and chosen, well were--very they
drew she list The rule. other some by sometimes and alphabetically,
much so judgment her did it thinking remember fourteen--I only when up
made have may she say dare I and time; some it preserved I that credit,
of course any expecting with done have I But now. list good very a out
thing any to submit never will She Emma. from reading steady
the to fancy the of subjection a and patience, and industry requiring
safely may I stimulate, to failed Taylor Miss Where understanding.
her persuade could never nothing.--You do will Smith Harriet that affirm
not.” could you know wished.--You you as much so half read to

so thought I “that smiling, Weston, Mrs. replied say,” dare “I
omitting Emma’s remember never can I parted, have we since _then_;--but
wished.” I thing any do to

_that_,”--said as memory a such refresh to desiring any hardly is “There
I,” “But done. had he two or moment a for and feelingly; Knightley, Mr.
must senses, my over thrown charm such no had have “who added, soon he
cleverest the being by spoiled is Emma remember. and hear, see, still
to able being of misfortune the had she old, years ten At family. her of
always was She seventeen. at sister her puzzled which questions answer
she since ever And diffident. and slow Isabella assured: and quick
her In all. you of and house the of mistress been has Emma twelve, was
her inherits She her. with cope to able person only the lost she mother
her.” to subjection under been have must and talents, mother’s

_your_ on dependent be to Knightley, Mr. sorry, been have should “I
another wanted and family Woodhouse’s Mr. quitted I had recommendation,
to me for word good a spoken have would you think not do I situation;
held.” I office the for unfit me thought always you sure am I body. any

a for fit very _here_; placed better are “You smiling. he, said “Yes,”
to yourself preparing were you But governess. a for all at not but wife,
might You Hartfield. at were you time the all wife excellent an be
to seem would powers your as education complete a such Emma give not
the on _her_, from education good very a receiving were you but promise;
doing and will, own your submitting of point matrimonial material very
I wife, a him recommend to me asked had Weston if and bid; were you as
Taylor.” Miss named have certainly should

to wife good a making in merit little very be will There you. “Thank
Weston.” Mr. as man a such

that and away, thrown rather are you afraid am I truth, the own to “Why,
We borne. be to nothing be will there bear, to disposition every with
of wantonness the from cross grow may Weston however. despair, not will
him.” plague may son his or comfort,

not do Knightley, Mr. No, likely. not is _that_.--It not hope “I
quarter.” that from vexation foretell

Emma’s to pretend not do I possibilities. name only I indeed. I, “Not
the heart, my all with hope, I guessing. and foretelling for genius
fortune.--But in Churchill a and merit, in Weston a be may man young
the her think I Smith. Harriet about done half not have Smith--I Harriet
knows She have. possibly could Emma that companion of sort worst very
a is She thing. every knowing as Emma upon looks and herself, nothing
undesigned. because worse, the much so and ways; her all in flatterer
any has she imagine Emma can How flattery. hourly is ignorance Her
delightful a such presenting is Harriet while herself, learn to thing
cannot _she_ that say to venture will I Harriet, for as And inferiority?
conceit of out her put only will Hartfield acquaintance. the by gain
refined just grow will She to. belongs she places other the all with
circumstances and birth whom among those with uncomfortable be to enough
any give doctrines Emma’s if mistaken much am I home. her placed have
rationally herself adapt girl a make to all at tend or mind, of strength
little a give only life.--They in situation her of varieties the to
polish.”

more am or do, you than sense good Emma’s upon more depend either “I
acquaintance. the lament cannot I for comfort; present her for anxious
night!” last looked she well How

Very you? would mind, her than person her of talk rather would you “Oh!
pretty.” being Emma’s deny to attempt not shall I well;

perfect nearer thing any imagine you Can rather. beautiful say “Pretty!
figure?” and altogether--face Emma than beauty

seldom have I that confess I but imagine, could I what know not do “I
partial a am I But hers. than me to pleasing more figure or face a seen
friend.” old

features, regular brilliant! so eye--and hazle true eye!--the an “Such
health, full of bloom a what oh! complexion! a with countenance, open
figure! upright and firm a such size; and height pretty a such and
her head, her air, her in but bloom, her in merely not health, is There
health;’ of picture ‘the being child a of sometimes hears One glance.
of picture complete the being of idea the me gives always Emma now,
she?” not is Knightley, Mr. itself. loveliness is She health. grown-up

her think “I replied. he person,” her with find to fault a not have “I
praise, this add will I and her; at look to love I describe. you all
handsome very how Considering vain. personally her think not do I that
lies vanity her it; with occupied little be to appears she is, she
of dislike my of out talked be to not am I Weston, Mrs. way. another
harm.” both them doing its of dread my or Smith, Harriet

not its of confidence my in stout equally am Knightley, Mr. I, “And
an is she faults, little Emma’s dear all With harm. any them doing
kinder a or daughter, better a see we shall Where creature. excellent
be may which qualities has she no; No, friend? truer a or sister,
no make will she wrong; really one any lead never will she trusted;
hundred a right the in is she once, errs Emma where blunder; lasting
times.”

and angel, an be shall Emma more. any you plague not will I well; “Very
Isabella. and John brings Christmas till myself to spleen my keep will I
affection, blind a not therefore and reasonable a with Emma loves John
quite not is he when except does; he as thinks always Isabella and
opinions their having of sure am I children. the about enough frightened
me.” with

unkind; or unjust be to well too really her love all you that know “I
myself, consider (I liberty the take I if Knightley, Mr. me, excuse but
Emma’s that speech of privilege the of somewhat having as know, you
any think not do I that hinting of liberty the had) have might mother
a made being intimacy Smith’s Harriet from arise can good possible
any supposing but me; excuse Pray you. among discussion much of matter
be cannot it intimacy, the from apprehended be may inconvenience little
perfectly who father, her but nobody to accountable Emma, that expected
a is it as long so it, to end an put should acquaintance, the approves
to province my years many so been has It herself. to pleasure of source
little this at Knightley, Mr. surprized, be cannot you that advice, give
office.” of remains

very is It it. for you to obliged much am “I he; cried all,” at “Not
often has advice your than fate better a have shall it and advice, good
to.” attended be shall it for found;

about unhappy made be might and alarmed, easily is Knightley John “Mrs.
sister.” her

my keep will I outcry. any raise not will “I he, said satisfied,” “Be
Isabella Emma. in interest sincere very a have I myself. to ill-humour
interest; greater a excited never has sister; my more seem not does
one what in curiosity a anxiety, an is There great. so hardly perhaps
her!” of become will what wonder I Emma. for feels

much.” “very gently, Weston Mrs. said I,” do “So

just means course, of which, marry, never will she declares always “She
she man a seen ever yet has she that idea no have I But all. at nothing
love in much very be to her for thing bad a be not would It for. cared
some in and love, in Emma see to like should I object. proper a with
hereabouts nobody is there But good. her do would it return; a of doubt
home.” from seldom so goes she and her; attach to

resolution her break to her tempt to little as seem indeed, does, “There
so is she while and be; well can “as Weston, Mrs. said present,” at
which attachment any forming be to her wish cannot I Hartfield, at happy
I account. Woodhouse’s Mr. poor on difficulties such creating be would
slight no mean I though Emma, to present at matrimony recommend not do
you.” assure I state, the to

own her of thoughts favourite some conceal to was meaning her of Part
wishes were There possible. as much as subject, the on Weston’s Mr. and
to desirable not was it but destiny, Emma’s respecting Randalls at
soon Knightley Mr. which transition quiet the and suspected; them have
have we shall weather; the of think Weston does “What to made afterwards
about surmise or say to more nothing had he that her convinced rain?”
Hartfield.



VI CHAPTER


proper a fancy Harriet’s given having of doubt a feel not could Emma
good very a to vanity young her of gratitude the raised and direction
Mr. of before than sensible more decidedly her found she for purpose,
manners; agreeable most with man, handsome remarkably a being Elton’s
his of assurance the up following in hesitation no had she as and
creating of confident pretty soon was she hints, agreeable by admiration
for. occasion any be could there as side, Harriet’s on liking much as
of way fairest the in being Elton’s Mr. of convinced quite was She
regard with scruple no had She already. love in not if love, in falling
could she that warmly, so her praised and Harriet, of talked He him. to
His add. not would time little a which wanting thing any suppose not
her since manner, Harriet’s of improvement striking the of perception
of proofs agreeable least the of one not was Hartfield, at introduction
attachment. growing his

have “you he; said required,” she that all Smith Miss given have “You
she when creature beautiful a was She easy. and graceful her made
are added have you attractions the opinion, my in but, you, to came
nature.” from received she what to superior infinitely

wanted only Harriet but her; to useful been have I think you glad am “I
the all had She hints. few very few, a receiving and out, drawing
have I herself. in artlessness and temper of sweetness of grace natural
little.” very done

Mr. gallant the said lady,” a contradict to admissible were it “If
Elton--

have character, of decision more little a her given perhaps have “I
before.” way her in fallen not had which points on think to her taught

superadded much So me. strikes principally what is that so; “Exactly
hand!” the been has Skilful character! of decision

disposition a with met never I sure. am I pleasure, the been has “Great
amiable.” truly more

sighing of sort a with spoken was it And it.” of doubt no have “I
pleased less not was She lover. the of deal vast a had which animation,
hers, of wish sudden a seconded he which in manner the with day another
picture. Harriet’s have to

you “did she: said Harriet?” taken, likeness your have ever you “Did
picture?” your for sit ever

say, to stopt only and room, the leaving of point the on was Harriet
naivete, interesting very a with

never.” no, dear, “Oh!

exclaimed, Emma than sight, of out she was sooner No

would I be! would her of picture good a possession exquisite an “What
myself. likeness her attempt to long almost I it. for money any give
great a had I ago years three or two but say, dare I it know not do You
and friends, my of several attempted and likenesses, taking for passion
or cause one from But general. in eye tolerable a have to thought was
venture, almost could I really, But disgust. in up it gave I another,
her have to delight a such be would It me. to sit would Harriet if
picture!”

delight! a be indeed would “it Elton; Mr. cried you,” entreat me “Let
talent a charming so exercise to Woodhouse, Miss you, entreat me Let
could How are. drawings your what know I friend. your of favour in
your of specimens in rich room this not Is ignorant? me suppose you
inimitable some Weston Mrs. not has and flowers; and landscapes
Randalls?” at drawing-room, her in figure-pieces

taking with do to that all has what Emma--but man!--thought good Yes,
raptures in be to pretend Don’t drawing. of nothing know You likenesses?
me give you if “Well, face. Harriet’s for raptures your Keep mine. about
do. can I what try shall I believe I Elton, Mr. encouragement, kind such
difficult; likeness a makes which delicate, very are features Harriet’s
lines the and eye the of shape the in peculiarity a is there yet and
catch.” to ought one which mouth the about

have mouth--I the about lines the and eye the of shape so--The “Exactly
it, do will you As it. attempt pray Pray, success. your of doubt a not
possession.” exquisite an be words, own your use to indeed, will it

thinks She sit. to like not will Harriet Elton, Mr. afraid, am I “But
answering of manner her observe you not Did beauty. own her of little so
drawn?’” be picture my should ‘why meant, it completely How me?

still But me. on lost not was It you. assure I it, observed I yes, “Oh!
persuaded.” be not would she imagine cannot I

made; immediately almost proposal the and again, back soon was Harriet
the against minutes many stand could which scruples no had she and
directly, work to go to wished Emma others. the both of pressing earnest
at attempts various her containing portfolio the produced therefore and
might they that finished, been ever had them of one not for portraits,
were beginnings many Her Harriet. for size best the on together decide
and crayon, pencil, whole-lengths, half-lengths, Miniatures, displayed.
do to wanted always had She turn. in tried all been had water-colours
than music and drawing in both progress more made had and thing, every
to. submit ever would she as labour little so with done have might many
steadiness but style; every almost in drew sang;--and and played She
of degree the approached she had nothing in and wanting; been always had
to not ought and command, to glad been have would she which excellence
either skill own her to as deceived much not was She of. failed have
others have to unwilling not was she but musician, a or artist an as
often accomplishment for reputation her know to sorry or deceived,
deserved. it than higher

the perhaps finished, least the drawing--in every in merit was There
there had or less, much been there had but spirited; was style her most;
companions two her of admiration and delight the more, times ten been
likeness A ecstasies. in both were They same. the been have would
capital. be must performances Woodhouse’s Miss and body; every pleases

own my only had “I Emma. said you,” for faces of variety great “No
the father--but my of father--another my is There from. study to family
only could I that nervous, so him made picture his for sitting of idea
Weston Mrs. therefore. like very them of neither stealth; by him take
my always Weston! Mrs. Dear see. you again, and again, and again,
her. asked I whenever sit would She occasion. every on friend kindest
figure!--and elegant little own her quite really and sister; my is There
she if her, of likeness good a made have should I unlike. not face the
draw me have to hurry a such in was she but longer, sat have would
my all come here Then, quiet. be not would she that children four her
and Henry are, they children;--there four those of three at attempts
of one any and other, the to sheet the of end one from Bella, and John
them have to eager so was She rest. the of one any for do might them
three of children making no is there but refuse; not could I that drawn
take to easy very be it can nor know; you still stand old years four or
are they unless complexion, and air the beyond them, of likeness any
my is Here were. ever children mama’s of any than featured coarser
on sleeping was he as him took I baby. a was who fourth, the of sketch
would you as cockade his of likeness a strong as is it and sofa, the
very That’s conveniently. most head his down nestled had He see. to wish
very is sofa the of corner The George. little of proud rather am I like.
gentleman a of sketch pretty a last,”--unclosing my is here Then good.
John Mr. brother, best--my my and last whole-length--“my size, small in
away it put I when finished, being of much want not did Knightley.--This
not could I likeness. another take never would I vowed and pet, a in
made really had I when and pains, my all after for provoked; being help
in agreed quite were I and Weston it--(Mrs. of likeness good very a
flattering--but handsome--too too like)--only _very_ it thinking
dear poor came this, all side”--after right the on fault a was that
be to like--but little a was it of--“Yes, approbation cold Isabella’s
trouble of deal great a had had We justice. him do not did it sure
and of; favour great a made was It all. at sit to him persuading in
finish would never I so and bear; could I than more was it altogether
every to likeness, unfavourable an as over apologised it have to it,
then did I said, I as Square;--and, Brunswick in visitor morning
rather or sake, Harriet’s for But again. body any drawing ever forswear
_at_ case the in wives and husbands no are there as and own, my for
now.” resolution my break will I _present_,

was and idea, the by delighted and struck properly very seemed Elton Mr.
as indeed, present at case the in wives and husbands “No repeating,
a interesting so with wives,” and husbands No so. Exactly observe. you
better not had she whether consider to began Emma that consciousness,
the drawing, be to wanted she as But once. at together them leave
longer. little a wait must declaration

be to was It portrait. of sort and size the on fixed soon had She
was and Knightley’s, John Mr. like water-colours, in whole-length a
station honourable very a hold to herself, please could she if destined,
mantelpiece. the over

not of afraid and blushing, and smiling Harriet, and began; sitting The
of mixture sweet very a presented countenance, and attitude her keeping
no was there But artist. the of eyes steady the to expression youthful
every watching and her behind fidgeting Elton Mr. with thing, any doing
gaze might he where himself stationing for credit him gave She touch.
to end an put to obliged really was but offence; without again gaze and
her to occurred then It elsewhere. himself place to him request and it,
reading. in him employ to

kindness a be would it them, to read to as good so be would he “If
the lessen and part, her of difficulties the away amuse would It indeed!
Smith’s.” Miss of irksomeness

peace. in drew Emma and listened, Harriet happy. too only was Elton Mr.
less thing any look; to coming frequently still be to him allow must She
the at ready was he and lover; a in little too been have certainly would
progress, the see and up jump to pencil, the of intermission smallest
encourager, an such with displeased being no was charmed.--There be and
it before almost likeness a discern him made admiration his for
his and love his but eye, his respect not could She possible. was
unexceptionable. were complaisance

enough quite was she satisfactory; very altogether was sitting The
want no was There on. go to wish to sketch day’s first the with pleased
meant she as and attitude, the in fortunate been had she likeness, of
more little a give to figure, the to improvement little a in throw to
of confidence great had she elegance, more considerably and height,
filling its of and last, at drawing pretty a way every in being its
the of memorial standing both--a them to credit with place destined its
both; of friendship the and other, the of skill the one, of beauty
promising very Elton’s Mr. as associations agreeable other many as with
add. to likely was attachment

ought, he as just Elton, Mr. and day; next the again sit to was Harriet
again. them to reading and attending of permission the for entreated

the of one as you consider to happy most be shall We means. all “By
party.”

satisfaction, and success same the courtesies, and civilities same The
the of progress whole the accompanied and morrow, the on place took
pleased, was it saw who body Every happy. and rapid was which picture,
every through it defended and raptures, continual in was Elton Mr. but
criticism.

she beauty only the friend her given has Woodhouse “Miss
that suspecting least the in him--not to Weston Mrs. wanted,”--observed
correct, most is eye the of expression lover.--“The a addressing was she
of fault the is It eyelashes. and eyebrows those not has Smith Miss but
not.” them has she that face her

appears It you. with agree cannot “I he. replied so?” think you “Do
a such saw never I feature. every in resemblance perfect most a me to
know.” you shade, of effect the for allow must We life. my in likeness

Knightley. Mr. said Emma,” tall, too her made have “You

warmly Elton Mr. and it; own not would but had, she that knew Emma
added,

she Consider, tall. too least the in not tall; too not certainly no! “Oh
short in different--which a presents naturally down--which sitting is
know. you preserved, be must proportions the idea--and the exactly gives
of idea the exactly one gives it no! fore-shortening.--Oh Proportions,
indeed!” so Exactly Smith’s. Miss as height a such

your as Just done! prettily “So Woodhouse. Mr. said pretty,” very is “It
well so draws who body any know not do I dear. my are, always drawings
seems she that is, like thoroughly not do I thing only The do. you as
her over shawl little a only with doors, of out sitting be to
cold.” catch must she think one makes it shoulders--and

summer. in day warm a summer; be to supposed is it papa, dear my “But,
tree.” the at Look

dear.” my doors, of out sit to safe never is it “But

that confess must I “but Elton, Mr. cried thing,” any say may sir, “You,
of out Smith Miss of placing the thought, happy most a as it regard I
other Any spirit! inimitable such with touched is tree the and doors;
Miss of naivete The character. in less much been have would situation
keep cannot I admirable! most is it altogether--Oh, manners--and Smith’s
likeness.” a such saw never I it. from eyes my

few a were here and framed; picture the get to was wanted thing next The
the London; in done be must it directly; done be must It difficulties.
taste whose person intelligent some of hands the through go must order
commissions, all of doer usual the Isabella, and on; depended be could
Woodhouse Mr. and December, was it because to, applied be not must
of fogs the in house her of out stirring her of idea the bear not could
it than Elton, Mr. to known distress the was sooner no But December.
trusted be he “Might alert. the on always was gallantry His removed. was
executing in have he should pleasure infinite what commission, the with
how say to impossible was It time. any at London to ride could he it!
errand.” an such on employed being by gratified be should he much

give not would thought!--she the endure not could good!--she too was “He
desired the on world,”--brought the for office troublesome a such him
settled minutes few very a assurances,--and and entreaties of repetition
business. the

give and frame, the chuse London, to drawing the take to was Elton Mr.
its ensure to as it pack so could she thought Emma and directions; the
of fearful mostly seemed he while him, incommoding much without safety
enough. incommoded being not

received he as sigh, tender a with he said deposit!” precious a “What
it.

should “I Emma. thought love,” in be to gallant too almost is man “This
of ways different hundred a be may there suppose I that but so, say
Harriet suit will and man, young excellent an is He love. in being
does he but himself; says he as so,’ ‘Exactly an be will it exactly;
could I than more rather compliments for study and languish, and sigh
second. a as share good pretty a for in come I principal. a as endure
account.” Harriet’s on gratitude his is it But



VII CHAPTER


occasion fresh a produced London to going Elton’s Mr. of day very The
Hartfield, at been had Harriet friend. her towards services Emma’s for
to home gone had time, a after and, breakfast; after soon usual, as
been had than sooner and returned, she dinner: to again return
something announcing look, hurried agitated, an with and of, talked
a Half tell. to longing was she which happened have to extraordinary
to back got she as soon as heard, had She out. all it brought minute
and before, hour an there been had Martin Mr. that Goddard’s, Mrs.
a left had expected, particularly nor home, at not was she finding
on and away; gone and sisters, his of one from her for parcel little
which songs two the besides found, actually had she parcel, this opening
was letter this and herself; to letter a copy, to Elizabeth lent had she
marriage. of proposal direct a contained and Martin, Mr. from him, from
what know not did she surprized so was She it? thought have could “Who
letter, good very a and marriage; of proposal a quite Yes, do. to
very her loved really he if as wrote he And so. thought she least at
to could she as fast as come was she so, know--and not did she much--but
her of half-ashamed was Emma do.--” should she what Woodhouse Miss ask
doubtful. so and pleased so seeming for friend

any lose to not determined is man young “the cried, she word,” my “Upon
can.” he if well himself connect will He asking. of want for thing

you rather I’d do. “Pray Harriet. cried letter?” the read you “Will
would.”

style The surprized. was and read, She pressed. be to sorry not was Emma
no merely not were There expectation. her above much was letter the of
a disgraced have not would it composition a as but errors, grammatical
and unaffected, and strong was plain, though language, the gentleman;
was It writer. the of credit the to much very conveyed it sentiments the
propriety, liberality, attachment, warm sense, good expressed but short,
stood Harriet while it, over paused She feeling. of delicacy even
last at was and well,” “Well, a with opinion, her for watching anxiously
short?” too it is or letter? good a it “Is add, to forced

slowly--“so rather Emma replied letter,” good very a indeed, “Yes,
his of one think I considered, thing every that Harriet, letter, a good
whom man young the imagine hardly can I him. helped have must sisters
if well, so himself express could day other the you with talking saw I
woman; a of style the not is it yet and powers, own his to quite left
a for enough diffuse not concise; and strong too is it certainly, no,
natural a have may suppose I and man, sensible a is he doubt No woman.
in pen a takes he when clearly--and and strongly for--thinks talent
men. some with so is It words. proper find naturally thoughts his hand,
sentiments with decided, Vigorous, mind. of sort the understand I Yes,
Harriet letter, written better A coarse. not point, certain a to
expected.” had I than it,) (returning

I shall what Harriet;--“well--and--and waiting still the said “Well,”
do?”

this to regard with mean you Do respect? what In do! you shall “What
letter?”

“Yes.”

course--and of it answer must You of? doubt in you are what “But
speedily.”

me.” advise do Woodhouse, Miss Dear say? I shall what But “Yes.

express will You own. your all be better much had letter the no! no, “Oh
not your of danger no is There sure. am I properly, very yourself
be must meaning Your thing. first the is which intelligible, being
gratitude of expressions such and demurs: or doubts no unequivocal;
will requires, propriety as inflicting are you pain the for concern and
need You persuaded. am I mind, _your_ to unbidden themselves present
his for sorrow of appearance the with write to prompted be not
disappointment.”

down. looking Harriet, said then,” him refuse to ought I think “You

any in you Are mean? you do what Harriet, dear My him! refuse to “Ought
been have I perhaps pardon, your beg I thought--but I that? to as doubt
feel you if you, misunderstanding been have certainly I mistake. a under
were you imagined had I answer. your of _purport_ the to as doubt in
it.” of wording the to as only me consulting

continued: Emma manner, of reserve little a With silent. was Harriet

collect.” I answer, favourable a return to mean “You

you would What do? I shall mean--What not do I is, that not; do I “No,
do.” to ought I what me tell Woodhouse, Miss dear Pray, do? to me advise

do to nothing have will I Harriet. advice, any you give not shall “I
feelings.” your with settle must you which point a is This it. with

Harriet, said much,” very so me liked he that notion no had “I
her in persevered Emma while little a For letter. the contemplating
that of flattery bewitching the apprehend to beginning but silence;
say, to best it thought she powerful, too be might letter

as _doubts_ woman a if that Harriet, rule, general a as down it lay “I
refuse to ought certainly she not, or man a accept should she whether to
directly. ‘No’ say to ought she ‘Yes,’ to as hesitate can she If him.
with feelings, doubtful with into entered safely be to state a not is It
yourself, than older and friend, a as duty my it thought I heart. a half
influence to want I that imagine not do But you. to much thus say to
you.”

would you if to--but kind too deal great a are you sure am I no, “Oh!
that--As mean not do I no, do--No, best had I what me advise just
be not should up--One made quite be to ought mind one’s say, you
‘No,’ say to safer be will thing.--It serious very a is hesitating--It
‘No?’” say better had I think you perhaps.--Do

you advise I “would graciously, smiling Emma, said world,” the for “Not
you If happiness. own your of judge best the be must You way. either
most the him think you if person; other every to Martin Mr. prefer
you should why with, company in been ever have you man agreeable
at you to occur else body any Harriet.--Does blush, You hesitate?
deceive not do Harriet, Harriet, definition? a such under moment this
this At compassion. and gratitude by with away run be not do yourself;
of?” thinking you are whom moment

away turned Harriet answering, of favourable.--Instead were symptoms The
was letter the though and fire; the by thoughtfully stood and confused,
regard. without about twisted mechanically now was it hand, her in still
At hopes. strong without not but impatience, with result the waited Emma
said-- Harriet hesitation, some with last,

well as do must I opinion, your me give not will you as Woodhouse, “Miss
almost really and determined, quite now have I and myself; by can I as
right?” am I think you Do Martin. Mr. refuse mind--to my up made

just doing are you Harriet; dearest my right, perfectly “Perfectly,
to feelings my kept I suspense in all at were you While ought. you what
hesitation no have I decided completely so are you that now but myself,
would It this. of joy myself give I Harriet, Dear approving. in
the been have must which acquaintance, your lose to me grieved have
smallest the in were you While Martin. Mr. marrying your of consequence
influence; not would I because it, about nothing said I wavering, degree
have not could I me. to friend a of loss the been have would it but
you of secure am I Now Farm. Abbey-Mill of Martin, Robert Mrs. visited
ever.” for

her struck it of idea the but danger, own her surmised not had Harriet
forcibly.

be to “No, aghast. looking cried, she me!” visited have not could “You
have would That before. that of thought never I but not; could you sure
not would I Woodhouse, Miss escape!--Dear an dreadful!--What too been
thing any for you with intimate being of honour and pleasure the up give
world.” the in

it but you; lose to pang severe a been have would it Harriet, “Indeed,
society. good all of out yourself thrown have would You been. have must
up.” you given have must I

me killed have would It it! borne have ever I should me!--How “Dear
more!” any Hartfield to come to never

Farm!--_You_ Abbey-Mill to banished creature!--_You_ affectionate “Dear
I life! your all vulgar and illiterate the of society the to confined
must He it. ask to assurance the have could man young the how wonder
himself.” of opinion good pretty a have

her Harriet, said general,” in either, conceited is he think not do “I
natured, good very is he least, “at censure; such opposing conscience
regard great a have and him, to obliged much feel always shall I and
though know, you from--and thing different a quite is that for--but
must I certainly should--and I that follow not does it me, like may he
comes one if people--and seen have I here visiting my since that confess
all, at comparison no is there manners, and person them, compare to
Mr. think really do I However, agreeable. and handsome very so is _one_
and him; of opinion great a have and man, young amiable very a Martin
as letter--but a such writing his me--and to attached much so being his
consideration.” any upon do not would I what is it you, leaving to

be not will We friend. little sweet own my you, thank you, “Thank
or asked, is she because merely man a marry to not is woman A parted.
letter.” tolerable a write can and her, to attached is he because

too.” letter short a but is it no;--and “Oh

“very a with pass it let but friend, her of taste bad the felt Emma
clownish the for her, to consolation small a be would it and true;
that know to day, the of hour every her offending be might which manner
letter.” good a write could husband her

always be to is, thing the letter; a for cares Nobody very. yes, “Oh!
But him. refuse to determined quite am I companions. pleasant with happy
say?” I shall What do? I shall how

advised and answer, the in difficulty no be would there her assured Emma
her of hope the in to, agreed was which directly, written being its
assistance any against protest to continued Emma though and assistance;
sentence. every of formation the in given fact in was it wanted, being
a such had it, to replying in again, letter his over looking The
up her brace to necessary particularly was it that tendency, softening
at concerned much very so was she and expressions; decisive few a with
mother his what of much so thought and unhappy, him making of idea the
not should they that anxious so was and say, and think would sisters and
in come had man young the if believed Emma that ungrateful, her fancy
all. after accepted been have would he moment, that at way her

business The sent. and sealed, and written, was however, letter, This
but evening, the all low rather was She safe. Harriet and finished, was
by them relieved sometimes and regrets, amiable her for allow could Emma
of idea the forward bringing by sometimes affection, own her of speaking
Elton. Mr.

a rather in said was again,” Abbey-Mill to invited be never shall “I
tone. sorrowful

You Harriet. my you, with part to bear ever I could were, you if “Nor,
Abbey-Mill.” to spared be to Hartfield at necessary too deal great a are

but happy never am I for there; go to want never should I sure am I “And
Hartfield.” at

much very be would Goddard Mrs. think “I was, it afterwards time Some
would--for Nash Miss sure am I happened. had what knew she if surprized
a only is it and married, well very sister own her thinks Nash Miss
linen-draper.”

teacher the in refinement or pride greater see to sorry be should “One
an such you envy would Nash Miss say dare I Harriet. school, a of
appear would conquest this Even married. being of this as opportunity
she suppose I you, for superior thing any to As eyes. her in valuable
be hardly can person certain a of attentions The dark. the in quite is
I and you fancy I Hitherto yet. Highbury of tittle-tattle the among
explained have manners and looks his whom to people only the are
themselves.”

that wondering about something said and smiled, and blushed Harriet
certainly was Elton Mr. of idea The much. so her like should people
towards again tender-hearted was she time, a after still, but cheering;
Martin. Mr. rejected the

all are they what wonder “I softly. she said letter,” my got has he “Now
unhappy be will they unhappy, is he know--if sisters his doing--whether
much.” very so it mind not will he hope I too.

cheerfully more are who friends absent our among those of think us “Let
shewing is Elton Mr. perhaps, moment, this “At Emma. cried employed,”
beautiful more much how telling sisters, and mother his to picture your
times, six or five it for asked being after and original, the is
name.” dear own your name, your hear to them allowing

Bond-street.” in picture my left has he picture!--But “My

modest little dear my No, Elton. Mr. of nothing know I so!--Then he “Has
till Bond-street in be not will picture the it upon depend Harriet,
this all companion his is It to-morrow. horse his mounts he before just
family, his to designs his opens It delight. his solace, his evening,
those party the through diffuses it them, among you introduces it
warm and curiosity eager nature, our of feelings pleasantest
busy how suspicious, how animated, how cheerful, How prepossession.
are!” all imaginations their

stronger. grew smiles her and again, smiled Harriet



VIII CHAPTER


been had she past weeks some For night. that Hartfield at slept Harriet
have to getting gradually and there, time her half than more spending
every in best it judged Emma and herself; to appropriated bed-room a
possible as much as them with her keep to kindest, and safest respect,
or hour an for morning next the go to obliged was She present. at just
should she that settled be to then was it but Goddard’s, Mrs. to two
days. some of visit regular a make to Hartfield, to return

Mr. with time some sat and called, Knightley Mr. gone, was she While
his up made previously had who Woodhouse, Mr. till Emma, and Woodhouse
was and it, defer to not daughter his by persuaded was out, walk to mind
his of scruples the against though both, of entreaties the by induced
Knightley, Mr. purpose. that for Knightley Mr. leave to civility, own
short, his by offering was him, about ceremony of nothing had who
and apologies protracted the to contrast amusing an answers, decided
other. the of hesitations civil

not will you if Knightley, Mr. me, excuse will you if believe, I “Well,
and advice Emma’s take shall I thing, rude very a doing as me consider
had I believe I out, is sun the As hour. an of quarter a for out go
ceremony, without you treat I can. I while turns three my take better
people.” privileged are we think invalids We Knightley. Mr.

me.” of stranger a make not do sir, dear “My

to happy be will Emma daughter. my in substitute excellent an leave “I
my take and excuse your beg will I think I therefore And you. entertain
walk.” winter turns--my three

sir.” better, do cannot “You

a am I but Knightley, Mr. company, your of pleasure the for ask would “I
you besides, and, you; to tedious be would pace my and walker, slow very
Abbey.” Donwell to you, before walk long another have

think I and myself; moment this going am I you; thank sir, you, “Thank
the open and greatcoat your fetch will I better. the go _you_ sooner the
you.” for door garden

being of instead Knightley, Mr. but off; was last at Woodhouse Mr.
more for inclined seemingly again, down sat likewise, off immediately
more with her of speaking and Harriet, of speaking began He chat.
before. heard ever had Emma than praise voluntary

a is she “but he; said do,” you as beauty her rate cannot “I
her of well very think to inclined am I and creature, little pretty
good in but with; is she those upon depends character Her disposition.
woman.” valuable a out turn will she hands

be not may hope, I hands, good the and so; think you glad am “I
wanting.”

you tell will I so compliment, a for anxious are “you he, said “Come,”
school-girl’s her of her cured have You her. improved have you that
credit.” you does really she giggle;

been had I believe not did I if indeed mortified be should I you. “Thank
they where praise bestow will who body every not is it but use; some of
it.” with me overpower often not do _You_ may.

morning?” this say, you again, her expecting are “You

she than already longer gone been has She moment. every “Almost
intended.”

perhaps.” visitors some her; delay to happened has “Something

wretches!” gossips!--Tiresome “Highbury

would.” you that tiresome body every consider not may “Harriet

said therefore and contradiction, for true too was this knew Emma
smile, a with added, presently He nothing.

that you tell must I but places, or times on fix to pretend not do “I
of hear soon will friend little your believe to reason good have I
advantage.” her to something

sort?” what of so? how “Indeed!

smiling. still you;” assure I sort, serious very “A

her? with love in is thing--Who one but of think can I serious! “Very
confidant?” their you makes Who

hint. a dropt having Elton’s Mr. of hopes in half than more was Emma
Mr. knew she and adviser, and friend general of sort a was Knightley Mr.
him. to up looked Elton

have soon will Smith Harriet “that replied, he think,” to reason have “I
quarter:--Robert unexceptionable most a from and marriage, of offer an
have to seems summer, this Abbey-Mill, to visit Her man. the is Martin
her.” marry to means and love in desperately is He business. his done

to means Harriet that sure he is “but Emma; said obliging,” very is “He
him?” marry

to came He do? that Will then. offer an her make to means well, “Well,
knows He it. about me consult to purpose on ago, evenings two Abbey the
believe, I and, family, his all and him for regard thorough a have I
whether me ask to came He friends. best his of one as me considers
whether early; so settle to him in imprudent be would it thought I
choice his approved I whether short, in young: too her thought I
considered being her of perhaps apprehension some having altogether;
society of line a in as her) of much so making _your_ since (especially
hear never I said. he that all with pleased much very was I him. above
the to speaks always He Martin. Robert than one any from sense better
every me told He judging. well very and straightforward, open, purpose;
in doing proposed all they what and plans, and circumstances his thing;
and son as both man, young excellent an is He marriage. his of event the
me to proved He marry. to him advising in hesitation no had I brother.
he convinced was I case, the being that and it; afford could he that
sent altogether and too, lady fair the praised I better. do not could
he before, opinion my esteemed never had he If happy. very away him
house the left say, dare I and, then; me of highly thought have would
happened This had. ever man counsellor and friend best the me thinking
allow not would he suppose, fairly may we as Now, last. before night the
appear not does he as and lady, the to spoke he before pass to time much
Mrs. at be should he that unlikely not is it yesterday, spoken have to
thinking without visitor, a by detained be may she and to-day; Goddard’s
wretch.” tiresome a all at him

herself to smiling been had who Emma, said Knightley,” Mr. “Pray,
Martin Mr. that know you do “how speech, this of part great a through
yesterday?” speak not did

it but it; know absolutely not do “I surprized, he, replied “Certainly,”
you?” with day whole the she not Was inferred. be may

what for return in something, you tell will “I she, said “Come,”
was and wrote, he is, yesterday--that speak did He me. told have you
refused.”

Mr. and believed; be could it before repeated be to obliged was This
stood he as displeasure, and surprize with red looked actually Knightley
said, and indignation, tall in up,

the is What her. believed ever I than simpleton greater a is she “Then
about?” girl foolish

man a to incomprehensible always is “it Emma, cried sure,” be to “Oh!
always man A marriage. of offer an refuse ever should woman a that
her.” asks who body any for ready be to woman a imagines

the is what But thing. such any imagine not does man a “Nonsense!
is it if madness, Martin? Robert refuse Smith Harriet this? of meaning
mistaken.” are you hope I but so;

clearer.” be could answer!--nothing her saw “I

your is this Emma, too. answer her wrote answer!--you her saw “You
him.” refuse to her persuaded You doing.

not should I allowing) from far am I however, (which, did, I if “And
man, young respectable very a is Martin Mr. wrong. done had I that feel
surprized rather am and equal; Harriet’s be to him admit cannot I but
he account, your By her. address to ventured have should he that indeed
ever were they that pity a is It scruples. some had have to seem does
over.” got

and warmly; and loudly Knightley Mr. exclaimed equal!” Harriet’s “Not
is he “No, afterwards, moments few a added, asperity, calmer with
in as sense in superior her much as is he for indeed, equal her not
are What you. blinds girl that about infatuation your Emma, situation.
any to education, or nature birth, of either claims, Smith’s Harriet
of daughter natural the is She Martin? Robert than higher connexion
and all, at provision settled no probably with whom, knows nobody
parlour-boarder as only known is She relations. respectable no certainly
any of girl a nor girl, sensible a not is She school. common a at
and young too is and useful, nothing taught been has She information.
have can she age her At herself. thing any acquired have to simple too
have to ever likely very not is wit, little her with and experience, no
and tempered, good is she and pretty, is She her. avail can that any
account, his on was match the advising in scruple only My all. is that
that, felt I him. for connexion bad a and deserts, his beneath being as
as that and better; much do might he probability all in fortune, to as
I But worse. do not could he helpmate, useful or companion rational a to
there to trust to willing was and love, in man a to so reason not could
in which, disposition, of sort that having her to her, in harm no being
well. very out turn and aright led easily be might his, like hands, good
the not had and side; her on all be to felt I match the of advantage The
cry-out general a be would there that now) I have (nor doubt smallest
of. sure made I satisfaction _your_ Even luck. good extreme her upon
friend’s your regret not would you that immediately mind my crossed It
remember I well. so settled being her of sake the for Highbury, leaving
will Harriet, for partiality her all with Emma, ‘Even myself, to saying
match.’” good a this think

any say to as Emma of little so knowing your at wondering help cannot “I
his all and sense his all with (and farmer, a think What! thing. such
friend! intimate my for match good a more,) nothing is Martin Mr. merit
whom man a marrying of sake the for Highbury leaving her regret Not
should you wonder I own! my of acquaintance an as admit never could I
are mine you assure I feelings. such have to me for possible it think
are You fair. means no by statement your think must I different. very
differently very estimated be would They claims. Harriet’s to just not
two, the of richest the be may Martin Mr. myself; as well as others by
in sphere society.--The in rank to as inferior her undoubtedly is he but
degradation.” a be would his.--It above much is moves she which

a to married be to ignorance, and illegitimacy to degradation “A
gentleman-farmer!” intelligent respectable,

may she sense legal a in though birth, her of circumstances the to “As
pay to not is She sense. common in hold not will it Nobody, called be
with those of level the below held being by others, of offence the for
father her that doubt a be scarcely can up.--There brought is she whom
is allowance fortune.--Her of gentleman a gentleman--and a is
or improvement her for grudged been ever has nothing liberal; very
that me; to indubitable is daughter, gentleman’s a is she comfort.--That
will apprehend, I one, no daughters, gentlemen’s with associates she
Martin.” Robert Mr. to superior is deny.--She

have may “whoever Knightley, Mr. said parents,” her be might “Whoever
of part any been have to appear not does it her, of charge the had
After society. good call would you what into her introduce to plan their
Goddard’s Mrs. in left is she education indifferent very a receiving
line, Goddard’s Mrs. in short, in move, can;--to she as shift to hands
thought evidently friends Her acquaintance. Goddard’s Mrs. have to
nothing desired She enough. good _was_ it and her; for enough good this
had mind her friend, a into her turn to chose you Till herself. better
as was She it. beyond ambition any nor set, own her for distaste no
of sense no had She summer. the in Martins the with possible as happy
no been have You it. given have you now, it has she If then. superiority
proceeded have never would Martin Robert Emma. Smith, Harriet to friend
to disinclined being not her of persuaded felt not had he if far, so
any address to feeling real much too has He well. him know I him.
is he conceit, to as And passion. selfish of haphazard the on woman
had he it upon Depend know. I man any of it from farthest the
encouragement.”

this to reply direct a make to not Emma to convenient most was It
subject the of line own her up take to rather chose she assertion;
again.

before, said I as but, Martin; Mr. to friend warm very a are “You
so not are well marry to claims Harriet’s Harriet. to unjust are
she but girl, clever a not is She them. represent you as contemptible
her have to deserve not does and of, aware are you than sense better has
and however, point, that Waiving slightingly. so of spoken understanding
good-natured, and pretty only her, describe you as be, to her supposing
not are they them, possesses she degree the in that you, tell me let
a fact, in is, she for general, in world the to recommendations trivial
an of out people ninety-nine by so thought be must and girl, beautiful
the on philosophic more much are men that appears it till and hundred;
fall do they till supposed; generally are they than beauty of subject
with girl, a faces, handsome of instead minds well-informed with love in
sought and admired being of certainty a has Harriet, as loveliness such
a consequently many, among from chusing of power the having of after,
claim, a slight very so not is too, good-nature, Her nice. be to claim
and temper of sweetness thorough real, does, it as comprehending,
to readiness great a and herself, of opinion humble very a manner,
in sex your if mistaken much very am I people. other with pleased be
claims highest the temper, such and beauty, such think not would general
possess.” could woman a

almost is have, you reason the abusing you hear to Emma, word, my “Upon
misapply than sense, without be Better too. so think me make to enough
do.” you as it

of feeling the is _that_ know “I playfully. she cried sure!” be “To
every what exactly is Harriet as girl a such that know I all. you
his satisfies and senses his bewitches once at in--what delights man
to ever yourself, you, Were chuse. and pick may Harriet Oh! judgment.
just seventeen, at she, is And you. for woman very the is she marry,
at wondered be to known, be to beginning just life, into entering
let No--pray receives? she offer first the accept not does she because
her.” about look to time have her

Knightley Mr. said intimacy,” foolish very a it thought always have “I
perceive now I but myself; to thoughts my kept have I “though presently,
up her puff will You Harriet. for one unfortunate very a be will it that
that, to, claim a has she what of and beauty, own her of ideas such with
her. for enough good be will reach her within nobody while, little a in
Nothing mischief. of sort every produces head, weak a on working Vanity
Miss high. too expectations her raise to lady young a for as easy so
though fast, so in flow marriage of offers find not may Smith Harriet
to chuse may you whatever sense, of Men girl. pretty very a is she
of fond very be not would family of Men wives. silly want not do say,
prudent most obscurity--and such of girl a with themselves connecting
be might they disgrace and inconvenience the of afraid be would men
Let revealed. be to came parentage her of mystery the when in, involved
for happy and respectable, safe, is she and Martin, Robert marry her
her teach and greatly, marry to expect to her encourage you if but ever;
large and consequence of man a than less nothing with satisfied be to
rest the all Goddard’s Mrs. at parlour-boarder a be may she fortune,
marry will who girl a is Smith Harriet (for least, at life--or, her of
the at catch to glad is and desperate, grow she till other,) or somebody
son.” writing-master’s old

there that Knightley, Mr. point, this on differently very so think “We
more other each making be only shall We it. canvassing in use no be can
impossible; is it Martin, Robert marry her _letting_ my to as But angry.
any prevent must as think, I decidedly, so and him, refused has she
him, refused having of evil the by abide must She application. second
to pretend not will I itself, refusal the to as and be; may it whatever
there you assure I but little; a her influence not might I that say
much so is appearance His do. to body any for or me for little very was
to disposed were ever she if that bad, so manner his and him, against
seen had she before that imagine, can I now. not is she him, favour
her of brother the was He him. tolerate might she superior, body any
seen having altogether, and her; please to pains took he and friends,
not, might she assistant) great his been have must (that better nobody
case the But disagreeable. him find Abbey-Mill, at was she while
a but nothing and are; gentlemen what now knows She now. altered is
Harriet.” with chance any has manner and education in gentleman

Mr. cried talked!” was ever as nonsense, errant “Nonsense,
and sincerity, sense, have manners Martin’s Knightley.--“Robert
than gentility true more has mind his and them; recommend to good-humour
understand.” could Smith Harriet

was but unconcerned, cheerfully look to tried and answer, no made Emma
She gone. be to much very him wanting and uncomfortable feeling really
better a herself thought still she done; had she what repent not did
be; could he than refinement and right female of point a such of judge
general, in judgment his for respect habitual of sort a had she yet but
him have to and her; against loudly so it having dislike her made which
disagreeable. very was state, angry in her to opposite just sitting
attempt one only with silence, unpleasant this in passed minutes Some
was He answer. no made he but weather, the of talk to side Emma’s on
words. these in last at appeared thoughts his of result The thinking.

it hope I and so; think but can he loss--if great no has Martin “Robert
known best are Harriet for views Your does. he before long be not will
it match-making, of love your of secret no make you as but yourself; to
as have;--and you projects and plans, and views, that suppose to fair is
it think I man, the is Elton if that you to hint just shall I friend a
vain.” in labour all be will

continued, He disclaimed. and laughed Emma

man, of sort good very a is Elton do. not will Elton it, upon “Depend
make to likely all at not but Highbury, of vicar respectable very a and
any as well as income good a of value the knows He match. imprudent an
is He rationally. act will he but sentimentally, talk may Elton body.
Harriet’s. with be can you as claims, own his with acquainted well as
favourite great a and man, young handsome very a is he that knows He
unreserved in talking of way general his from and goes; he wherever
does he that convinced am I present, men only are there when moments,
great with speak him heard have I away. himself throw to mean not
are sisters his that ladies young of family large a of animation
apiece.” pounds thousand twenty all have who with, intimate

had I “If again. laughing Emma, said you,” to obliged much very am “I
very been have would it Harriet, marrying Elton’s Mr. on heart my set
to Harriet keep to want only I present at but eyes; my open to kind
to hope never could I indeed. match-making with done have I myself.
well.” am I while off leave shall I Randalls. at doings own my equal

was He abruptly. off walking and rising he, you,”--said to morning “Good
was and man, young the of disappointment the felt He vexed. much very
had he sanction the by it, promoting of means the been have to mortified
affair, the in taken had Emma persuaded was he which part the and given;
exceedingly. him provoking was

more was there but too; vexation of state a in remained Emma
always not did She his. in than her’s, of causes the in indistinctness
that convinced entirely so herself, with satisfied absolutely so feel
He Knightley. Mr. as wrong, adversary’s her and right were opinions her
She her. for left he than self-approbation complete more in off walked
and time little a that but however, down, cast materially so not was
staying Harriet’s restoratives. adequate very were Harriet of return the
the of possibility The uneasy. her make to beginning was long so away
with meeting and morning, that Goddard’s Mrs. to coming man’s young
dread The ideas. alarming gave cause, own his pleading and Harriet
when and uneasiness; prominent the became all after failure a such of
any having without and spirits, good very in and appeared, Harriet
which satisfaction a felt she absence, long her for give to reason such
Mr. let that her, convinced and mind, own her with her settled
woman’s which nothing done had she would, he what say or think Knightley
justify. not would feelings woman’s and friendship

considered she when but Elton; Mr. about little a her frightened had He
neither done, had she as him observed have not could Knightley Mr. that
of spite in herself, tell to allowed be must (she nor interest, the with
such on observer an such of skill the with pretensions) Knightley’s Mr.
she anger, in and hastily it spoken had he that herself, as question a
resentfully wished he what said rather had he that believe, to able was
have might certainly He about. thing any knew he what than true, be to
and done, ever had she than unreserve more with speak Elton Mr. heard
to as disposition inconsiderate imprudent, an of be not might Elton Mr.
otherwise than attentive rather be naturally might he matters; money
the for allowance due make not did Knightley Mr. then, but them; to
Mr. motives. interested all with war at passion strong a of influence
its of nothing thought course of and passion, such no saw Knightley
overcoming its of doubt a feel to it of much too saw she but effects;
and suggest; originally might prudence reasonable a that hesitations any
sure very was she prudence, of degree becoming reasonable, a than more
Elton. Mr. to belong not did

not back, came she hers: established manner and look cheerful Harriet’s
been had Nash Miss Elton. Mr. of talk to but Martin, Mr. of think to
great with immediately repeated she which something, her telling
child, sick a attend to Goddard’s Mrs. to been had Perry Mr. delight.
was he as that Nash, Miss told had he and him, seen had Nash Miss and
and Elton, Mr. met had he Park, Clayton from yesterday back coming
road his on actually was Elton Mr. that surprize, great his to found
the was it though morrow, the till return to meaning not and London, to
Mr. and before; miss to known never been had he which night, whist-club
it shabby how him told and it, about him with remonstrated had Perry
to much very tried and himself, absent to player, best their him, in was
not would it but day; one only journey his off put to him persuade
_very_ a in said had and on, go to determined been had Elton Mr. do;
would he which business on going was he that indeed, way _particular_
a about something and world; the in inducement any for off put not
exceedingly something of bearer the being and commission, enviable very
sure very was he but him, understand quite not could Perry Mr. precious.
Elton Mr. and so; him told he and case, the in _lady_ a be must there
spirits. great in off rode and smiling, and conscious very looked only
about more deal great a talked had and this, all her told had Nash Miss
did she “that her, at significantly very so looking said, and Elton; Mr.
only she but be, might business his what understand to pretend not
the think should she prefer, could Elton Mr. whom woman any that knew
his not had Elton Mr. doubt, a beyond for, world; the in woman luckiest
agreeableness.” or beauty for equal



IX CHAPTER


with quarrel not could Emma but her, with quarrel might Knightley Mr.
before usual than longer was it that displeased, much so was He herself.
looks grave his meet, did they when and again; Hartfield to came he
repent. not could but sorry, was She forgiven. not was she that shewed
justified more and more were proceedings and plans her contrary, the On
days. few next the of appearances general the by her to endeared and

Mr. after soon hand to safely came framed, elegantly Picture, The
common the of mantelpiece the over hung being and return, Elton’s
sentences half his out sighed and it, at look to up got he sitting-room,
were they feelings, Harriet’s for as and ought; he as just admiration of
as attachment an steady and strong as into themselves forming visibly
satisfied perfectly soon was Emma admitted. mind of sort and youth her
a furnished he as than remembered, otherwise no being Martin’s Mr. of
latter. the to advantage utmost the of Elton, Mr. with contrast

of deal great a by mind, friend’s little her improving of views Her
few a than more to led yet never had conversation, and reading useful
much was It to-morrow. on going of intention the and chapters, first
imagination her let to pleasanter much study; to than chat to easier
enlarge to labouring be to than fortune, Harriet’s at work and range
literary only the and facts; sober on it exercise or comprehension her
she provision mental only the present, at Harriet engaged which pursuit
transcribing and collecting the was life, of evening the for making was
thin a into with, meet could she that sort every of riddles the all
with ornamented and friend, her by up made paper, hot-pressed of quarto
trophies. and ciphers

are scale grand very a on collections such literature, of age this In
out written had Goddard’s, Mrs. at head-teacher Nash, Miss uncommon. not
it of hint first the taken had who Harriet, and hundred; three least at
more. many great a get to help, Woodhouse’s Miss with hoped, her, from
wrote Harriet as and taste; and memory invention, her with assisted Emma
first the of arrangement an be to likely was it hand, pretty very a
quantity. as well as form in order,

the as business the in interested much as almost was Woodhouse Mr.
putting their worth something recollect to often very tried and girls,
young--he was he when be to used there as riddles clever many “So in.
time.” in should he hoped he but them! remember not could he wondered
maid.” frozen but fair a “Kitty, in ended always it And

subject, the on to spoken had he whom too, Perry, friend good His
he but kind; riddle the of thing any recollect present at not did
much, so about went he as and watch, the upon be to Perry desired had
quarter. that from come might thought, he something,

Highbury of intellects the that wish daughter’s his means no by was It
one only the was Elton Mr. requisition. under put be should general in
good really any contribute to invited was He asked. she assistance whose
had she and recollect; might he that conundrums or charades, enigmas,
recollections; his with work at intently most him seeing of pleasure the
that careful earnestly most perceive, could she as time, same the at and
the to compliment a breathe not did that nothing ungallant, nothing
politest three or two their him to owed They lips. his pass should sex
and recalled, he last at which with exultation and joy the and puzzles;
charade, well-known that recited, sentimentally rather

denote, affliction doth first My
feel to destin’d is second my Which
antidote best the is whole my And
heal.-- and soften to affliction That

some it transcribed had they that acknowledge to sorry quite her made
already. ago pages

“that she; said Elton?” Mr. us, for yourself one write you not will “Why
to easier be could nothing and freshness; its for security only the is
you.”

his in kind the of thing any ever, hardly written, never had he no! “Oh
Woodhouse”--he Miss even not afraid was He fellow! stupidest The life.
him.” inspire could Smith Miss moment--“or a stopt

He inspiration. of proof some produced however day next very The
table the on paper of piece a leave to just moments, few a for called
addressed had his of friend a which charade, a said, he as containing,
his from which, but admiration, his of object the lady, young a to
own. his be must convinced immediately was Emma manner,

my “Being he. said collection,” Smith’s Miss for it offer not do “I
eye, public the to degree any in it expose to right no have I friend’s,
it.” at looking dislike not may you perhaps but

could Emma which Harriet, to than Emma to more was speech The
found he and him, about consciousness deep was There understand.
next the gone was He friend’s. her than eye her meet to easier it
pause, moment’s another moment:--after

towards paper the pushing and smiling, Emma, said it,” “Take
own.” your Take you. for is Harriet--“it

never Emma, and it; touch not could and tremor, a in was Harriet But
herself. it examine to obliged was first, be to loth

Miss-- To

CHARADE.

kings, of pomp and wealth the displays first My
ease. and luxury their earth! the of Lords
brings, second my man, of view Another
seas! the of monarch the there, him Behold

have! we reverse what united, ah! But
flown; are all freedom, and power boasted Man’s
slave, a bends he sea, and earth the of Lord
alone. reigns woman, lovely woman, And

supply, soon will word the wit ready Thy
eye! soft that in beam approval its May

through it read meaning, the caught pondered, it, over eye her cast She
then and lines, the of mistress quite and certain, quite be to again
while herself, to saying and smiling, happily sat Harriet, to it passing
and hope of confusion the all in paper the over puzzling was Harriet
worse read have I indeed. well very Elton, Mr. well, “Very dulness,
This it. for credit you give I hint. good very _Courtship_--a charades.
Smith, Miss plainly--‘Pray, very saying is This way. your feeling is
my and charade my Approve you. to addresses my pay to leave me give
glance.’ same the in intentions

eye! soft that in beam approval its May

the epithets, all eye--of her for word very the is Soft exactly. Harriet
given. be could that justest

supply. soon will word the wit ready Thy

in much very be must man A better. the All wit! ready Humph--Harriet’s
the had you wish I Knightley, Mr. Ah! so. her describe to indeed, love,
life your in once For you. convince would this think I this; of benefit
charade excellent An mistaken. yourself own to obliged be would you
soon crisis a to come must Things purpose. the to much very and indeed!
now.”

observations, pleasant very these from off break to obliged was She
the by length, great into run to sort a of otherwise were which
questions. wondering Harriet’s of eagerness

idea--I an not have I be? it can Woodhouse?--what Miss be, it can “What
find to try Do be? possibly it can What least. the in it guess cannot
it Is hard. so thing any saw never I me. help Do Woodhouse. Miss out, it
lady. young the be could who was--and friend the who wonder I kingdom?
woman? be it Can one? good a is it think you Do

alone. reigns woman, lovely woman, And

Neptune? be it Can

seas! the of monarch the there, him Behold

one only is shark no! Oh, shark? a or mermaid? a or trident? a Or
Oh! it. brought have not would he or clever, very be must It syllable.
out?” it find ever shall we think you do Woodhouse, Miss

thinking you are what Harriet, dear My Nonsense! sharks! and “Mermaids
friend a by made charade a us bringing his of use the be would Where of?
listen. and paper the me Give shark? a or mermaid a upon

Smith. Miss read ------, Miss For

kings, of pomp and wealth the displays first My
ease. and luxury their earth! the of Lords

_court_. is That

brings; second my man, of view Another
seas! the of monarch the there, him Behold

cream. the for be.--Now can it as _ship_;--plain is That

have! we reverse what know,) you (_courtship_, united, ah! But
flown. are all freedom, and power boasted Man’s
slave, a bends he sea, and earth the of Lord
alone. reigns woman, lovely woman, And

which application, the follows then compliment!--and proper very A
in difficulty much find cannot you Harriet, dear my think, I
of doubt no be can There yourself. to comfort in it Read comprehending.
you.” to and you for written being its

read She persuasion. a delightful so resist long not could Harriet
not could She happiness. and flutter all was and lines, concluding the
feel. to her for enough was It speak. to wanted not was she But speak.
her. for spoke Emma

compliment,” this in meaning a particular so and pointed, so is “There
You intentions. Elton’s Mr. to as doubt a have cannot I “that she, said
I it. of proof completest the receive soon will you object--and his are
it now, but deceived; so be not could I thought I so. be must it thought
on wishes my as decided, and clear as is mind his of state the clear; is
long so just Harriet, Yes, you. knew I since ever been have subject the
happened. has that happen to circumstance very the wanting been I have
were Elton Mr. and you between attachment an whether tell never could I
have eligibility its and probability Its natural. most or desirable most
my you, congratulate I happy. very am I other! each equalled so really
may woman a which attachment an is This heart. my all with Harriet, dear
nothing offers which connexion a is This creating. in pride feel well
want--consideration, you that thing every you give will It good. but
your all of centre the in you fix will home--it proper a independence,
intimacy our confirm and me, to and Hartfield to close friends, real
in blush a raise never can which alliance an is Harriet, This, ever. for
us.” of either

Harriet, that all was Woodhouse,” Miss “Dear Woodhouse!”--and Miss “Dear
did they when but first; at articulate could embraces tender many with
to clear sufficiently was it conversation, like more something at arrive
she as just remembered and anticipated, felt, saw, she that friend her
acknowledgment. ample very had superiority Elton’s Mr. ought.

I therefore “and Harriet, cried right,” always is say you “Whatever
not could I otherwise but so; be must it hope and believe, and suppose,
Elton, Mr. deserve. I thing any beyond much so is It it. imagined have
He _him_. about opinions two be cannot There body! any marry might who
------.’ Miss verses--‘To sweet those of think Only superior. very so is
me?” for meant be really it clever!--Could how me, Dear

a is It that. about question a to listen or question, a make cannot “I
to prologue of sort a is It judgment. my on it Receive certainty.
by followed soon be will and chapter; the to motto a play, the
prose.” matter-of-fact

sure, am I expected. have could nobody which thing of sort a is “It
take do things strangest myself!--The idea more no had I ago, month a
place!”

indeed--and do acquainted--they get Eltons Mr. and Smiths Miss “When
so is what that course common the of out is it strange; is it really
of pre-arrangement the courts desirable--what palpably so evidently,
form. proper the into itself shape immediately so should people, other
one to belong you together; called situation by are Elton Mr. and You
marrying Your homes. respective your of circumstance every by another
a be to seem does There Randalls. at match the to equal be will
right the exactly love gives which Hartfield of air the in something
flow. to ought it where channel very the into it sends and direction,

smooth-- run did never love true of course The

that on note long a have would Shakespeare of edition Hartfield A
passage.”

people, all of me,--me, with love in be really should Elton Mr. “That
very the he, And Michaelmas! at him, to speak to him, know not did who
to, up looks body every that man a and was, ever that man handsomest
body every that after, sought so company His Knightley! Mr. like quite
it; chuse not does he if himself by meal single a eat not need he says
so And week. the in days are there than invitations more has he that
has he texts the all down put has Nash Miss Church! the in excellent
back look I When me! Dear Highbury. to came he since from preached ever
and Abbots two think!--The I did little How him! saw I time first the to
he heard we when blind the through peeped and room front the into ran I
look to staid and away, us scolded and came Nash Miss and by, going was
me let and presently, back me called she however, herself; through
he thought we beautiful how And good-natured. very was which too, look
Cole.” Mr. with arm-in-arm was He looked!

must be, may friends your whoever--whatever which, alliance an is “This
we and sense; common have they least at provided them, to agreeable be
to anxious are they If fools. to conduct our addressing be to not are
gives character amiable whose man a is here married, _happily_ you see
same the in settled you have to wish they it;--if of assurance every
will it here in, you place to chosen have they which circle and country
the in should, you that is object only their if and accomplished; be
the fortune, comfortable the is here married, _well_ be phrase, common
satisfy must which world the in rise the establishment, respectable
them.”

understand You you. hear to love I talk; you nicely How true. very “Yes,
This other. the as clever as one are Elton Mr. and You thing. every
any made have never could I twelvemonth, a studied had I charade!--If
it.” like thing

it declining of manner his by skill, his try to meant he thought “I
yesterday.”

read.” ever I charade best the exception, without is, it think do “I

certainly.” purpose, the to more one read never “I

before.” had have we all almost as again long as is “It

things Such favour. its in particularly as length its consider not do “I
short.” too be cannot general in

satisfactory most The hear. to lines the on intent too was Harriet
mind. her in rising were comparisons

have glow--“to a in cheeks presently--her she, said thing,” one is “It
is there if and else, body every like way, common a in sense good very
you what just say and letter, a write and down sit to say, to thing any
like charades and verses write to another, and way; short a in must,
this.”

Martin’s Mr. of rejection spirited more a desired have not could Emma
prose.

I shall how last!--But two Harriet--“these continued lines!” sweet “Such
Miss out?--Oh! it found have I say or paper, the return to able be ever
that?” about do we can what Woodhouse,

dare I evening, this here be will He nothing. do You me. to it “Leave
will other or nonsense some and back, him it give will I then and say,
shall eyes soft committed.--Your be not shall you and us, between pass
me.” to Trust beaming. for time own their chuse

beautiful this write not must I that pity a what Woodhouse, Miss “Oh!
good.” so half one got not have I sure am I book! my into charade

not should you why reason no is there and lines, last two the out “Leave
book.” your into it write

are”-- lines two those but “Oh!

private for and enjoyment; private Granted;--for all. of best --“The
know, you written less the all at not are They them. keep enjoyment
its does nor be, to cease not does couplet The them. divide you because
a and ceases, _appropriation_ all and away, it take But change. meaning
upon Depend collection. any for fit remains, charade gallant pretty very
his than better much slighted, charade his have to like not would he it,
or capacities, both in encouraged be must love in poet A passion.
be can there then and down, it write will I book, the me Give neither.
you.” on reflection possible no

parts, the separate hardly could mind her though submitted, Harriet
a down writing not were friend her that sure quite feel to as so
degree any for offering an precious too seemed It love. of declaration
publicity. of

she. said hands,” own my of out go book that let never shall “I

it longer the and feeling; natural most “a Emma; replied well,” “Very
you coming: father my is here But pleased. be shall I better the lasts,
him giving be will It him. to charade the reading my to object not will
any especially and sort, the of thing any loves He pleasure! much so
of spirit tenderest the has He compliment. a woman pays that thing
him.” to it read me let must all!--You us towards gallantry

grave. looked Harriet

charade.--You this upon much too refine not must you Harriet, dear “My
too and conscious too are you if improperly, feelings your betray will
meaning the all quite even or meaning, more affix to appear and quick,
little a such by overpowered be not Do it. to affixed be may which
not would he secrecy, for anxious been had he If admiration. of tribute
me towards it pushed rather he but by; was I while paper the left have
has He business. the on solemn too be us let not Do you. towards than
over souls our out sighing our without proceed, to enough encouragement
charade.” this

please.” you as Do it. about ridiculous be not shall I hope no--I “Oh!

the by again, subject the to led soon very and in, came Woodhouse Mr.
does how dears, my “Well, of inquiry frequent very his of recurrence
fresh?” thing any got you on?--Have go book your

A fresh. quite something you, read to something have we papa; “Yes,
suppose, we morning--(dropt, this table the on found was paper of piece
copied just have we and charade, pretty very a fairy)--containing a by
in.” it

and slowly read, thing any have to liked he as just him, to it read She
every of explanations with over, times three or two and distinctly,
had she as and, pleased, much very was he proceeded--and she as part
conclusion. complimentary the with struck especially foreseen,

true. Very said. properly very that’s indeed, just, very that’s “Aye,
I that dear, my charade, pretty a such is It woman.’ lovely ‘Woman,
so written have could it.--Nobody brought fairy what guess easily can
Emma.” you, but prettily,

very a and thinking, little a smiled.--After and nodded, only Emma
added, he sigh, tender

mother dear Your after! take you who see to difficulty no is it “Ah!
can I But memory! her but had I If things! those all at clever so was
have you which riddle particular that even nothing;--not remember
are there and stanza; first the recollect only can I mention; me heard
several.

maid, frozen but fair a Kitty,
deplore, yet I flame a Kindled
aid, to called I boy hood-wink’d The
afraid, approach near his of Though
before. suit my to fatal So

all clever very is it it--but of recollect can I that all is that And
it.” got had you said you dear, my think, I But through. way the

the from it copied We page. second our in out written is it papa, “Yes,
know.” you Garrick’s, was It Extracts. Elegant

it. of more recollect could I wish true.--I very “Aye,

maid. frozen but fair a Kitty,

being near very was she for Isabella; poor of think me makes name The
here her have shall we hope I grandmama. her after Catherine christened
what her--and put shall you where dear, my thought, you Have week. next
children?” the for be will there room

always she room the course; of room, own her have will yes--she “Oh!
you usual, as children,--just the for nursery the is there has;--and
change?” any be there should Why know.

here!--not was she since long so is it dear--but my know, not do “I
Knightley’s John days.--Mr. few a for only then and Easter, last since
taken sadly is Isabella!--she inconvenient.--Poor very is lawyer a being
see to not comes, she when be will she sorry how all!--and us from away
here!” Taylor Miss

least.” at papa, surprized, be not will “She

I when surprized much very was I sure am I dear. my know, not do “I
married.” be to going was she heard first

is Isabella while us, with dine to Weston Mrs. and Mr. ask must “We
here.”

tone)--she depressed very a time.--But--(in is there if dear, my “Yes,
thing.” any for time be not will There week. one only for coming is

of case a seems it longer--but stay cannot they that unfortunate is “It
we and 28th, the on again town in be must Knightley John Mr. necessity.
time the of whole the have to are we that papa, thankful, be to ought
taken be to not are days three or two that country, the to give can they
this claim his up give to promises Knightley Mr. Abbey. the for out
than him, with were they since longer is it know you Christmas--though
us.” with

be to were Isabella poor if dear, my indeed, hard, very be would “It
Hartfield.” at but anywhere

his on claims Knightley’s Mr. for allow never could Woodhouse Mr.
musing sat He own. his except Isabella, on claims body’s any or brother,
said, then and while, little a

so back go to obliged be should Isabella poor why see not do I “But
to her persuade and try shall I Emma, think, I does. he though soon,
well.” very stay might children the and She us. with longer stay

I and accomplish, to able been have never you what is papa--that “Ah!
her behind stay to bear cannot Isabella will. ever you think not do
husband.”

Woodhouse Mr. was, it as Unwelcome contradiction. for true too was This
affected spirits his saw Emma as and sigh; submissive a give only could
immediately she husband, her to attachment daughter’s his of idea the by
them. raise must as subject the of branch a such to led

brother my while can she as company her of much as us give must “Harriet
children. the with pleased be will she sure am I here. are sister and
she which wonder I papa? we, not are children, the of proud very are We
John?” or Henry handsomest, the think will

be will they glad how dears, little Poor will. she which wonder I “Aye,
Harriet.” Hartfield, at being of fond very are They come. to

not.” is who know not do I sure am I sir. are, they say dare “I

the is Henry mama. his like very is John but boy, fine a is “Henry
second, the John, father. his after not me, after named was he eldest,
that believe, I surprized, are people Some father. his after named is
I which Henry, called him have would Isabella but not, was eldest the
They indeed. boy, clever very a is he And her. of pretty very thought
will They ways. pretty many so have they and clever; remarkably all are
bit a me give you can ‘Grandpapa, say, and chair, my by stand and come
knives him told I but knife, a for me asked Henry once and string?’ of
with rough too is father their think I grandpapas. for made only were
often.” very them

gentle very so are you “because Emma, said you,” to rough appears “He
not would you papas, other with him compare could you if but yourself;
if and hardy; and active be to boys his wishes He rough. him think
an is he but then; and now word sharp a them give can misbehave, they
affectionate an is Knightley John Mr. father--certainly affectionate
him.” of fond all are children The father.

a in ceiling the to up them tosses and in, comes uncle their then “And
way!” frightful very

such is It much. so like they nothing is there papa; it, like they “But
of rule the down lay not did uncle their if that them, to enjoyment
other.” the to way give never would began whichever turns, taking their

it.” understand cannot I “Well,

cannot world the of half One papa. all, us with case the is “That
other.” the of pleasures the understand

separate to going were girls the as just and morning, the in Later
this of hero the dinner, o’clock four regular the for preparation in
could Emma but away; turned Harriet again. in walked charade inimitable
in discerned soon eye quick her and smile, usual the with him receive
die; a thrown having push--of a made having of consciousness the his
ostensible His up. turn might it how see to come was he imagined she and
made be could party Woodhouse’s Mr. whether ask to was however, reason,
smallest the in be should he whether or him, without evening the in up
give must else thing every were, he If Hartfield. at necessary degree
his about much so saying been had Cole friend his otherwise but way;
him promised had he that it, of point a such made him--had with dining
come. to conditionally

friend his disappointing his of allow not could but him, thanked Emma
re-urged--she He rubber. his of sure was father her account; their on
the taking when bow, his make to about then seemed he and re-declined;
it-- returned she table, the from paper

thank us; with leave to as obliging so were you charade the is here “Oh!
ventured have I that much, so it admired We it. of sight the for you
it take not will friend Your collection. Smith’s Miss into it write to
eight first the beyond transcribed not have I course Of hope. I amiss
lines.”

rather looked He say. to what know well very not did certainly Elton Mr.
at “honour,”--glanced about something said confused; doubtingly--rather
took table, the on open book the seeing then and Harriet, at and Emma
an off passing of view the With attentively. very it examined and up, it
said, smilingly Emma moment, awkward

charade a good so but friend; your to apologies my make must “You
woman’s every of sure be may He two. or one to confined be not must
gallantry.” such with writes he while approbation

hesitating though Elton, Mr. replied saying,” in hesitation no have “I
least saying--at in hesitation no have “I spoke; he while deal good a
that, doubt smallest the not have do--I _I_ as all at feels friend my if
the at (looking it, see _I_ as honoured effusion little his see he could
the as it consider would he table), the on it replacing and again, book
life.” his of moment proudest

think not could Emma possible. as soon as gone was he speech this After
was there qualities, agreeable and good his all with for soon; too it
to her incline to apt very was which speeches his in parade of sort a
and tender the leaving inclination, the indulge to away ran She laugh.
share. Harriet’s to pleasure of sublime the



X CHAPTER


to weather no been yet had there December, of middle the now Though
the on and exercise; regular tolerably from ladies young the prevent
who family, sick poor a to pay to visit charitable a had Emma morrow,
Highbury. of out way little a lived

lane a Lane, Vicarage down was cottage detached this to road Their
of street main irregular, though broad, the from angles right at leading
Mr. of abode blessed the containing inferred, be may as and, place; the
about then, and passed, be to first were dwellings inferior few A Elton.
not and old an Vicarage, the rose lane the down mile a of quarter a
had It be. could it as road the to close as almost house, good very
the by up smartened much very been had but situation; of advantage no
possibility no be could there was, it as such and, proprietor; present
observing and pace slackened a without it passing friends two the of
was-- remark eyes.--Emma’s

these of one riddle-book your and you go There is. it “There
was-- days.”--Harriet’s

yellow the are beautiful!--There very house!--How sweet a what “Oh,
much.” so admires Nash Miss that curtains

“but proceeded, they as Emma, said _now_,” way this walk often not do “I
intimately get gradually shall I and inducement, an be will there _then_
part this of pollards and pools gates, hedges, the all with acquainted
Highbury.” of

Vicarage, the inside been life her in never had found, she Harriet,
exteriors considering that, extreme, so was it see to curiosity her and
with love, of proof a as it, class only could Emma probabilities, and
her. in wit ready seeing Elton’s Mr.

any of think cannot I “but she; said it,” contrive could we wish “I
inquire to want I that servant in;--no going for pretence tolerable
father.” my from message housekeeper--no his of about

some of silence mutual a After nothing. of think could but pondered, She
again-- began thus Harriet minutes,

or married, be not should you that Woodhouse, Miss wonder, so do “I
are!”-- you as charming so married! be to going

replied, and laughed, Emma

marry; to me induce to enough quite not is Harriet, charming, being “My
I And least. at person other charming--one people other find must I
little very have but present, at married, be to going not only, not am
all.” at marrying ever of intention

it.” believe cannot I but say; you “Ah!--so

be to yet, seen have I one any to superior very somebody see must “I
the of out is herself,) (recollecting know, you Elton, Mr. tempted;
not rather would I person. such any see to wish _not_ do I and question:
I marry, to were I If better. the for change really cannot I tempted. be
it.” repent to expect must

so!”-- talk woman a hear to odd so is me!--it “Dear

fall to I Were marry. to women of inducements usual the of none have “I
in been have never I but thing! different a be would it indeed, love, in
shall. ever I think not do I and nature; my or way, my not is it love;
a such change to fool a be should I sure am I love, without And,
want; not do I employment want; not do I Fortune mine. as situation
much as half are women married few believe I want: not do I consequence
never never, and Hartfield; of am I as house husband’s their of mistress
and first always so important; and beloved truly so be to expect I could
father’s.” my in am I as eyes man’s any in right always

Bates!” Miss like last, at maid old an be to then, “But

if and Harriet; present, could you as image an formidable as is “That
satisfied--so silly--so so Bates! Miss like be ever should I thought I
apt so unfastidious--and and undistinguishing prosing--so smiling--so
marry would I me, about body every to relative thing every tell to
any be can never there convinced am I _us_, between But to-morrow.
unmarried.” being in except likeness,

dreadful!” so that’s and maid! old an be will you still, “But

poverty is it and maid; old poor a be not shall I Harriet, mind, “Never
single A public! generous a to contemptible celibacy makes which only
old disagreeable ridiculous, a be must income, narrow very a with woman,
good of woman, single a but girls, and boys of sport proper the maid!
pleasant and sensible as be may and respectable, always is fortune,
the against much so quite not is distinction the And else. body any as
very a for first; at appears as world the of sense common and candour
temper. the sour and mind, the contract to tendency a has income narrow
and small, very a in perforce live who and live, barely can who Those
This cross. and illiberal be well may society, inferior, very generally
and natured good too only is she Bates; Miss to however, apply, not does
taste the to much very is she general, in but, me; suit to silly too
not has certainly Poverty poor. though and single though body, every of
the in shilling a only had she if believe, really I mind: her contracted
nobody and it; of sixpence away give to likely very be would she world,
charm.” great a is that her: of afraid is

you when yourself employ you shall how do? you shall what but me! “Dear
old?” grow

great a with mind, busy active, an is mine Harriet, myself, know I “If
more be should I why perceive not do I and resources; independent many
Woman’s one-and-twenty. than fifty or forty at employment of want in
they as then me to open as be will mind and hand of occupations usual
read shall I less, draw I If variation. important no with or now; are
for as And carpet-work. to take shall I music, up give I if more;
the truth in is which affections, the for objects interest, of objects
evil great the really is which of want the inferiority, of point great
the all with off, well very be shall I marrying, _not_ in avoided be to
enough be will There about. care to much, so love I sister a of children
that sensation of sort every supply to probability, all in them, of
every and hope every for enough be will There need. can life declining
it parent, a of that equal can none to attachment my though and fear;
My blinder. and warmer is what than better comfort of ideas my suits
me.” with niece a have often shall nieces!--I and nephews

her seen have must you know I is, That niece? Bates’s Miss know you “Do
acquainted?” you are times--but hundred a

to comes she whenever acquainted be to forced always are we yes; “Oh!
conceit of out one put to enough almost is _that_ bye, the By Highbury.
people bore ever should I that least, at forbid! Heaven niece. a with
Jane about does she as together, Knightleys the all about much so half
from letter Every Fairfax. Jane of name very the of sick is One Fairfax.
round go friends all to compliments her over; times forty read is her
a of pattern the aunt her send but does she if and again; round and
of hears one grandmother, her for garters of pair a knit or stomacher,
tires she but well; very Fairfax Jane wish I month. a for else nothing
death.” to me

were topics idle all and cottage, the approaching now were They
poor the of distresses the and compassionate; very was Emma superseded.
her kindness, and attention personal her from relief of sure as were
ways, their understood She purse. her from as patience, her and counsel
romantic no had temptations, their and ignorance their for allow could
had education whom for those from virtue extraordinary of expectations
and sympathy, ready with troubles their into entered little; so done
In good-will. as intelligence much as with assistance her gave always
she which together poverty and sickness was it instance, present the
give could she as long as there remaining after and visit; to came
of impression an such with cottage the quitted she advice, or comfort
away, walked they as Harriet, to say her made as scene the

make they trifling How good. one do to Harriet, sights, the are “These
but nothing of think could I if as now feel appear!--I else thing every
how say can who yet, and day; the of rest the all creatures poor these
mind?” my from vanish all may it soon

nothing of think can one creatures! “Poor Harriet. said true,” “Very
else.”

said over,” be soon will impression the think not do I really, “And
ended which footstep tottering and hedge, low the crossed she as Emma,
them brought and garden, cottage the through path slippery narrow, the
once look to stopping will,” it think not do “I again. lane the into
still the recall and place, the of wretchedness outward the all at more
within. greater

companion. her said no,” dear, “Oh!

was bend that when and bend; slight a made lane The on. walked They
Emma give to as near so and sight; in immediately was Elton Mr. passed,
farther, say to only time

good in stability our of trial sudden very a comes here Harriet, “Ah!
compassion if that allowed be may it hope I (smiling,) Well, thoughts.
that all done has it sufferers, the to relief and exertion produced has
can we all do to enough wretched, the for feel we If important. truly is
ourselves.” to distressing only sympathy, empty is rest the them, for

joined gentleman the before yes,” dear, “Oh! answer, just could Harriet
the were however, family, poor the of sufferings and wants The them.
visit His them. on call to going been had He meeting. on subject first
about parley interesting very a had they but defer; now would he
to back turned then Elton Mr. done. be should and done be could what
them. accompany

Emma; thought this,” as errand an such on other each with in fall “To
increase great a bring will this scheme; charitable a in meet “to
the on bring to were it if wonder not should I side. each on love of
else.” anywhere were I wish I here. not were I if must, It declaration.

soon she could, she as far as them from herself separate to Anxious
one on raised little a footpath, narrow a of possession took afterwards
had she But road. main the in together them leaving lane, the of side
of habits Harriet’s that found she when minutes two there been not
short, in that, and too, up her bringing were imitation and dependence
immediately she do; not would This her. after soon be both would they
lacing the in make to alteration some having of pretence under stopped,
the of occupation complete in down stooping and half-boot, her of
would she and on, walk to goodness the have to them begged footpath,
time the by and desired; were they as did They minute. a half in follow
comfort the had she boot, her with done have to reasonable it judged she
the from child a by overtaken being power, her in delay farther of
fetch to pitcher, her with orders, to according out, setting cottage,
to talk and child, this of side the by walk To Hartfield. from broth
have would or world, the in thing natural most the was her, question and
design; without then just acting been she had natural, most the been
without ahead, keep to able still were others the means this by and
however, them, on gained She her. for waiting of obligation any
slow; rather theirs and quick, was pace child’s the involuntarily:
in evidently being their from it, at concerned more the was she and
with speaking was Elton Mr. them. interested which conversation a
Emma, and attention; pleased very a with listening Harriet animation,
back draw might she how think to beginning was on, child the sent having
join to obliged was she and around, looked both they when more, little a
them.

detail; interesting some in engaged still talking, still was Elton Mr.
only was he that found she when disappointment some experienced Emma and
his at party yesterday’s the of account an companion fair his giving
cheese, Stilton the for herself in come was she that and Cole’s, friend
the all and beet-root, the celery, the butter, the Wiltshire, north the
dessert.

her was course,” of better, something to led have soon would “This
and love; who those between interests thing “any reflection; consoling
I If heart. the near is what to introduction as serve will thing any
away!” longer kept have but could

vicarage the of view within till quietly, together on walked now They
the into Harriet getting least at of resolution, sudden a when pales,
and boot, her about amiss much very something find again her made house,
short, off lace the broke then She more. once it arrange to behind fall
to obliged presently was ditch, a into it throwing dexterously and
to herself put to inability her acknowledged and stop, to them entreat
comfort. tolerable in home walk to able be to as so rights

to am I how know not do I “and she, said gone,” is lace my of “Part
I but both, you to companion troublesome most a am really I contrive.
stop to leave beg must I Elton, Mr. ill-equipped. so often not am I hope
string, or ribband of bit a for housekeeper your ask and house, your at
on.” boot my keep to just thing any or

could nothing and proposition; this at happiness all looked Elton Mr.
and house his into them conducting in attention and alertness his exceed
were they room The advantage. to appear thing every make to endeavouring
behind forwards; looking and occupied, chiefly he one the was into taken
between door the communicated; immediately it which with another was it
receive to housekeeper the with it into passed Emma and open, was them
leave to obliged was She manner. comfortable most the in assistance her
Elton Mr. that intended fully she but it; found she as ajar door the
but ajar; remained still it however, closed, not was It it. close should
make to hoped she conversation, incessant in housekeeper the engaging by
adjoining the in subject own his chuse to him for practicable it
be could It herself. but nothing hear could she minutes ten For room.
her make and finished, be to obliged then was She longer. no protracted
appearance.

most a had It windows. the of one at together standing were lovers The
having of glory the felt Emma minute, a half for and, aspect; favourable
point. the to come not had he do; not would it But successfully. schemed
that Harriet told had he delightful; most agreeable, most been had He
little other them; followed purposely had and by, go them seen had he
serious. nothing but dropt, been had allusions and gallantries

and inch, by inch advances “he Emma; thought cautious,” very “Cautious,
secure.” himself believes he till nothing hazard will

her by accomplished been not had thing every though however, Still,
been had it that herself flatter but not could she device, ingenious
them leading be must and both, to enjoyment present much of occasion the
event. great the to forward



XI CHAPTER


power Emma’s in longer no was It himself. to left be now must Elton Mr.
her of coming The measures. his quicken or happiness his superintend to
anticipation, in first that hand, at near very so was family sister’s
interest; of object prime her henceforth became it reality, in then and
be to not was it Hartfield at stay their of days ten the during and
occasional, beyond thing any expect--that herself not did expected--she
might They lovers. the to her by afforded be could assistance fortuitous
or somehow advance must they however; would, they if rapidly advance
leisure more have to wished hardly She no. or would they whether other
they less the them, for do you more the who people, are There them. for
themselves. for do will

absent usual than longer been having from Knightley, John Mrs. and Mr.
interest. usual the than more rather course of exciting were Surry, from
been had marriage their since vacation long every year, this Till
of holidays the all but Abbey; Donwell and Hartfield between divided
was it and children, the for sea-bathing to given been had autumn this
their by way regular a in seen been had they since months many therefore
be not could who Woodhouse, Mr. by all at seen or connexions, Surry
and sake; Isabella’s poor for even London, as far so get to induced
in happy apprehensively and nervously most now was consequently who
visit. short too this forestalling

little a not and her, for journey the of evils the of much thought He
some bring to were who coachman and horses own his of fatigues the of
needless; were alarms his but way; the of half last the party the of
John Mrs. and Mr. and accomplished, happily being miles sixteen the
nursery-maids, of number competent a and children, five their Knightley,
arrival, an such of joy and bustle The safety. in Hartfield reaching all
dispersed variously and encouraged, welcomed, to, talked be to many the
could nerves his which confusion and noise a produced of, disposed and
even longer much endured have nor cause, other any under borne have not
father her of feelings the and Hartfield of ways the but this; for
maternal of spite in that Knightley, John Mrs. by respected so were
their for and ones, little her of enjoyment immediate the for solicitude
and eating the all attendance, and liberty the all instantly having
for, wish possibly could they which playing, and sleeping and drinking,
long be to allowed never were children the delay, smallest the without
attendance restless any in or themselves in either him, to disturbance a
them. on

quiet gentle, of woman, little elegant pretty, a was Knightley John Mrs.
wrapt affectionate; and amiable remarkably disposition a and manners,
tenderly so and mother, doating a wife, devoted a family; her in up
a ties, higher these for but that, sister and father her to attached
fault a see never could She impossible. seemed have might love warmer
any or understanding strong of woman a not was She them. of any in
also inherited she father, her of resemblance this with and quickness;
over-careful health, own her in delicate was constitution; his of much
fond as was and nerves, many and fears many had children, her of that of
Perry. Mr. of be could father her as town in Wingfield Mr. own her of
strong a and temper, of benevolence general a in too, alike were They
acquaintance. old every for regard of habit

man; clever very and gentleman-like, tall, a was Knightley John Mr.
private his in respectable and domestic, profession, his in rising
generally being his prevented which manners reserved with but character;
an not was He humour. of out sometimes being of capable and pleasing;
a such deserve to as cross unreasonably often so not man, ill-tempered
with indeed, and, perfection; great his not was temper his but reproach;
defects natural any that possible hardly was it wife, worshipping a such
temper her of sweetness extreme The increased. be not should it in
she which mind of quickness and clearness the all had He his. hurt must
thing. severe a say or ungracious, an act sometimes could he and wanted,

wrong Nothing sister-in-law. fair his with favourite great a not was He
to injuries little the feeling in quick was She her. escaped him in
have might she Perhaps herself. felt never Isabella which Isabella,
sister, Isabella’s to flattering been manners his had more over passed
without friend, and brother kind calmly a of those only were they but
personal of degree any hardly but blindness; without and praise
of fault greatest that of regardless her made have could compliment
respectful of want the into, fell sometimes he which eyes her in all
patience the always not had he There father. her towards forbearance
and peculiarities Woodhouse’s Mr. wished. been have could that
or remonstrance rational a to him provoking sometimes were fidgetiness
John Mr. for happen; often not did It ill-bestowed. equally retort sharp
generally and father-in-law, his for regard great a really had Knightley
Emma’s for often too was it but him; to due was what of sense strong a
frequently apprehension of pain the all was there as especially charity,
of however, beginning, The not. came offence the though endured, be to
of being this and feelings, properest the but none displayed visit every
cordiality. unsullied in away pass to hoped be might short so necessity
a with Woodhouse, Mr. when composed and seated long been not had They
attention daughter’s his called sigh, a and head the of shake melancholy
last. there been had she since Hartfield at change sad the to

business.” grievous a is Taylor--It Miss “poor he, said dear,” my “Ah,

her! miss must you “how sympathy, ready with she cried sir,” yes, “Oh
so been have both!--I you to loss dreadful a too!--What Emma, dear And
without do possibly could you how imagine not could you.--I for grieved
sir.” well, pretty is she hope I indeed.--But change sad a is her.--It

the that but know not do well.--I hope--pretty dear--I my well, “Pretty
tolerably.” her with agrees place

doubts any were there whether quietly Emma asked here Knightley John Mr.
Randalls. of air the of

my in better Weston Mrs. saw never I least. the in no--none “Oh!
regret.” own his speaking only is Papa well. so looking life--never

reply. handsome the was both,” of honour the to much “Very

the in Isabella asked often?” tolerably sir, her, see you do “And
father. her suited just which tone plaintive

wish.” could I as dear, my often, so near hesitated.--“Not Woodhouse Mr.

they since day entire one but them seeing missed have we papa, “Oh!
one, excepting day, every of evening or morning the in Either married.
both, generally and Weston, Mrs. or Weston Mr. either seen we have
most Isabella, suppose, may you as here--and or Randalls at either
Weston Mr. visits. their in kind very very, are They here. frequently
way, melancholy that in speak you if Papa, herself. as kind as really is
be must body Every all. us of idea false a Isabella giving be will you
be to also ought body every but missed, be must Taylor Miss that aware
by her missing our prevent really do Weston Mrs. and Mr. that assured
exact the is anticipated--which ourselves we extent the to means any
truth.”

hoped I as just “and Knightley, John Mr. said be,” should it as “Just
be not could attention you shewing of wish Her letters. your from was it
I easy. all it makes man social and disengaged a being his and doubted,
change the of idea no had I that love, my you, telling always been have
have you now and apprehended; you as Hartfield to material very so being
satisfied.” be will you hope I account, Emma’s

cannot certainly--I Woodhouse--“yes, Mr. said sure,” be to “Why,
pretty us see and come does Weston, Mrs. poor Weston, Mrs. that deny
again.” away go to obliged always is then--she often--but

quite papa.--You not, did she if Weston Mr. upon hard very be would “It
Weston.” Mr. poor forget

has Weston Mr. “that pleasantly, Knightley John said indeed,” think, “I
the of part the take to venture will Emma, I, and You claim. little some
claims the wife, a being not you and husband, a being I, husband. poor
Isabella, for As force. equal with us strike likely very may man the of
all putting of convenience the see to enough long married been has she
can.” she as much as aside Westons Mr. the

part.-- in only understanding and hearing wife, his cried love,” my “Me,
a be, can or be, to ought nobody sure am me?--I about talking you “Are
for been not had it if and am; I than matrimony for advocate greater
Miss of thought have never should I Hartfield, leaving her of misery the
slighting to as and world; the in woman fortunate most the as but Taylor
does he nothing is there think I Weston, Mr. excellent that Weston, Mr.
ever that men best-tempered very the of one is he believe I deserve. not
equal his know not do I brother, your and yourself Excepting existed.
that him for kite Henry’s flying his forget never shall I temper. for
last kindness particular his since ever Easter--and last day windy very
night, at o’clock twelve at note, that writing in twelvemonth September
I Cobham, at fever scarlet no was there that me assure to purpose on
better a nor heart feeling more a be not could there convinced been have
Taylor.” Miss be must it him, deserve can body any existence.--If in man

this on here been he “Has Knightley. John said man?” young the is “Where
not?” he has occasion--or

strong a was “There Emma. replied yet,” here been not has “He
in ended it but marriage, the after soon coming his of expectation
lately.” mentioned him heard not have I and nothing;

father. her said dear,” my letter, the of them tell should you “But
very a and her, congratulate to Weston, Mrs. poor to letter a wrote “He
very it thought I me. to it shewed She was. it letter handsome proper,
one know, you idea own his was it Whether indeed. him of done well
perhaps--” uncle, his and young, but is He tell. cannot

passes.” time how forget You three-and-twenty. is he papa, dear “My

thought have not could I indeed?--Well, he “Three-and-twenty!--is
Well, mother! poor his lost he when old years two but was he it--and
an was it However, bad. very is memory my indeed!--and fly does time
deal great a Weston Mrs. and Mr. gave and letter, pretty good, exceeding
Sept. dated and Weymouth, from written was it remember I pleasure. of
it and on; went it how forget I but Madam,’ dear ‘My began, 28th--and
perfectly.” that remember Churchill.’--I Weston C. ‘F. signed was

John Mrs. good-hearted the cried him!” of proper and pleasing very “How
But man. young amiable most a being his of doubt no have “I Knightley.
is There father! his with home at live not should he that is it sad how
and parents his from away taken being child’s a in shocking so something
with part could Weston Mr. how comprehend could never I home! natural
body any of well think could never really I child! one’s up give To him.
else.” body any to thing a such proposed who

Mr. observed fancy,” I Churchills, the of well think did ever “Nobody
felt have to Weston Mr. imagine not need you “But coolly. Knightley John
rather is Weston Mr. John. or Henry up giving in feel would you what
takes he feelings; strong of man a than man, cheerful-tempered easy, an
other, or somehow them of enjoyment makes and them, finds he as things
his for society called is what upon more much suspect, I depending,
playing and drinking, and eating of power the upon is, that comforts,
affection, family upon than week, a times five neighbours his with whist
affords.” home that thing any or

had and Weston, Mr. on reflection a on bordered what like not could Emma
She pass. it let and struggled, she but up; it take to mind a half
and honourable something was there and possible; if peace the keep would
to home of all-sufficiency the habits, domestic strong the in valuable
on down look to disposition brother’s her resulted whence himself,
was it whom to those and intercourse, social of rate common the
forbearance. to claim high a had important.--It



XII CHAPTER


of inclination the against them--rather with dine to was Knightley Mr.
in him with share should one any that like not did who Woodhouse, Mr.
it; decided had however right of sense Emma’s day. first Isabella’s
had she brother, each to due was what of consideration the besides and
disagreement late the of circumstance the from pleasure, particular
proper the him procuring in herself, and Knightley Mr. between
invitation.

time was it thought She again. friends become now might they hoped She
been not had certainly _She_ do. not would indeed Making-up up. make to
be must Concession had. he that own never would _he_ and wrong, the in
had they that forget to appear to time was it but question; the of out
of restoration the assist rather might it hoped she and quarrelled; ever
children the of one had she room the into came he when that friendship,
who old, months eight about girl little nice a youngest, her--the with
danced be to happy very and Hartfield, to visit first her making now was
grave with began he though for assist; did It arms. aunt’s her in about
in all them of talk to on led soon was he questions, short and looks
the all with arms her of out child the take to and way, usual the
again; friends were they felt Emma amity. perfect of unceremoniousness
then and satisfaction, great first at her giving conviction the and
the admiring was he as saying, help not could she sauciness, little a
baby,

nieces. and nephews our about alike think we that is, it comfort a “What
with but different; very sometimes are opinions our women, and men to As
disagree.” never we observe I children, these to regard

women, and men of estimate your in nature by guided much as were you “If
with dealings your in whim and fancy of power the under little as and
always might we concerned, are children these where are you as them,
alike.” think

the in being my from arise always must discordancies sure--our be “To
wrong.”

when old years sixteen was I good. reason smiling--“and he, said “Yes,”
born.” were you

much were you doubt no replied--“and she then,” difference material “A
the not does but lives; our of period that at judgment in superior my
deal good a understandings our bring years one-and-twenty of lapse
nearer?”

_nearer_.” deal good “Yes--a

we if right, being of chance a me give to enough near not still, “But
differently.” think

by and experience, years’ sixteen by you of advantage the still have “I
Emma, dear my Come, child. spoiled a and woman young pretty a being not
little aunt, your Tell it. about more no say and friends, be us let
old renewing be to than example better a you set to ought she that Emma,
now.” is she before, wrong not were she if that and grievances,

better a up grow Emma, Little true. cried--“very she true,” “That’s
conceited. so half not and cleverer infinitely Be aunt. your than woman
good as far As done. have I and more, two or word a Knightley, Mr. Now,
on effects no that say must I and right, _both_ were we went, intentions
that know to want only I wrong. proved yet have argument the of side my
disappointed.” bitterly very very, not is Martin Mr.

answer. full short, his was so,” more be cannot man “A

me.” with hands shake sorry.--Come, very am I “Ah!--Indeed

Knightley John when cordiality, great with and place taken just had This
are how “John, and George?” do, d’ye “How and appearance, his made
that calmness a under burying style, English true the in succeeded you?”
led have would which attachment real the indifference, but all seemed
the of good the for thing every do to requisite, if them, of either
other.

cards declined Woodhouse Mr. as conversable, and quiet was evening The
and Isabella, dear his with talk comfortable of sake the for entirely
his and he side one on divisions; natural two made party little the
totally subjects their Knightleys; Mr. two the other the on daughter;
in joining occasionally only Emma mixing--and rarely very or distinct,
other. the or one

principally but pursuits, and concerns own their of talked brothers The
communicative, most the much by was temper whose elder, the of those of
generally had he magistrate, a As talker. greater the always was who and
curious some least, at or, about, John consult to law of point some
at home-farm the hand in keeping as farmer, a as and give; to anecdote
to and year, next bear to was field every what tell to had he Donwell,
interesting being of fail not could as information local such all give
his of part longest the been equally had it home whose brother a to
change the drain, a of plan The strong. were attachments whose and life,
for acre every of destination the and tree, a of felling the fence, a of
equality much as with into entered was corn, spring or turnips, wheat,
his if and possible; rendered manners cooler his as John, by interest of
inquiries his about, inquire to thing any him left ever brother willing
eagerness. of tone a approached even

a enjoying was Woodhouse Mr. occupied, comfortably thus were they While
daughter. his with affection fearful and regrets happy of flow full

and hand, her taking fondly he, said Isabella,” dear poor “My
her of one some for labours busy her moments, few a for interrupting,
here! were you since long terribly how is, it long children--“How five
early, bed to go must You journey! your after be must you tired how And
and go.--You you before you to gruel little a recommend I dear--and my
all we suppose Emma, dear My together. gruel of basin nice a have will I
gruel.” little a have

the both that did, she as knowing thing, such any suppose not could Emma
herself;--and as article that on unpersuadable as were Knightleys Mr.
of praise in discourse more little a After ordered. were only basins two
every by evening every taken being not its at wondering some with gruel,
reflection, grave of air an with say, to proceeded he body,

South at autumn the spending your dear, my business, awkward an was “It
air.” sea the of opinion much had never I here. coming of instead End

not should we sir--or it, recommended strenuously most Wingfield “Mr.
for particularly but children, the all for it recommended He gone. have
bathing.” and air sea throat,--both Bella’s little in weakness the

any her doing sea the about doubts many had Perry but dear, my “Ah!
though convinced, perfectly long been have I myself, to as and good;
use of rarely very is sea the that before, so you told never I perhaps
once.” me killed almost it sure am I body. any to

must “I subject, unsafe an be to this feeling Emma, cried come,” “Come,
miserable;--I and envious me makes It sea. the of talk to not you beg
dear My please. you if prohibited, is End South it! seen never have who
and yet; Perry Mr. about inquiry one make you heard not have I Isabella,
you.” forgets never he

sir?” he, is Perry--how Mr. good “Oh!

has he and bilious, is Perry Poor well. quite not but well; pretty “Why,
take to time not has he me tells himself--he of care take to time not
round all wanted always is he sad--but very is himself--which of care
But anywhere. practice such in man a not is there suppose I country. the
where.” any man a clever so not is there then

grow? children the do they? are how children, the and Perry Mrs. “And
He soon. calling be will he hope I Perry. Mr. for regard great a have I
ones.” little my see to pleased so be will

ask to two or question a have I for to-morrow, here be will he hope “I
comes, he whenever dear, my And, consequence. some of myself about him
throat.” Bella’s little at look him let better had you

any hardly have I that better much so is throat her sir, dear my “Oh!
to service greatest the of been has bathing Either it. about uneasiness
Mr. of embrocation excellent an to attributed be to is it else or her,
August.” since ever times at applying been have we which Wingfield’s,

use of been have should bathing that dear, my likely, very not is “It
have would I embrocation, an wanting were you known had I if her--and to
to-- spoken

“I Emma, said Bates,” Miss and Mrs. forgotten have to me to seem “You
them.” after inquiry one heard not have

mention you myself--but of ashamed quite am Bateses--I good the “Oh!
Mrs. old Good well. quite are they hope I letters. your of most in them
children.--They my take and to-morrow, her upon call will Bates--I
Miss excellent that children.--And my see to pleased so always are
sir?” they, are people!--How worthy thorough Bates!--such

a had Bates Mrs. poor But whole. the upon dear, my well, pretty “Why,
ago.” month a about cold bad

been have they as prevalent so never were colds But am! I sorry “How
more them known never has he that me told Wingfield Mr. autumn. this
influenza.” an quite been has it when heavy--except or general

you degree the to not but dear; my case, the deal good a been has “That
heavy so not but general, very been have colds that says Perry mention.
it call not does Perry November. in them known often very has he as
season.” sickly a altogether

sickly _very_ it considers Wingfield Mr. that know not do I “No,
except--

always is it London in that is, truth the child, dear poor my “Ah!
a is It be. can nobody London, in healthy is Nobody season. sickly a
the off!--and far so there! live to forced you have to thing dreadful
bad!” so air

is London of part Our air. bad a in all at not are indeed--_we_ “No,
London with us confound not must others!--You most to superior very
very is Square Brunswick of neighbourhood The sir. dear my general, in
be should I airy! very so are We rest. the all almost from different
is town;--there the of part other any in live to own, I unwilling,
in: children my have to satisfied be could I that other any hardly
of vicinity the thinks Wingfield airy!--Mr. remarkably so are _we_ but
air.” to as favourable most the decidedly Square Brunswick

it--but of best the make You Hartfield. like not is it dear, my “Ah!
different you of all are you Hartfield, at week a been have you after
think I that say, cannot I Now same. the like look not do you creatures;
present.” at well looking you of any are you

those excepting you, assure I but sir; so, say you hear to sorry am “I
entirely never am I which palpitations and head-aches nervous little
were children the if and myself; well quite am I anywhere, from free
a were they because only was it bed, to went they before pale rather
of happiness the and journey their from usual, than tired more little
I for to-morrow; looks their of better think will you hope I coming.
ever had he believe not did he that me, told Wingfield Mr. you assure
that least, at trust, I case. good such in altogether, off us sent
with eyes her turning ill,” looking Knightley Mr. think not do you
husband. her towards anxiety affectionate

Knightley John Mr. think I you. compliment cannot I dear; my “Middling,
well.” looking from far very

John Mr. cried me?” to speak you sir?--Did matter, the is “What
name. own his hearing Knightley,

looking you think not does father my that love, my find, to sorry am “I
have could I fatigued. little a being from only is it hope I well--but
you before Wingfield Mr. seen had you that know, you as however, wished,
home.” left

yourself concern not do hastily--“pray he Isabella,”--exclaimed dear “My
and yourself coddling and doctoring with satisfied Be looks. my about
chuse.” I as look me let and children, the

brother,” your telling were you what understand thoroughly not did “I
bailiff a have to intending Graham’s Mr. friend your “about Emma, cried
Will answer? it will What estate. new his after look to Scotland, from
strong?” too be prejudice old the not

to forced when that, successfully and long so way this in talked she And
nothing had she sister, and father her to again attention her give
Jane and Fairfax; Jane after inquiry kind Isabella’s than hear to worse
that at was she general, in her with favourite great no though Fairfax,
praising. in assist to happy very moment

Knightley.--“It John Mrs. said Fairfax!” Jane amiable sweet, “That
moment a for then and now except her, seen have I since long so is
old good her to be must it happiness What town! in accidentally
always I them! visit to comes she when aunt, excellent and grandmother
at more be cannot she that account Emma’s dear on excessively regret
Mrs. and Colonel suppose I married, is daughter their now but Highbury;
a such be would She all. at her with part to able be not will Campbell
Emma.” for companion delightful

added, but all, it to agreed Woodhouse Mr.

pretty another such just is however, Smith, Harriet friend little “Our
a have not could Emma Harriet. like will You person. young of kind
Harriet.” than companion better

so be to knows one Fairfax Jane only it--but hear to happy most am “I
age.” Emma’s exactly superior!--and and accomplished very

similar of succeeded others and happily, very discussed was topic This
not did evening the but harmony; similar with away passed and moment,
supplied and came gruel The agitation. of return little a without close
comments--undoubting many and praise said--much be to deal great a
pretty and constitution, every for wholesomeness its of decision
with met never was it where houses many the upon Philippics severe
daughter the which failures the among unfortunately, tolerably;--but,
in was prominent, most therefore and recent, most the instance, to had
never who time, the for hired woman young a End, South at cook own her
smooth nice of basin a by meant she what understand to able been had
ordered and for wished had she as Often thin. too not but thin, gruel,
a was Here tolerable. thing any get to able been never had she it,
opening. dangerous

her on eyes his fixing and head his shaking Woodhouse, Mr. said “Ah!”
“Ah! expressed, ear Emma’s in ejaculation concern.--The tender with
It End. South to going your of consequences sad the of end no is there
not would he hoped she while little a for And of.” talking bear not does
to him restore to suffice might rumination silent a that and it, of talk
minutes, some of interval an After gruel. smooth own his of relish the
with, began he however,

autumn, this sea the to went you that sorry very be always shall “I
here.” coming of instead

a children the did it you, assure sir?--I sorry, be you should why “But
good.” of deal great

been have not better had it sea, the to go must you if moreover, “And,
to surprized was Perry place. unhealthy an is End South End. South to
End.” South upon fixed had you hear

quite is it indeed but people, many with idea an such is there know “I
never there, well perfectly health our had all sir.--We mistake, a
is it says Wingfield Mr. and mud; the from inconvenience least the found
may he sure am I and unhealthy; place the suppose to mistake a entirely
and air, the of nature the understands thoroughly he for on, depended be
repeatedly.” there been have family and brother own his

anywhere.--Perry went you if dear, my Cromer, to gone have should “You
the all of best the be to it holds he and once, Cromer at week a was
by And, air. pure very and says, he sea, open fine A places. sea-bathing
from away quite there lodgings had have might you understand, I what
have should You comfortable. off--very mile a of quarter sea--a the
Perry.” consulted

how consider journey;--only the of difference the sir, dear my “But,
forty.” of instead perhaps, miles, hundred been.--An have would it great

else nothing stake, at is health where says, Perry as dear, my “Ah!
to much not is there travel, to is one if and considered; be should
all, at move not hundred.--Better an and miles forty between chuse
into get to miles forty travel than altogether London in stay better
very a him to seemed It said. Perry what just is This air. worse a
measure.” ill-judged

he when and vain; been had father her stop to attempts Emma’s
her at wonder not could she this, as point a such reached had
out. breaking brother-in-law’s

do “would displeasure, strong very of voice a in he, said Perry,” “Mr.
it make he does Why for. asked is it till opinion his keep to well as
to family my taking my do?--at I what at wonder to his, of business any
of use the hope, I allowed, be may another?--I or coast the of part one
than more no directions his want Perry.--I Mr. as well as judgment my
only with added, moment, a in cooler growing paused--and He drugs.” his
and wife a convey to how me tell can Perry Mr. “If dryness, sarcastic
greater no with miles thirty and hundred an of distance a children five
as be should I forty, of distance a than inconvenience or expense
himself.” could he as End South to Cromer prefer to willing

interposition--“very ready most with Knightley, Mr. cried true,” “True,
telling was I what to as John, indeed.--But consideration a That’s true.
the to more it turning of Langham, to path the moving of idea my of you
conceive cannot I meadows, home the through cut not may it that right
of means the be to were it if it, attempt not should I difficulty. any
exactly mind to call you if but people, Highbury the to inconvenience
however, it, proving of way only The path.... the of line present the
to-morrow Abbey the at you see shall I maps. our to turn to be will
me give shall you and over, them look will we then and hope, I morning
opinion.” your

his on reflections harsh such by agitated rather was Woodhouse Mr.
been unconsciously, though fact, in had, he whom to Perry, friend
soothing the expressions;--but and feelings own his of many attributing
and evil, present the removed gradually daughters his of attentions
the of recollections better and brother, one of alertness immediate the
it. of renewal any prevented other,



XIII CHAPTER


John Mrs. than world the in creature happier a be hardly could There
morning every about going Hartfield, to visit short this in Knightley,
what over talking and children, five her with acquaintance old her among
nothing had She sister. and father her with evening every done had she
a was It swiftly. so pass not did days the that but otherwise, wish to
short. too much being in visit;--perfect, delightful

their than friends with engaged less were evenings their general In
too, house the of out and engagement, dinner complete one but mornings;
no take would Weston Mr. Christmas. at though avoiding, no was there
was Woodhouse Mr. day;--even one Randalls at dine all must they denial;
of division a to preference in thing possible a it think to persuaded
party. the

he if difficulty a made have would he conveyed, be to all were they How
actually were horses and carriage daughter’s and son his as but could,
on question simple a than more make to able not was he Hartfield, at
long Emma occupy it did nor doubt; a to amounted hardly it head; that
for room find carriages the of one in might they that him convince to
also. Harriet

the were set, especial own their Knightley, Mr. and Elton, Mr. Harriet,
as early, be to were hours them;--the meet to invited persons only
being inclination and habits Woodhouse’s Mr. few; numbers the as well
thing. every in consulted

that event great very a was it (for event great this before evening The
spent been had December) of 24th the on out, dine should Woodhouse Mr.
with indisposed much so home gone had she and Hartfield, at Harriet by
Mrs. by nursed being of wish earnest own her for but that, cold, a
called Emma house. the leave to her allowed have not could Emma Goddard,
to regard with signed already doom her found and day, next the her on
Goddard Mrs. throat: sore bad a had and feverish very was She Randalls.
Harriet and of, talked was Perry Mr. affection, and care of full was
her excluded which authority the resist to low and ill too was herself
loss her of speak not could she though engagement, delightful this from
tears. many without

Goddard’s Mrs. in her attend to could, she as long as her with sat Emma
Mr. much how representing by spirits her raise and absences, unavoidable
last at her left and state; her knew he when depressed be would Elton’s
most a having his of dependence sweet the in comfortable, tolerably
not had She much. very her missing all their of and visit, comfortless
Mr. by met was she when door, Goddard’s Mrs. from yards many advanced
slowly on walked they as and it, towards coming evidently himself, Elton
rumour the on he, whom invalid--of the about conversation in together
might he that inquire, to going been had illness, considerable of
John Mr. by overtaken were Hartfield--they to her of report some carry
eldest two his with Donwell, to visit daily the from returning Knightley
country a of benefit the all shewed faces glowing healthy, whose boys,
rice and mutton roast the of despatch quick a ensure to seemed and run,
and company joined They for. home hastening were they pudding
friend’s her of nature the describing just was Emma together. proceeded
heat of deal great a with inflamed, much very throat complaint;--“a
Mrs. from find to sorry was she and &c. pulse, low quick, a her, about
often had and sore-throats, bad very to liable was Harriet that Goddard
as occasion, the on alarm all looked Elton Mr. them.” with her alarmed
exclaimed, he

putrid a of not hope I infectious. not hope sore-throat!--I “A
of care take should you Indeed her? seen Perry Has sort. infectious
risks. no run to you entreat me Let friend. your of as well as yourself
her?” see Perry not does Why

this tranquillised herself, frightened all at really not was who Emma,
and experience Goddard’s Mrs. of assurances by apprehension of excess
she which uneasiness of degree a remain still must there as but care;
assist and feed rather would she which away, reason to wish not could
subject, another quite if afterwards--as soon added she not, than

like much very so feels and looks cold--and very so cold, so is “It
I party, other any with or place other any to were it if that snow,
from father my dissuade to-day--and out go to not try really should
the feel to seem not does and mind, his up made has he as but venturing;
great so be would it know I as interfere, to like not do I himself, cold
Elton, Mr. word, my upon But, Weston. Mrs. and Mr. to disappointment a
a me to appear You myself. excuse certainly should I case, your in
and voice of demand what consider you when and already, hoarse little
than more no be would it think I bring, will to-morrow fatigues what
to-night.” yourself of care take and home at stay to prudence common

make; to answer what know well very not did he if as looked Elton Mr.
kind the by gratified much very though for case; the exactly was which
her’s, of advice any resist to liking not and lady, fair a such of care
Emma, visit;--but the up give to inclination least the really not had he
him hear to views and conceptions previous own her in busy and eager too
with satisfied well very was vision, clear with him see or impartially,
very certainly cold, “very being its of acknowledgment muttering his
Randalls, from him extricated having in rejoicing on, walked and cold,”
hour every Harriet after inquire to sending of power the him secured and
evening. the of

and Mr. to apologies your make will she;--“we said right,” quite do “You
Weston.” Mrs.

civilly was brother her found she when spoken, so she had hardly But
only Elton’s Mr. were weather the if carriage, his in seat a offering
prompt much with offer the accepting actually Elton Mr. and objection,
had never and go, to was Elton Mr. thing; done a was It satisfaction.
moment; this at than pleasure more expressed face handsome broad his
when than exulting more eyes his nor stronger, been smile his had never
her. at looked next he

got had I strange!--After most is “this herself, to she said “Well,”
ill Harriet leave and company, into go to chuse to well, so off him
men, many in believe, I is, there indeed!--But strange behind!--Most
dining for passion a inclination--such an such men, single especially
pleasures, their of class the in high so is engagement dinner out--a
any that duties, their almost dignities, their employments, their
most a Elton; Mr. with case the be must this it--and to way gives thing
love in much very and undoubtedly, man young pleasing amiable, valuable,
dine must he invitation, an refuse cannot he still, but Harriet; with
ready see can he is! love thing strange a What asked. is he wherever out
her.” for alone dine not will but Harriet, in wit

him do but not could she and them, quitted Elton Mr. afterwards Soon
his in sentiment of deal great a was there that feeling of justice the
while voice his of tone the in parting; at Harriet naming of manner
fair her of news for Goddard’s Mrs. at call should he that her assuring
meeting of happiness the for prepared he before thing last the friend,
and report; better a give to able be to hoped he when again, her
of balance the left that way a in off himself smiled and sighed he
favour. his in much approbation

began Knightley John them, between silence entire of minutes few a After
with--

Mr. than agreeable being on intent more man a saw life my in never “I
With concerned. are ladies where him to labour downright is It Elton.
please, to ladies has he when but unaffected, and rational be can he men
works.” feature every

is there where “but Emma; replied perfect,” not are manners Elton’s “Mr.
great a overlook does one and overlook, to ought one please, to wish a
will he powers, moderate only with best his does man a Where deal.
perfect such is There superiority. negligent over advantage the have
value.” but cannot one as Elton Mr. in good-will and good-temper

seems “he slyness, some with presently, Knightley John Mr. said “Yes,”
you.” towards good-will of deal great a have to

to me imagining you “are astonishment, of smile a with replied she “Me!”
object?” Elton’s Mr. be

never it if and Emma; own, I me, crossed has imagination an “Such
now.” consideration into it take well as may you before, you to occurred

idea!” an me!--What with love in Elton “Mr.

it whether consider to well do will you but so; is it say not do “I
your think I accordingly. behaviour your regulate to and not, or so is
better had You Emma. friend, a as speak I encouraging. him to manners
do.” to mean you what and do, you what ascertain and you, about look

and Elton Mr. mistaken. quite are you you assure I but you; thank “I
amusing on, walked she and more;” nothing and friends, good very are I
a from arise often which blunders the of consideration the in herself
high of people which mistakes the of circumstances, of knowledge partial
well very not and into; falling ever for are judgment to pretensions
in and ignorant, and blind her imagining for brother her with pleased
more. no said He counsel. of want

in that visit, the to mind his up made completely so had Woodhouse Mr.
shrinking of idea no have to seemed he coldness, increasing the of spite
eldest his with punctually most last at forward set and it, from
the of consciousness apparent less with carriage, own his in daughter
own his of wonder the of full too others; the of either than weather
was it that see to Randalls at afford to was it pleasure the and going,
severe; was however, cold, The it. feel to up wrapt well too and cold,
snow of flakes few a motion, in was carriage second the time the by and
so being of appearance the had sky the and down, way their finding were
world white very a produce to air milder a only want to as overcharged
time. short very a in

The humour. happiest the in not was companion her that saw soon Emma
of sacrifice the with weather, such in abroad going the and preparing
least, at disagreeables were evils, were dinner, after children his
anticipated he like; means any by not did Knightley John Mr. which
the and purchase; the worth all at be could that visit the in nothing
his expressing in him by spent was vicarage the to drive their of whole
discontent.

asks he when himself of opinion good very a have “must he, said man,” “A
as day a such encounter and fireside, own their leave to people
most a himself think must He him. see to coming of sake the for this,
greatest the is It thing. a such do not could I fellow; agreeable
allowing not of folly moment!--The this at snowing absurdity--Actually
staying not people’s of folly the home--and at comfortable be to people
such out go to obliged were we If can! they when home at comfortably
we hardship a what business, or duty of call any by this, as evening an
clothing thinner rather with probably we, are here it;--and deem should
of defiance in excuse, without voluntarily, forward setting usual, than
view his to given thing every in man, tells which nature, of voice the
shelter under all keep and himself, home at stay to feelings, his or
in hours dull five spend to forward setting we are can;--here he that
said not was that hear to or say to nothing with house, man’s another
to-morrow. again heard and said be not may and yesterday, heard and
and horses worse;--four in probably return to weather, dismal in Going
shivering idle, five convey to but nothing for out taken servants four
had have might they than company worse and rooms colder into creatures
home.” at

no which assent, pleased the give to equal herself find not did Emma
true, “Very the emulate to receiving, of habit the in was he doubt
travelling his by administered usually been have must which love,” my
making from refrain to enough resolution had she but companion;
being dreaded she complying, be not could She all. at answer any
to him allowed She silence. to only reached heroism her quarrelsome;
opening without up, herself wrapped and glasses, the arranged and talk,
lips. her

Elton, Mr. and down, let was step the turned, carriage the arrived, They
with thought Emma instantly. them with was smiling, and black, spruce,
and obligation all was Elton Mr. subject. of change some of pleasure
she that indeed, civilities his in cheerful very so was he cheerfulness;
from Harriet of account different a received have must he think to began
had answer the and dressing, while sent had She her. reached had what
better.” same--not the “Much been,

so not “was presently, she said Goddard’s,” Mrs. from report “_My_
answer.” _my_ was better’ hoped--‘Not had I as pleasant

of voice the was voice his and immediately; lengthened face His
answered. he as sentiment

that you telling of point the on was find--I to grieved am no--I “Oh!
thing last very the did I which door, Goddard’s Mrs. at called I when
better, not was Smith Miss that told was I dress, to returned I before
concerned--I and grieved much Very worse. rather better, means no by
I as cordial a such after better be must she that myself flattered had
morning.” the in her given been had knew

of part nervous the to use of was visit answered--“My and smiled Emma
throat; sore a away charm can I even not but hope; I complaint, her
you as her, with been has Perry Mr. indeed. cold severe most a is it
heard.” probably

not--” did is--I imagined--that “Yes--I

to-morrow hope I and complaints, these in her to used been has “He
is it But report. comfortable more a both us bring will morning
to-day!” party our to loss sad a Such uneasiness. feel to not impossible

moment.” every missed be will indeed.--She so, “Dreadful!--Exactly

really was it accompanied which sigh the proper; very was This
dismay in rather was Emma longer. lasted have should it but estimable;
things, other of speak to began he afterwards minute a half only when
enjoyment. and alacrity greatest the of voice a in and

for sheepskin a of use “the he, said device,” excellent an “What
cold feel to it;--impossible make they comfortable very How carriages.
have indeed days modern of contrivances The precautions. such with
fenced so is One complete. perfectly carriage gentleman’s a rendered
way its find can air of breath a not that weather, the from guarded and
very a is It consequence. no of absolutely becomes Weather unpermitted.
matter.--Ha! the of nothing know we carriage this in afternoon--but cold
see.” I little a snows

of deal good a have shall we think I “and Knightley, John said “Yes,”
it.”

and seasonable; “Quite Elton. Mr. observed weather,” “Christmas
begin not did it that ourselves think may we fortunate extremely
possibly very might it which party, day’s this prevent and yesterday,
been there had ventured have hardly would Woodhouse Mr. for done, have
quite is This consequence. no of is it now but ground; the on snow much
invites body every Christmas At meetings. friendly for indeed season the
worst the even of little think people and them, about friends their
Nothing week. a for once house friend’s a at up snowed was I weather.
away get not could and night, one only for went I pleasanter. be could
se’nnight.” day very that till

but pleasure, the comprehend not did he if as looked Knightley John Mr.
coolly, only, said

Randalls.” at week a up snowed be to wish cannot “I

much too was she but amused, been have might Emma time another At
seemed Harriet feelings. other for spirits Elton’s Mr. at now astonished
party. pleasant a of expectation the in forgotten quite

the in thing every “and he, continued fires,” excellent of sure are “We
Weston Weston;--Mrs. Mrs. and Mr. people, Charming comfort. greatest
so values, one what exactly is he and praise, beyond much is indeed
where but party, small a be will society;--it of fond so and hospitable,
any. of agreeable most the perhaps are they select, are parties small
comfortably; ten than more accommodate not does dining-room Weston’s Mr.
by short fall circumstances, such under rather, would I part, my for and
with (turning me, with agree will you think I two. by exceed than two
approbation, your have certainly shall I think I Emma,) to air soft a
of parties large the to used being from perhaps, Knightley Mr. though
feelings.” our into enter quite not may London,

with dine never sir--I London, of parties large the of nothing know “I
body.” any

had law the that idea no had I pity,) and wonder of tone a (in “Indeed!
will you when come must time the sir, Well, slavery. a great so been
great and labour little have will you when this, all for paid be
enjoyment.”

the through passed they as Knightley, John replied enjoyment,” first “My
again.” Hartfield at safe myself find to be “will sweep-gate,



XIV CHAPTER


they as gentleman each for necessary was countenance of change Some
his compose must Elton drawing-room;--Mr. Weston’s Mrs. into walked
Mr. ill-humour. his disperse Knightley John Mr. and looks, joyous
the for them fit to more, Knightley John Mr. and less, smile must Elton
as just herself shew and prompted, nature as be might only place.--Emma
Westons. the with be to enjoyment real was it her To was. she as happy
the in creature a not was there and favourite, great a was Weston Mr.
any not wife; his to as unreserve, such with spoke she whom to world
and to listened being of conviction such with related she whom to one,
the intelligible, always and interesting always being of understood,
father her of pleasures and perplexities, arrangements, affairs, little
Weston Mrs. which in Hartfield, of nothing tell could She herself. and
communication uninterrupted hour’s an half and concern; lively a not had
life private of happiness daily the which on matters little those all of
each. of gratifications first the of one was depends,

not might visit day’s whole the perhaps which pleasure a was This
the but half-hour; present the to belong not did certainly which afford,
grateful was voice her touch, her smile, her Weston, Mrs. of sight very
Mr. of possible as little as think to determined she and Emma, to
that all enjoy and unpleasant, else thing any of or oddities, Elton’s
utmost. the to enjoyable was

through gone well pretty been had cold Harriet’s of misfortune The
enough long seated safely been had Woodhouse Mr. arrival. her before
and own his of history the all besides it, of history the give to
just indeed had and follow, to being Emma’s of and coming, Isabella’s
his see and come should James that satisfaction his of end the to got
almost been had who Weston, Mrs. and appeared, others the when daughter,
and away turn to able was him, to attentions her by engrossed wholly
Emma. dear her welcome

sorry rather her made while a for Elton Mr. forgetting of project Emma’s
her. to close was he that places, their taken all had they when find, to
towards insensibility strange his driving of great was difficulty The
but elbow, her at sat only not he while mind, her from Harriet,
and notice, her on countenance happy his obtruding continually was
forgetting of Instead occasion. every upon her addressing solicitously
internal the avoid not could she that such was behaviour his him,
be it can imagined? brother my as be really it “Can of suggestion
from affections his transfer to beginning be to man this for possible
anxious so be would he insufferable!”--Yet and me?--Absurd to Harriet
father, her about interested so be would warm, perfectly being her for
her admiring begin would last at and Weston; Mrs. with delighted so and
terribly seemed as knowledge little so and zeal much so with drawings
her preserve to her with effort some it made and lover, would-be a like
Harriet’s, for and rude; be not could she sake own her For manners. good
positively even was she right, out turn yet would all that hope the in
on going was something as especially effort; an was it but civil;
Elton’s Mr. of period overpowering most the in others, the amongst
enough heard She to. listen to wished particularly she which nonsense,
she son; his about information some giving was Weston Mr. that know to
several repeated son,” “my and “Frank,” and son,” “my words the heard
suspected much very half-syllables other few a from and, over; times
could she before but son; his from visit early an announcing was he that
reviving any that past completely so was subject the Elton, Mr. quiet
awkward. been have would her from question

never of resolution Emma’s of spite in that happened so it Now,
Mr. of idea the in name, the in something was there marrying,
frequently had She her. interested always which Churchill, Frank
Taylor--that Miss with marriage father’s his since thought--especially
age, in her suit to person very the was he marry, to _were_ she if
the between connexion this by seemed He condition. and character
be to it suppose but not could She her. to belong to quite families,
Mrs. and Mr. That of. think must them knew who body every that match a
though and persuaded; strongly very was she it, of think did Weston
a up give to else, body any by or him, by induced be to meaning not
could she any than good with replete more believed she which situation
intention decided a him, see to curiosity great a had she for, it change
and degree, certain a to him by liked being of pleasant, him finding of
friends’ their in coupled being their of idea the in pleasure of sort a
imaginations.

ill-timed; dreadfully were civilities Elton’s Mr. sensations, such With
very feeling while polite, very appearing of comfort the had she but
possibly not could visit the of rest the that thinking of cross--and
the or again, information same the forward bringing without pass
proved;--for it Weston.--So Mr. open-hearted the from it, of substance
Weston, Mr. by seated and Elton, Mr. from released happily when
of cares the in interval first very the of use made he dinner, at
to say to mutton, of saddle the from leisure first very the hospitality,
her,

see to like should I number. right the just be to more two only want “We
son--and my and Smith, Miss friend, little pretty here,--your more two
me hear not did you believe I complete. quite were we say should I then
Frank. expecting are we that drawing-room the in others the telling
a within us with be will he and morning, this him from letter a had I
fortnight.”

to assented fully and pleasure; of degree proper very a with spoke Emma
party their making Smith Miss and Churchill Frank Mr. of proposition his
complete. quite

since “ever Weston, Mr. continued us,” to come to wanting been has “He
his command cannot he but it; of full been has letter every September:
(between who and pleased, be must who please to those has He time. own
sacrifices. many good a by only pleased be to sometimes are ourselves)
in week second the about here him seeing of doubt no have I now But
January.”

so is Weston Mrs. and you! to be will it pleasure great very a “What
as happy as almost be must she that him, with acquainted be to anxious
yourself.”

put-off. another be will there thinks she that but be, would she “Yes,
not does she but do: I as much so coming his upon depend not does She
is this is--(but see, you case, The do. I as well so parties the know
other the in it of syllable a mention not did I ourselves: between quite
a that is, case know)--The you families, all in secrets are There room.
and January; in Enscombe at visit a pay to invited are friends of party
not are they If off. put being their upon depends coming Frank’s that
family a is it because will, they know I But stir. cannot he off, put
particular a has Enscombe, at consequence, some of lady, certain a that
in once them invite to necessary thought is it though and to: dislike
point. the to comes it when off put are always they years, three or two
seeing of confident as am I issue. the of doubt smallest the not have I
myself: here being of am I as January, of middle the before here Frank
table) the of end upper the towards (nodding there friend good your but
at them to used little so been has and herself, vagaries few so has
been have I as effects, their on calculate cannot she that Hartfield,
doing.” of practice the in long

replied case,” the in doubt like thing any be should there sorry am “I
he think you If Weston. Mr. you, with side to disposed am “but Emma;
Enscombe.” know you for too; so think shall I come, will

at been never have I though knowledge; that to right some have “Yes--I
myself allow never I woman!--But odd an is life.--She my in place the
very be to her believe do I for account; Frank’s on her, of ill speak to
of fond being of capable not was she think to used I him. of fond
her (in him to kind been always has she but herself: except body, any
thing every expecting and caprices, and whims little for way--allowing
him, to opinion, my in credit, small no is it And likes). she as be to
say not would I though for, affection; an such excite should he that
in people to stone a than heart more no has she else, body any to it
temper.” a of devil the and general;

Weston, Mrs. to it, upon began she that well, so subject the liked Emma
joy--yet her wishing drawing-room: the into moving their after soon very
alarming.-- rather be must meeting first the knew she that observing,
be to glad very be should she that added, but it; to agreed Weston Mrs.
talked time the at meeting first a of anxiety the undergoing of secure
as sanguine so be cannot I coming. his upon depend cannot I “for of:
Mr. nothing. in end all will it that afraid much very am I Weston. Mr.
stands?” matter the how exactly you telling been has say, dare I Weston,

Mrs. of ill-humour the but nothing upon depend to seems “Yes--it
world.” the in thing certain most the be to imagine I which Churchill,

certainty the is “what smiling, Weston, Mrs. replied Emma!” “My
attending been not had who Isabella, to turning Then caprice?” of
means no by are we that Knightley, Mrs. dear my know, must before--“You
father his as opinion, my in Churchill, Frank Mr. seeing of sure so
in pleasure; and spirits aunt’s his upon entirely depends It thinks.
on venture may daughters--I two my you--to To temper. her upon short,
odd-tempered very a is and Enscombe, at rules Churchill Mrs. truth. the
him.” spare to willing being her upon depends now, coming his and woman;

Isabella: replied Churchill,” Mrs. knows body every Churchill; Mrs. “Oh,
greatest the without man young poor that of think never I sure am I “and
must person, ill-tempered an with living constantly be To compassion.
but of; thing any known never have happily we what is It dreadful. be
any had never she that blessing, a What misery. of life a be must it
them!” made have would she unhappy how creatures, little Poor children!

have then should She Weston. Mrs. with alone been had she wished Emma
unreserve of degree a with her, to speak would Weston Mrs. more: heard
believed, really she and, Isabella; with hazard not would she which
Churchills the to relative thing any conceal to try scarcely would
own her which of man, young the on views those excepting her, from
at But knowledge. instinctive such her given already had imagination
soon very Woodhouse Mr. said. be to more nothing was there present
after long sitting be To drawing-room. the into them followed
nor wine Neither endure. not could he that confinement a was dinner,
with those to move he did gladly and him; to thing any was conversation
comfortable. always was he whom

of opportunity an found Emma however, Isabella, to talked he While
saying,

means any by as son your from visit this consider not do you so “And
unpleasant, be must introduction The it. for sorry am I certain.
better.” the over, be could it sooner the and place; takes it whenever

Even delays. other of apprehensive more one makes delay every and “Yes;
that afraid still am I off, put are Braithwaites, the family, this if
imagine to bear cannot I us. disappointing for found be may excuse some
on wish great a is there sure am I but side; his on reluctance any
They jealousy. is There themselves. to him keep to Churchills’ the
no feel can I short, In father. his for regard his of even jealous are
sanguine.” less were Weston Mr. wish I and coming, his on dependence

days, of couple a only stay could he “If Emma. said come,” to ought “He
having not man’s young a conceive hardly can one and come; to ought he
into fall she if _woman_, young A that. as much as do to power his in it
wants she those from distance a at kept and teased, be may hands, bad
such under being _man_‘s young a comprehend cannot one but with; be to
he if father, his with week a spend to able be to not as restraint,
it.” likes

before family, the of ways the know and Enscombe, at be to ought “One
to ought “One Weston. Mrs. replied do,” can he what upon decides one
one any of conduct the of judging in perhaps, caution, same the use
must certainly believe, I Enscombe, but family; one any of individual
every and unreasonable; very so is _she_ rules: general by judged be not
her.” to way gives thing

Now, favourite. a great very so is he nephew: the of fond so is she “But
that natural, most be would it Churchill, Mrs. of idea my to according
she whom to husband, the of comfort the for sacrifice no makes she while
_him_, towards caprice incessant exercises she while thing, every owes
owes she whom to nephew, the by governed be frequently should she
all.” at nothing

understand to temper, sweet your with pretend, not do Emma, dearest “My
way. own its go it let must you it: for rules down lay to or one, bad a
it but influence; considerable times, at having, his of doubt no have I
will it _when_ beforehand know to him for impossible perfectly be may
be.”

unless satisfied, be not shall “I said, coolly then and listened, Emma
comes.” he

Mrs. continued points,” some on influence of deal great a have may “He
is she which on those, among and little: very others, on “and Weston,
of circumstance very this be may likely, too but is it reach, his beyond
us.” visit to them from away coming his



XV CHAPTER


his drank had he when and tea; his for ready soon was Woodhouse Mr.
three his as much as was it and home; go to ready quite was he tea
of lateness the of notice his away entertain to do, could companions
and chatty was Weston Mr. appeared. gentlemen other the before hour, the
last at but sort; any of separations early to friend no and convivial,
very in Elton, Mr. augmentation. an receive did party drawing-room the
Emma and Weston Mrs. in. walk to first the of one was spirits, good
with and, immediately, them joined He sofa. a on together sitting were
them. between himself seated invitation, an scarcely

by mind her afforded amusement the from too, spirits good in Emma,
late his forget to willing was Churchill, Frank Mr. of expectation the
his on and before, as him with satisfied well as be and improprieties,
most with listen to ready was subject, first very his Harriet making
smiles. friendly

fair, friend--her fair her about anxious extremely himself professed He
about thing any heard she know?--had she “Did friend. amiable lovely,
must anxiety--he much felt Randalls?--he at being their since her,
considerably.” him alarmed complaint her of nature the that confess
much not properly, very time some for on talked he style this in And
terror the to awake sufficiently altogether but answer, any to attending
him. with charity in quite was Emma and throat; sore bad a of

he if as once at all seemed it turn; perverse a seemed there last at But
on than account, her on throat sore bad a being its of afraid more were
than infection, the escape should she that anxious Harriet’s--more
great with began He complaint. the in infection no be should there that
sick-chamber the visiting from refrain to her entreat to earnestness
venture to not _him_ _promise_ to her entreat present--to the for again,
and opinion; his learnt and Perry Mr. seen had he till hazard such into
its into back subject the bring and off it laugh to tried she though
solicitude extreme his to end an putting no was there course, proper
concealing no was appear--there did It vexed. was She her. about
of instead her, with love in being of pretence the like it--exactly
abominable! and contemptible most the real, if inconstancy, an Harriet;
Weston Mrs. to turned He temper. with behaving in difficulty had she and
support?--would her him give she not “Would assistance, her implore to
go to not Woodhouse Miss induce to his, to persuasions her add she not
had disorder Smith’s Miss that certain were it till Goddard’s Mrs. to
she not promise--would a without satisfied be not could He infection? no
it?” procuring in influence her him give

for careless so yet “and continued, he others,” for scrupulous “So
and to-day, home at staying by cold my nurse to me wanted She herself!
sore ulcerated an catching of danger the avoid to promise not will yet
I not Have us. between Weston?--Judge Mrs. fair, this Is herself. throat
aid.” and support kind your of sure am I complain? to right some

an at great, be must it that felt and surprize, Weston’s Mrs. saw Emma
of right the himself to assuming was manner, and words in which, address
and provoked much too was she herself, for as and her; in interest first
purpose. the to thing any saying directly of power the have to offended
thought she as look a such was it but look; a him give only could She
a to removing sofa, the left then and senses, his to him restore must
attention. her all her giving and sister, her by seat

did rapidly so reproof, the took Elton Mr. how know to time not had She
room the into came now Knightley John Mr. for succeed; subject another
information the with all them on opened and weather, the examining from
snowing still its of and snow, with covered being ground the of
Mr. to words these with concluding wind; drifting strong a with fast,
Woodhouse:

engagements, winter your of beginning spirited a prove will “This
way their making be to horses and coachman your for new Something sir.
snow.” of storm a through

else body every but consternation; from silent was Woodhouse Mr. Poor
surprized, not or surprized either was body every say; to something had
Weston Mrs. offer. to comfort some or ask, to question some had and
his from attention his turn and him cheer to earnestly tried Emma and
unfeelingly. rather triumph his pursuing was who son-in-law,

out venturing “in he, said sir,” much, very resolution your admired “I
soon. very snow be would there saw you course of for weather, such in
and spirit; your admired I on. coming snow the seen have must body Every
can snow two’s or hour Another well. very home get shall we say dare I
is one if carriages; two are we and impassable; road the make hardly
other the be will there field common the of part bleak the in over blown
midnight.” before Hartfield at safe all be shall we say dare I hand. at

he that confessing was sort, different a of triumph with Weston, Mr.
lest word, a said not had but time, some snowing be to it known had
his for excuse an be and uncomfortable, Woodhouse Mr. make should it
likely or fallen snow of quantity any being there to As away. hurrying
they afraid was he joke; mere a was that return, their impede to fall to
that impassable, be might road the wished He difficulty. no find would
utmost the with and Randalls; at all them keep to able be might he
body, every for found be might accommodation that sure was good-will
contrivance, little a with that him, with agree to wife his on calling
the from do, to how knew hardly she which lodged, be might body every
house. the in rooms spare two but being there of consciousness

Mr. was done?” be to is Emma?--what dear my done, be to is “What
some for say could he that all and exclamation, first Woodhouse’s
her safety, of assurances her and comfort; for looked he her To time.
of and James, of and horses, the of excellence the of representation
little. a him revived them, about friends many so having their

being of horror The own. his to equal was alarm daughter’s eldest His
full was Hartfield, at were children her while Randalls, at up blocked
for passable just now be to road the fancying and imagination; her in
eager was she delay, no admitted that state a in but people, adventurous
Randalls, at remain should Emma and father her that settled, it have to
possible the all through instantly forward set husband her and she while
them. impede might that snow drifted of accumulations

dare “I she; said love,” my directly, carriage the order better had “You
we if and directly; off set we if along, get to able be shall we say
all at not am I walk. and out get can I bad, very thing any to come do
shoes, my change could I way. the half walking mind not should I afraid.
that thing of sort the not is it and home; got I moment the know, you
cold.” me gives

most the is it Isabella, dear my “Then, he. replied “Indeed!”
thing every general in for world, the in thing of sort extraordinary
home, walking for shod prettily are home!--you Walk cold. you give does
horses.” the for enough bad be will It say. dare I

Mrs. plan. the of approbation her for Weston Mrs. to turned Isabella
could Emma but Emma; to went then Isabella approve. only could Weston
away; get to able all being their of hope the up give entirely so not
had who Knightley, Mr. when point, the discussing still were they and
snow, the of report first brother’s his after immediately room the left
examine, to doors of out been had he that them told and again, back came
their in difficulty smallest the being not there for answer could and
He hence. hour an or now either it, liked they whenever home, getting
snow road--the Highbury the along way sweep--some the beyond gone had
to enough hardly places many deep--in inch an half above nowhere was
the but present, at falling were flakes few very a ground; the whiten
soon being its of appearance every was there and parting, were clouds
there in him with agreed both they and coachmen, the seen had He over.
apprehend. to nothing being

were they and great, very was tidings such of relief the Isabella, To
who account, father’s her on Emma to acceptable less scarcely
nervous his as subject the on ease at much as set immediately was
be not could raised been had that alarm the but allowed; constitution
at continued he while him for comfort any of admit to as so appeased
returning in danger present no being there of satisfied was He Randalls.
and stay; to safe was it that him convince could assurances no but home,
Knightley Mr. recommending, and urging variously were others the while
thus-- sentences: brief few a in it settled Emma and

go?” you not do why easy; be not will father “Your

are.” others the if ready, am “I

bell?” the ring I “Shall

do.” “Yes,

more, minutes few A for. spoken carriages the and rung, was bell the And
own his in deposited companion troublesome one see to hoped Emma and
and temper his recover other the and cool, and sober get to house,
over. were hardship of visit this when happiness

such on object first the always Woodhouse, Mr. and came: carriage The
Mr. and Knightley Mr. by own his to attended carefully was occasions,
renewal some prevent could say could either that all not but Weston;
the and fallen, actually had which snow the of sight the at alarm of
was “He for. prepared been had he than night darker much a of discovery
Isabella poor afraid was He drive. bad very a have should they afraid
behind. carriage the in Emma poor be would there And it. like not would
together much as keep must They do. best had they what know not did He
very go to charge a given and to, talked was James and could;” they as
carriage. other the for wait and slow

he that forgetting Knightley, John father; her after in stept Isabella
naturally; very wife his after in stept party, their to belong not did
second the into followed and escorted being on found, Emma that so
them, on shut lawfully be to was door the that Elton, Mr. by carriage
been have not would It drive. tete-a-tete a have to were they that and
pleasure, a rather been have would it moment, a of awkwardness the
to talked have could she day; very this of suspicions the to previous
but seemed have would mile a of three-quarters the and Harriet, of him
had he believed She happened. not had it rather would she now, But one.
he that sure felt and wine, good Weston’s Mr. of much too drinking been
nonsense. talking be to want would

was she manners, own her by be, might as much as him restrain To
of gravity and calmness exquisite with speak to preparing immediately
they had scarcely begun, she had scarcely but night; the and weather the
her found she than carriage, other the joined and sweep-gate the passed
Elton Mr. and demanded, attention seized--her hand up--her cut subject
precious the of himself availing her: to love violent making actually
known, well already be must which sentiments declaring opportunity,
but him; refused she if die to hoping--fearing--adoring--ready
and love unequalled and attachment ardent his that himself flattering
short, in and effect, some having of fail not could passion unexampled
It possible. as soon as accepted seriously being on resolved much very
apparent much apology--without scruple--without Without so. was really
himself professing was Harriet, of lover the Elton, Mr. diffidence,
say and on, go would he vainly; but him; stop to tried She lover. _her_
to resolve her made moment the of thought the was, she as Angry all. it
must folly this half that felt She speak. did she when herself restrain
to only belong might it that hope could therefore and drunkenness, be
the and serious the of mixture a with Accordingly, hour. passing the
she state, half and half his suit best would hoped she which playful,
replied,

forget you _me_! to This Elton. Mr. astonished, much very am “I
shall I Smith Miss to message friend--any my for me take yourself--you
please.” you if _me_, to this of more no but deliver; to happy be

possibly she could Smith!--What Miss to Smith!--message “Miss
such accent, of assurance such with words her repeated he mean!”--And
with replying help not could she that amazement, of pretence boastful
quickness,

account can I and conduct! extraordinary most the is this Elton, “Mr.
speak not could you or yourself, not are you way; one in only it for
enough yourself Command manner. a such in Harriet, of or me, to either
it.” forget to endeavour will I and more, no say to

at not spirits, his elevate to enough wine drunk only had Elton Mr. But
and meaning; own his knew perfectly He intellects. his confuse to all
and injurious, most as suspicion her against protested warmly having
friend,--but her as Smith Miss for respect his upon touched slightly
all,--he at mentioned be should Smith Miss that wonder his acknowledging
a for urgent very was and passion, own his of subject the resumed
answer. favourable

his of more thought she inebriety, his of less thought she As
politeness, for struggles fewer with and presumption; and inconstancy
replied,

yourself made have You longer. any doubt to me for impossible is “It
can I thing any beyond much is astonishment my Elton, Mr. clear. too
last the during witnessed have I as behaviour, such After express.
daily the in been have I as attentions Smith--such Miss to month,
an is manner--this this in me addressing be observing--to of habit
possible! supposed not had I which indeed, character, of unsteadiness
object the being in gratified from far, very far, am I sir, me, Believe
professions.” such of

this?--Miss of meaning the be can “what Elton, Mr. cried Heaven!” “Good
my of course whole the in Smith Miss of thought never Smith!--I
never friend: your as but attentions, any her paid existence--never
she If friend. your as but alive, or dead were she whether cared
very am I and her, misled have wishes own her otherwise, fancied has
Woodhouse! Miss indeed!--Oh! Smith, Miss sorry--But, sorry--extremely
my upon No, near! is Woodhouse Miss when Smith, Miss of think can who
of only thought have I character. of unsteadiness no is there honour,
one any to attention smallest the paid having against protest I you.
has past, weeks many for done, or said have I that thing Every else.
You yourself. of adoration my marking of view sole the with been
be to meant accent an No!--(in it. doubt seriously, really, cannot
me.” understood and seen have you sure am insinuating)--I

this--which hearing on felt, Emma what say to impossible be would It
completely too was She uppermost. was sensations unpleasant her all of
silence of moments two and reply: to able immediately be to overpowered
he mind, of state sanguine Elton’s Mr. for encouragement ample being
exclaimed-- joyously he as again, hand her take to tried

interesting this interpret to me allow Woodhouse! Miss “Charming
me.” understood long have you that confesses It silence.

having from far So thing. such no confesses “it Emma, cried sir,” “No,
respect with error complete most a in been have I you, understood long
you that sorry very am I myself, to As moment. this till views, your to
farther be could feelings--Nothing any to way giving been have should
of pursuit Harriet--your friend my to attachment wishes--your my from
been have I and pleasure, great me gave appeared,) it (pursuit, her,
not were she that supposed I had but success: you wishing earnestly very
judged you thought have certainly should I Hartfield, to attraction your
have you that believe to I Am frequent. so visits your making in ill
you Smith?--that Miss to particularly yourself recommend to sought never
her?” of seriously thought never have

you. assure I “never, turn: his in affronted he, cried madam,” “Never,
of sort good very a is Smith Smith!--Miss Miss of seriously think _I_
wish I settled. respectably her see to happy be should I and girl;
object not might who men are there doubt, no and, well: extremely her
think, I not, am I myself, for as but level: their has body to--Every
equal an of despair totally so not need I loss. a at much so quite
my madam, Smith!--No, Miss to myself addressing be to as alliance,
I encouragement the and only; yourself for been have Hartfield to visits
received--”

entirely been have you encouragement!--Sir, you give “Encouragement!--I
my of admirer the as only you seen have I it. supposing in mistaken
common a than me to more been have you could light other no In friend.
mistake the that well is it but sorry: exceedingly am I acquaintance.
might Smith Miss continued, behaviour same the Had does. it where ends
aware, being not views; your of misconception a into led been have
you which inequality great very the of myself, than more any probably,
I and, single, is disappointment the is, it as But, of. sensible so are
present.” at matrimony of thoughts no have I lasting. be not will trust,

invite to decided too manner her word; another say to angry too was He
mutually and resentment, swelling of state this in and supplication;
longer, minutes few a together continue to had they mortification, deep
If foot-pace. a to them confined had Woodhouse Mr. of fears the for
desperate been have would there anger, much so been not had there
the for room no left emotions straightforward their but awkwardness;
carriage the when knowing Without embarrassment. of zigzags little
themselves, found they stopped, it when or Lane, Vicarage into turned
another before out was he and house; his of door the at once, at all
good a him wish to indispensable it felt then passed.--Emma syllable
under and, proudly; and coldly returned, just was compliment The night.
Hartfield. to conveyed then was she spirits, of irritation indescribable

who father, her by delight, utmost the with welcomed, was she There
Vicarage from drive solitary a of dangers the for trembling been had
in of--and think to bear never could he which corner a Lane--turning
as seemed it there and James; coachman--no common mere hands--a strange
Mr. for well: go thing every make to wanted were only return her if
and kindness all now was ill-humour, his of ashamed Knightley, John
her of comfort the for solicitous particularly so and attention;
of basin a in him join to ready quite not seem--if to as father,
the and wholesome; exceedingly being its of sensible gruel--perfectly
party, little their all to comfort and peace in concluding was day
and perturbation; such in been never had mind her herself.--But except
the till cheerful and attentive appear to effort strong very a needed it
reflection. quiet of relief the her allowed separating of hour usual



XVI CHAPTER


think to down sat Emma and away, sent maid the and curled, was hair The
overthrow an indeed!--Such business wretched a was miserable.--It be and
every of development a for!--Such wishing been had she thing every of
worst the was Harriet!--that for blow a unwelcome!--Such most thing
or sort some of humiliation, and pain brought it of part Every all. of
and light; was all Harriet, to evil the with compared but, other;
in mistaken--more more yet feel to submitted have gladly would she
the could was, actually she than mis-judgment, by disgraced error--more
herself. to confined been have blunders her of effects

have could I man, the liking into Harriet persuaded not had I “If
poor me--but to presumption his doubled have might He thing. any borne
Harriet!”

never had he that protested deceived!--He so been have could she How
as well as back looked She Harriet--never! of seriously thought
she idea, the up taken had She confusion. all was it but could; she
must however, manners, His it. to bend thing every made and supposed,
so been have not could she or dubious, wavering, unmarked, been have
misled.

the picture!--and the about been had he eager picture!--How The
had they clearly circumstances;--how other hundred an charade!--and
“ready its with charade, the sure, be To Harriet. at point to seemed
was it neither; suited it fact eyes”--in “soft the then wit”--but
such through seen have could Who truth. or taste without jumble a
nonsense? thick-headed

to manners his thought late, of especially often, had she Certainly
mere a as way, his as passed had it but gallant; unnecessarily herself
others among proof one as taste, of knowledge, of judgment, of error
the all with that society, best the in lived always not had he that
but, wanting; sometimes was elegance true address, his of gentleness
mean to it suspected instant, an for never, had she day, very this till
friend. Harriet’s as her to respect grateful but thing any

the on idea first her for indebted she was Knightley John Mr. To
denying no was There possibility. its of start first the for subject,
Knightley Mr. what remembered She penetration. had brothers those that
given, had he caution the Elton, Mr. about her to said once had
marry never would Elton Mr. that professed had he conviction the
his of knowledge a truer much how think to blushed and indiscreetly;
It herself. reached had she any than shewn there been had character
many in himself, proving was Elton Mr. but mortifying; dreadfully was
him; believed and meant had she what of reverse very the respects,
little and claims, own his of full very conceited; assuming, proud,
others. of feelings the about concerned

his pay to wanting Elton’s Mr. things, of course usual the to Contrary
his and professions His opinion. her in him sunk had her to addresses
attachment, his of nothing thought She service. no him did proposals
the having and well, marry to wanted He hopes. his by insulted was and
was she but love; in be to pretended her, to eyes his raise to arrogance
be need that disappointment any suffering not his to as easy perfectly
or language his in either affection real no been had There for. cared
could she but abundance; in given been had words fine and Sighs manners.
less voice, of tone any fancy or expressions, of set any devise hardly
He him. pity to herself trouble not need She love. real with allied
Woodhouse Miss if and himself; enrich and aggrandise to wanted only
so quite not were pounds, thousand thirty of heiress the Hartfield, of
Somebody Miss for try soon would he fancied, had he as obtained easily
ten. with or twenty, with else

aware as her consider should encouragement, of talk should he But--that
marry to short), (in meaning attentions, his accepting views, his of
down mind!--look or connexion in equal her himself suppose him!--should
below rank of gradations the understanding well so friend, her upon
no shewing himself fancy to as above, rose what to blind so be and him,
provoking. most was her!--It addressing in presumption

her was he much very how feel to him expect to fair not was it Perhaps
of want very The mind. of elegancies the all and talent, in inferior
that know must he but it; of perception his prevent might equality such
must He superior. his greatly was she consequence and fortune in
at generations several for settled been had Woodhouses the that know
the that family--and ancient very a of branch younger the Hartfield,
was certainly Hartfield of property landed The nobody. were Eltons
estate, Abbey Donwell the in notch of sort a but being inconsiderable,
from fortune, their but belonged; Highbury of rest the all which to
Donwell to secondary scarcely them make to as such was sources, other
had Woodhouses the and consequence; of kind other every in itself, Abbey
which neighbourhood the of consideration the in place high a held long
he as way his make to ago, years two not entered first had Elton Mr.
him recommend to thing any or trade, in but alliances any without could,
her fancied had he civility.--But his and situation his but notice to
and dependence; his been have must evidently that him; with love in
manners gentle of incongruity seeming the about little a raving after
stop to honesty common in obliged was Emma head, conceited a and
and complaisant so been had him to behaviour own her that admit and
real her (supposing as attention, and courtesy of full so obliging,
and observation ordinary of man a warrant might unperceived) motive
favourite. decided very a himself fancying in Elton, Mr. like delicacy,
to right little had she feelings, his misinterpreted so had _she_ If
mistaken have should him, blind to self-interest with _he_, that wonder
hers.

was it foolish, was It door. her at lay worst the and error first The
It together. people two any bringing in part a active so take to wrong,
what of light making much, too assuming far, too adventuring was
quite was She simple. be to ought what of trick a serious, be to ought
more. no things such do to resolved and ashamed, and concerned

very being into Harriet poor talked “actually she, said I,” have “Here
for but him of thought have never might She man. this to attached much
had I if hope, with him of thought have would never certainly and me;
I as humble and modest as is she for attachment, his of her assured not
not her persuading with satisfied been had I that Oh! him. think to used
done well was That right. quite was I There Martin. young accept to
and time to rest the left and stopped, have should I there but me; of
the her giving and company, good into her introducing was I chance.
have to not ought I having; worth one some pleasing of opportunity
time. some for up cut is peace her girl, poor now, But more. attempted
this feel to _not_ were she if and her; to friend a half but been have I
body any of idea an not have I sure am I much, very so disappointment
I no, Coxe--Oh! her;--William for desirable all at be would who else
lawyer.” young pert Coxe--a William endure not could

more a resumed then and relapse, own her at laugh and blush to stopt She
be, might and been, had what upon cogitation dispiriting more serious,
and Harriet, to make to had she explanation distressing The be. must and
of awkwardness the with suffering, be would Harriet poor that all
the discontinuing or continuing of difficulties the meetings, future
avoiding and resentment, concealing feelings, subduing of acquaintance,
some reflections unmirthful most in her occupy to enough were eclat,
the but settled nothing with last at bed to went she and longer, time
dreadfully. most blundered having her of conviction

temporary under though Emma’s, like cheerfulness natural and youth To
of return bring to fail hardly will day of return the night, at gloom
analogy, happy in are morning of cheerfulness and youth The spirits.
enough poignant not be distress the if and operation; powerful of and
of sensations to open to sure be will they unclosed, eyes the keep to
hope. brighter and pain softened

gone had she than comfort for disposed more morrow the on up got Emma
to and her, before evil the of alleviations see to ready more bed, to
it. of out tolerably getting on depend

in really be not should Elton Mr. that consolation great a was It
to shocking it make to as amiable particularly so or her, with love
superior that of be not should nature Harriet’s him--that disappoint
there that retentive--and and acute most are feelings the which in sort
the except passed had what knowing body’s any for necessity no be could
moment’s a given being father’s her for especially and principals, three
it. about uneasiness

snow of deal great a of sight the and thoughts; cheering very were These
that welcome was thing any for service, further her did ground the on
present. at asunder quite being three all their justify might

she Day, Christmas though her; for favourable most was weather The
his had miserable been have would Woodhouse Mr. church. to go not could
exciting either from safe therefore was she and it, attempted daughter
covered ground The ideas. unsuitable most and unpleasant receiving or
and frost between state unsettled that in atmosphere the and snow, with
every exercise, for unfriendly most the others all of is which thaw,
to in setting evening every and snow, or rain in beginning morning
intercourse No prisoner. honourable most a days many for was she freeze,
any Sunday on her for church no note; by but possible Harriet with
Elton’s Mr. for excuses find to need no and Day; Christmas on than more
himself. absenting

though and home; at body every confine fairly might which weather was It
society some in comfort taking really be to him believed and hoped she
with satisfied well so father her have to pleasant very was it other, or
to and out; stir to wise too house, own his in alone all being his
from entirely keep could weather no whom Knightley, Mr. to say him hear
them,--

Elton?” Mr. poor like home at stay you not do why Knightley, Mr. “Ah!

private her for but been, have would confinement of days These
suited exactly seclusion such as comfortable, remarkably perplexities,
to importance great of be always must feelings whose brother, her
his off cleared thoroughly so besides, had, he and companions; his
the during him failed never amiableness his that Randalls, at ill-humour
obliging, and agreeable always was He Hartfield. at stay his of rest
of hopes the all with But body. every of pleasantly speaking and
such still was there delay, of comfort present the all and cheerfulness,
as Harriet, with explanation of hour the in her over hanging evil an
ease. at perfectly ever be to Emma for impossible it made



XVII CHAPTER


The Hartfield. at long detained not were Knightley John Mrs. and Mr.
Mr. and move; must who move to those for enough improved soon weather
stay to daughter his persuade to tried usual, as having, Woodhouse
party whole the see to obliged was children, her all with behind
poor of destiny the over lamentations his to return and off, set
doated she those with life her passing Isabella, poor Isabella;--which
innocently always and faults, their to blind merits, their of full on,
happiness. feminine right of model a been have might busy,

Mr. from note a brought went they which on day very the of evening The
with say, to note, ceremonious civil, long, a Woodhouse, Mr. to Elton
Highbury leave to proposing was he “that compliments, best Elton’s Mr.
with compliance in where, Bath; to way his in morning following the
few a spend to engaged had he friends, some of entreaties pressing the
from under, was he impossibility the regretted much very and weeks,
personal a taking of business, and weather of circumstances various
ever should he civilities friendly whose of Woodhouse, Mr. of leave
be should commands, any Woodhouse Mr. had sense--and grateful a retain
them.” to attend to happy

this at just absence Elton’s surprized.--Mr. agreeably most was Emma
contriving for him admired She desired. be to thing very the was time
it which in manner the for credit much him give to able not though it,
than spoken plainly more been have not could Resentment announced. was
excluded. pointedly so was she which from father, her to civility a in
not was name compliments.--Her opening his in share a even not had She
an such and this, all in change a striking so was there mentioned;--and
as acknowledgments, graceful his in leave-taking of solemnity ill-judged
suspicion. father’s her escape not could first, at thought, she

so of surprize the with up taken quite was father however.--Her did, It
to safely get never might Elton Mr. that fears his and journey, a sudden
a was It language. his in extraordinary nothing saw and it, of end the
thought for matter fresh with them supplied it for note, useful very
Woodhouse Mr. evening. lonely their of rest the during conversation and
away them persuade to spirits in was Emma and alarms, his over talked
promptitude. usual her all with

reason had She dark. the in longer no Harriet keep to resolved now She
that desirable was it and cold, her from recovered nearly her believe to
of better the getting for possible as time much as have should she
Mrs. to went She return. gentleman’s the before complaint other her
necessary the undergo to day, next very the accordingly Goddard’s
destroy to had was.--She it one severe a and communication; of penance
in appear feeding--to industriously so been had she which hopes the all
herself acknowledge preferred--and one the of character ungracious the
all subject, one on ideas her all in mis-judging and mistaken grossly
last the for prophecies her all convictions, her all observations, her
weeks. six

of sight the shame--and first her renewed completely confession The
with charity in be never should she that think her made tears Harriet’s
again. herself

every in nobody--and well--blaming very intelligence the bore Harriet
opinion lowly and disposition of ingenuousness an such testifying thing
to moment that at advantage particular with appear must as herself, of
friend. her

utmost; the to modesty and simplicity value to humour the in was Emma
on seemed attaching, be to ought that all amiable, was that all and
having as herself consider not did Harriet own. her not side, Harriet’s
Elton Mr. as man a such of affection The of. complain to thing any
deserved have could never distinction.--She a great too been have would
would Woodhouse Miss as friend a kind and partial so but nobody him--and
possible. it thought have

that artless, truly so was grief her abundantly--but fell tears Her
eyes--and Emma’s in respectable more it made have could dignity no
and heart her all with her console to tried and her to listened she
the was Harriet that convinced time the for understanding--really
for more be would her resemble to that two--and the of creature superior
could intelligence or genius that all than happiness and welfare own her
do.

and simple-minded being about set to day the in late too rather was It
of confirmed resolution previous every with her left she but ignorant;
of rest the all imagination repressing and discreet, and humble being
was claims, father’s her to only inferior now, duty second Her life. her
affection own her prove to endeavour and comfort, Harriet’s promote to
Hartfield, to her got She match-making. by than method better some in
and occupy to striving kindness, unvarying most the her shewed and
her from Elton Mr. drive to conversation, and books by and her, amuse
thoughts.

and done; thoroughly being this for allowed be must knew, she Time,
in matters such of judge indifferent an but herself suppose could she
Elton Mr. to attachment an in sympathise to inadequate very and general,
age, Harriet’s at that reasonable her to seemed it but particular; in
be might progress a such hope, all of extinction entire the with and
as return, Elton’s Mr. of time the by composure of state a towards made
acquaintance, of routine common the in again meet to all them allow to
them. increasing or sentiments betraying of danger any without

non-existence the maintained and perfection, all him think did Harriet
truth, in did, goodness--and or person in him to equal body any of
yet but foreseen; had Emma than love in resolutely more herself prove
an against strive to inevitable so natural, so her to appeared it
its comprehend not could she that _unrequited_, sort that of inclination
force. equal in long very continuing

and evident as indifference own his made return, his on Elton, Mr. If
not could she do, anxiously would he doubt not could she as indubitable
the or sight the in happiness her place to persisting Harriet’s imagine
him. of recollection

for bad was place, same the in fixed, absolutely so fixed, being Their
of or removal, of power the had them of one Not three. all for each,
each encounter must They society. of change material any effecting
it. of best the make and other,

Mrs. at companions her of tone the in unfortunate farther was Harriet
great and teachers the all of adoration the being Elton Mr. Goddard’s;
could she that only Hartfield at be must it and school; the in girls
or moderation cooling with of spoken him hearing of chance any have
be cure the must there given, been had wound the Where truth. repellent
of way the in her saw she till that, felt Emma and anywhere; if found
herself. for peace true no be could there cure,



XVIII CHAPTER


Mrs. near, drew proposed time the When come. not did Churchill Frank Mr.
For excuse. of letter a of arrival the in justified were fears Weston’s
mortification great “very his to spared, be not could he present, the
to coming of hope the with forward looked he still but regret; and
period.” distant no at Randalls

in disappointed, more disappointed--much exceedingly was Weston Mrs.
man young the seeing on dependence her though husband, her than fact,
ever for though temper, sanguine a but sober: more much so been had
by hopes its for pay always not does occurs, than good more expecting
failure, present the over flies soon It depression. proportionate any
and surprized was Weston Mr. hour an half For again. hope to begins and
three or two coming Frank’s that perceive to began he then but sorry;
year; of time better plan; better much a be would later months
stay to doubt, any without able, be would he that and weather; better
sooner. come had he if than them with longer considerably

of Weston, Mrs. while comfort, his restored rapidly feelings These
of repetition a but nothing foresaw disposition, apprehensive more a
was husband her what for concern her all after and delays; and excuses
herself. more deal great a suffered suffer, to

Mr. about really care to spirits of state a in time this at not was Emma
Randalls. at disappointment a as except coming, not Churchill’s Frank
to rather, wanted, She her. for charm no had present at acquaintance The
she that desirable was it as still, but temptation; of out and quiet, be
express to care took she self, usual her like general, in appear, should
Mr. into warmly as enter and circumstance, the in interest much as
their to belong naturally might as disappointment, Weston’s Mrs. and
friendship.

quite exclaimed and Knightley; Mr. to it announce to first the was She
rather perhaps part, a acting being (or, necessary, was as much as
then She away. him keeping in Churchills, the of conduct the at more,)
of advantage the of felt, she than more deal good a say to proceeded
of pleasure the Surry; in society confined their to addition an such
the which entire, Highbury to gala-day the new; somebody at looking
the on reflections with ending and made; have would him of sight
disagreement a in involved directly herself found again, Churchills
was she that perceived amusement, great her to and, Knightley; Mr. with
making and opinion, real her from question the of side other the taking
herself. against arguments Weston’s Mrs. of use

coolly; Knightley, Mr. said fault,” in likely very are Churchills “The
would.” he if come might he say dare I “but

but come; to exceedingly wishes He so. say should you why know not do “I
him.” spare not will aunt and uncle his

a made he if coming, of power the not has he that believe cannot “I
proof.” without it believe to me for unlikely, too is It it. of point

suppose you make to done, Churchill Frank Mr. has What are! you odd “How
creature?” unnatural an such him

that suspecting in creature, unnatural an all at him supposing not am “I
little very care to and connexions, his above be to learnt have may he
have who those with living from pleasure, own his but thing any for
than natural more deal great a is It it. of example the him set always
proud, are who those by up brought man, young a that wish, could one
If too. selfish and luxurious, proud, be should selfish, and luxurious,
it contrived have would he father, his see to wanted had Churchill Frank
or he?--three is age--what his at man A January. and September between
that. as much as doing of means the without be four-and-twenty--cannot
impossible.” is It

your been always have who you, by felt easily and said, easily “That’s
the of Knightley, Mr. world, the in judge worst the are You master. own
tempers have to is it what know not do You dependence. of difficulties
manage.” to

four-and-twenty or three of man a that conceived be to not is “It
want cannot He amount. that to limb or mind of liberty have not should
so has he that contrary, the on know, We leisure. want cannot money--he
in haunts idlest the at them of rid get to glad is he that both, of much
A other. or watering-place some at ever for him of hear We kingdom. the
the leave can he that proves This Weymouth. at was he ago, while little
Churchills.”

can.” he sometimes “Yes,

whenever while; his worth it thinks he whenever are times those “And
pleasure.” of temptation any is there

intimate an without conduct, body’s any of judge to unfair very is “It
interior the in been not has who Nobody, situation. their of knowledge
that of individual any of difficulties the what say can family, a of
Mrs. with and Enscombe, with acquainted be to ought We be. may family
nephew her what upon decide to pretend we before temper, Churchill’s
at can he than more deal great a do to able be times, at may, He do. can
others.”

and chuses, he if do, always can man a which Emma, thing, one is “There
and vigour by but finessing, and manoeuvring by not duty; his is, that
his to attention this pay to duty Churchill’s Frank is It resolution.
he if but messages; and promises his by so, be to it knows He father.
at say would rightly felt who man A done. be might it it, do to wished
of sacrifice Churchill--‘Every Mrs. to resolutely, and simply once,
convenience; your to make to ready me find always will you pleasure mere
by hurt be would he know I immediately. father my see and go must I but
occasion. present the on him to respect of mark a such in failing my
her to so say would he to-morrow.’--If off set therefore, shall, I
no be would there man, a becoming decision of tone the in once, at
going.” his to made opposition

his to made some be might there perhaps “but laughing; Emma, said “No,”
to dependent, entirely man young a for language Such again. back coming
you But possible. it imagine would Knightley, Mr. you, but use!--Nobody
to opposite directly situations in requisite is what of idea an not have
to that as speech a such making be to Churchill Frank Mr. own. your
for provide to are and up, him brought have who aunt, and uncle the
as speaking and suppose, I room, the of middle the in up him!--Standing
practicable?” conduct such imagine you can could!--How he as loud

He it. in difficulty no find would man sensible a Emma, it, upon “Depend
course, of declaration--made, the and right; the in himself feel would
more him do manner--would proper a in it, make would sense of man a as
he people the with stronger interest his fix higher, him raise good,
do. ever can expedients and shifts of line a that all than on, depended
could they that feel would They affection. to added be would Respect
do would father, his by rightly done had who nephew the that him; trust
the all as well as does, he as well as know, they for them; by rightly
and father; his to visit this pay to ought he that know, must world
not hearts their in are it, delay to power their exerting meanly while
for Respect whims. their to submitting for him of better the thinking
of sort this in act would he If body. every by felt is conduct right
would minds little their regularly, consistently, principle, on manner,
his.” to bend

but minds; little bending of fond very are You that. doubt rather “I
have they think I authority, in people rich to belong minds little where
great as unmanageable as quite are they till out, swelling of knack a
be to were Knightley, Mr. are, you as you, if that imagine, can I ones.
situation, Churchill’s Frank Mr. in once at all placed and transported
for recommending been have you what just do and say to able be would you
have not might Churchills The effect. good very a have might it and him;
early of habits no have would you then, but return; in say to word a
might it has, who him To through. break to observance long and obedience
set and independence, perfect into once at forth burst to easy so be not
as have may He nought. at regard and gratitude his on claims their all
so being without have, can you as right, be would what of sense a strong
it.” to up act to circumstances, particular under equal,

equal produce to failed it If sense. a strong so be not would it “Then
conviction.” equal an be not could it exertion,

to try would you wish I habit! and situation of difference the “Oh,
directly in feel to likely be may man young amiable an what understand
his all to up looking been has he boy and child as whom those, opposing
life.”

first the be this if man, young weak very a is man young amiable “Our
the against right do to resolution a through carrying his of occasion
of time, this by him with habit a been have to ought It others. of will
for allow can I expediency. consulting of instead duty, his following
he rational, became he As man. the of not but child, the of fears the
in unworthy was that all off shaken and himself roused have to ought
their on attempt first the opposed have to ought He authority. their
there ought, he as begun he Had father. his slight him make to side
now.” difficulty no been have would

nothing is that “but Emma; cried him,” about agree never shall “We
man: young weak a being his of idea least the not have I extraordinary.
folly, to blind be not would Weston Mr. not. is he that sure feel I
yielding, more a have to likely very is he but son; own his in though
man’s of notions your suit would than disposition mild complying,
some from off him cut may it though and has; he say dare I perfection.
others.” many him secure will it advantages,

and move, to ought he when still sitting of advantages the all “Yes;
extremely himself fancying and pleasure, idle mere of life a leading of
fine a write and down sit can He it. for excuses finding in expert
persuade and falsehoods, and professions of full letter, flourishing
of world the in method best very the upon hit has he that himself
to right any having father’s his preventing and home at peace preserving
me.” disgust letters His complain.

else.” body every satisfy to seem They singular. are feelings “Your

satisfy can hardly They Weston. Mrs. satisfy not do they suspect “I
mother’s a in standing feelings: quick and sense good her of woman a
her on is It her. blind to affection mother’s a without but place,
doubly must she and due, doubly is Randalls to attention that account
he herself, consequence of person a been she Had omission. the feel
whether signified have not would it and say; dare I come have would
of sort these in behindhand friend your think you Can no. or did he
to this all say often not does she suppose you Do considerations?
French, in only amiable be can man young amiable your Emma, No, herself?
be and manners, good very have ‘amiable,’ very be may He English. in not
feelings the towards delicacy English no have can he but agreeable; very
him.” about amiable really nothing people: other of

him.” of ill think to determined seem “You

not do “I displeased; rather Knightley, Mr. replied all,” at “Me!--not
merits his acknowledge to ready as be should I him. of ill think to want
personal; merely are what except none, of hear I but man; other any as
manners.” plausible smooth, with good-looking, and well-grown is he that

treasure a be will he him, recommend to else nothing have he if “Well,
and well-bred men, young fine upon look often not do We Highbury. at
the into virtues the all for ask and nice be not must We agreeable.
his _sensation_ a what Knightley, Mr. imagine, you Cannot bargain.
the throughout subject one but be will There produce? will coming
of object interest--one one but Highbury; and Donwell of parishes
speak and think shall we Churchill; Frank Mr. all be will it curiosity;
else.” nobody of

him find I If over-powered. much so being my excuse will “You
a only is he if but acquaintance; his of glad be shall I conversable,
thoughts.” or time my of much occupy not will he coxcomb, chattering

of taste the to conversation his adapt can he that is, him of idea “My
universally being of wish the as well as power the has and body, every
music; or drawing of me, to farming; of talk will he you, To agreeable.
subjects all on information general that having body, every to on so and
as just lead, the take or lead, the follow to him enable will which
my is that each; on well extremely speak to and require, may propriety
him.” of idea

any out turn he if that “is, warmly, Knightley Mr. said mine,” “And
What! breathing! fellow insufferable most the be will he it, like thing
man--the great company--the his of king the be to three-and-twenty at
make and character, body’s every read to is who politician, practised
to superiority; own his of display the to conduce talents body’s every
like appear all make may he that around, flatteries his dispensing be
not could sense good own your Emma, dear My himself! with compared fools
point.” the to came it when puppy a such endure

to thing every turn “you Emma, cried him,” about more no say will “I
no have we and him; for I against, you prejudiced; both are We evil.
here.” really is he till agreeing of chance

prejudiced.” not am I “Prejudiced!

for love My it. of ashamed all at being without and much, very am I “But
favour.” his in prejudice decided a me gives Weston Mrs. and Mr.

said another,” to end month’s one from of think never I person a is “He
immediately Emma made which vexation, of degree a with Knightley, Mr.
be should he why comprehend not could she though else, something of talk
angry.

a of be to appeared he because only man, young a to dislike a take To
of liberality real the unworthy was himself, from disposition different
the all with for him; in acknowledge to used always was she which mind
had she charge, his to laid often had she which himself, of opinion high
merit the to unjust him make could it supposed moment a for before never
another. of




II VOLUME



I CHAPTER


Emma’s in and, morning, one together walking been had Harriet and Emma
could She day. that for Elton Mr. of enough talking been had opinion,
and more; required sins own her or solace Harriet’s that think not
they as subject the of rid getting industriously therefore was she
succeeded, had she thought she when again out burst it returned;--but
and winter, in suffer must poor the what of time some speaking after and
good so is Elton plaintive--“Mr. very a than answer other no receiving
done. be must else something found she poor!” the to

Bates. Miss and Mrs. lived where house the approaching just were They
was There numbers. in safety seek and them upon call to determined She
Bates Miss and Mrs. attention; an such for reason sufficient always
few very the by considered was she knew she and on, called be to loved
in negligent rather as her, in imperfection see to ever presumed who
of stock the to ought she what contributing not as and respect, that
comforts. scanty their

heart, own her from some and Knightley Mr. from hint a many had had She
persuasion the counteract to equal were none deficiency--but her to as
women--and time--tiresome of waste disagreeable,--a very being its of
and second-rate the with in falling of danger in being of horror the all
therefore and ever, for them on calling were who Highbury, of third-rate
not of resolution sudden the made she now But them. near went seldom she
to it proposed she as in--observing, going without door their passing
quite now just were they calculate, could she as well as that, Harriet,
Fairfax. Jane from letter any from safe

occupied Bates Miss and Mrs. business. in people to belonged house The
apartment, moderate-sized very the in there, and floor; drawing-room the
even and cordially most were visitors the them, to thing every was which
was knitting her with who lady, old neat quiet the welcomed; gratefully
to place her up give to even wanting corner, warmest the in seated
ready almost daughter, talking active, more her and Woodhouse, Miss
visit, their for thanks kindness, and care with them overpower to
Woodhouse’s Mr. after inquiries anxious shoes, their for solicitude
from sweet-cake and mother’s, her about communications cheerful health,
ten for in called just there, been just had Cole beaufet--“Mrs. the
had _she_ and them, with hour an sit to as good so been had and minutes,
much; very it liked she say to as kind so been and cake of piece a taken
them do would Smith Miss and Woodhouse Miss hoped she therefore, and,
too.” piece a eat to favour the

Elton. Mr. of that by followed be to sure was Coles the of mention The
Elton Mr. from heard had Cole Mr. and them, between intimacy was There
the have must they coming; was what knew Emma away. going his since
much how and gone, been had he long how settle and again, over letter
went, he wherever was he favourite a what and company, in engaged was he
went she and been; had ball Ceremonies’ the of Master the full how and
commendation the all and interest the all with well, very it through
Harriet’s prevent to forward putting always and requisite, be could that
word. a say to obliged being

meant, but house; the entered she when for prepared been had she This
by incommoded farther no be to over, handsomely him talked once having
Mistresses the all amongst large at wander to and topic, troublesome any
been not had She card-parties. their and Highbury, of Misses and
actually was he but Elton; Mr. succeed Fairfax Jane have to prepared
to abruptly last at him from away jumped she Bates, Miss by off hurried
niece. her from letter a in usher to Coles, the

Cole dancing--Mrs. to as understand--certainly I Elton, yes--Mr. “Oh!
so was Cole was--Mrs. Bath at rooms the at dancing that me telling was
as soon as for Jane; of talking us, with time some sit to as kind
a great very so is Jane her, after inquiring began she in, came she
to how know not does Cole Mrs. us, with is she Whenever there. favourite
much as it deserves Jane that say must I and enough; kindness her shew
saying, directly, her after inquiring began she so And can. body any as
her not is it because lately, Jane from heard have cannot you know ‘I
we have, we indeed ‘But said, immediately I when and writing;’ for time
body any saw ever I that know not do I morning,’ very this letter a had
is that ‘well, she; said honour?’ your upon you, ‘Have surprized. more
says.’” she what hear me let Do unexpected. quite

interest-- smiling with say, to directly, hand at was politeness Emma’s

I happy. extremely am I lately? so Fairfax Miss from heard you “Have
well?” is she hope

while aunt, deceived happily the replied kind!” so are You you. “Thank
could it sure was I is. it here letter.--“Oh! the for hunting eagerly
being without see, you it, upon huswife my put had I but off; far be not
lately very so hand my in it had I but hid, quite was it so and aware,
Mrs. to it reading was I table. the on be must it sure almost was I that
for mother, my to again it reading was I away, went she since and Cole,
never can she Jane--that from letter her--a to pleasure a such is it
is, it here and off, far be not could it knew I so enough; often it hear
hear to wish to as kind so are you since huswife--and my under just only
to justice in must, really I all, of first says;--but, she what
you pages two letter--only a short so writing her for apologise Jane,
crosses and paper whole the fills she general in two--and see--hardly
often She well. so out it make can I that wonders often mother My half.
think I now Hetty, ‘Well, opened, first is letter the when says,
you, checker-work’--don’t that all out make to it to put be will you
out it make to contrive would she sure am I her, tell I then ma’am?--And
sure am it--I of word her--every for it do to nobody had she if herself,
indeed, And, word. every out made had she till it over pore would she
see can she were, they as good so not are eyes mother’s my though
such is It spectacles. of help the with God! thank still, well amazingly
says, often Jane indeed. good very really are mother’s My blessing! a
strong very had have must you grandmama, sure, am ‘I here, is she when
too!--I done have you as work fine much so do--and you as see to eyes
well.’” as me last may eyes my wish only

breath; for stop to Bates Miss obliged fast extremely spoken this All
Miss of excellence the about civil very something said Emma and
handwriting. Fairfax’s

who “you gratified; highly Bates, Miss replied kind,” extremely are “You
is there sure am I yourself. beautifully so write and judge, a such are
Woodhouse’s. Miss as pleasure much so us give could that praise nobody’s
Ma’am,” know. you deaf little a is she hear; not does mother My
say to obliging so is Woodhouse Miss what hear you “do her, addressing
handwriting?” Jane’s about

repeated compliment silly own her hearing of advantage the had Emma And
was She it. comprehend could lady old good the before over twice
very seeming without possibility, the upon meanwhile, the in pondering,
almost had and letter, Fairfax’s Jane from escape her making of rude,
Miss when excuse, slight some under directly away hurrying on resolved
attention. her seized and again her to turned Bates

By all. at nothing see--just you trifling very is deafness mother’s “My
over, times three or two thing any saying and voice, my raising only
very is it But voice. my to used is she then but hear; to sure is she
me. does she than better Jane hear always should she that remarkable
all at grandmama her find not will she However, distinct! so speaks Jane
my at deal great a saying is which ago; years two was she than deafer
since know, you years, two full is really it life--and of time mother’s
as and before, her seeing without long so were never We here. was she
her of enough make to how know hardly shall we Cole, Mrs. telling was I
now.”

soon?” here Fairfax Miss expecting you “Are

week.” next yes; “Oh

pleasure.” great very a be must “Indeed!--that

so is body Every week. next Yes, kind. very are You you. “Thank
she sure am I things. obliging same the says body every and surprized;
see to be can they as Highbury, at friends her see to happy as be will
Colonel because which, say cannot she Saturday; or Friday Yes, her.
very So days. those of one himself carriage the wanting be will Campbell
Oh know. you do, always they But way! whole the her send to them of good
is That about. writes she what is That next. Saturday or Friday yes,
the in for, it; call we as rule, of out writing her of reason the
or Tuesday next before her from heard have not should we course, common
Wednesday.”

my of chance little be could there afraid was I imagined. I so “Yes,
to-day.” Fairfax Miss of thing any hearing

been not had it if heard, have not should we No, you! of obliging “So
My soon. so here come to being her of circumstance, particular this for
at us with months three be to is she delighted!--for so is mother
the have to going am I as positively, so, says she months, Three least.
are Campbells the that see, you is, case The you. to reading of pleasure
come to mother and father her persuaded has Dixon Mrs. Ireland. to going
the till over go to intended not had They directly. her see and over
married, she till again--for them see to impatient so is she but summer,
must which week, a as much so them from away never was she October, last
say, to going was I kingdoms, different in be to strange very it make
letter urgent very a wrote she so and countries, different however but
but was, it which know not do I declare I father, her mother--or her to
as name Dixon’s Mr. in letter--wrote Jane’s in presently see shall we
would they and directly, over coming their press to own, her as well
country their to back them take and Dublin, in meeting the them give
great a heard has Jane fancy. I place, beautiful a Baly-craig, seat,
ever she that know not do mean--I I Dixon, Mr. from beauty; its of deal
know, you natural, very was it but else; body any from it about heard
his paying was he while place own his of speak to like should he that
them--for with out walking often very be to used Jane as addresses--and
daughter’s their about particular very were Campbell Mrs. and Colonel
all at not do I which for Dixon, Mr. only with often out walking not
Miss telling be might he thing every heard she course of them; blame
word us wrote she think I and Ireland; in home own his about Campbell
had he that views place, the of drawings some them shewn had he that
Jane believe. I man, young charming amiable, most a is He himself. taken
things.” of account his from Ireland, to go to longing quite was

Emma’s entering suspicion animating and ingenious an moment, this At
the and Dixon, Mr. charming this Fairfax, Jane to regard with brain
farther of design insidious the with said, she Ireland, to going not
discovery,

to allowed be should Fairfax Miss that fortunate very it feel must “You
friendship particular very the Considering time. a such at you to come
be to her expected have hardly could you Dixon, Mrs. and her between
Campbell.” Mrs. and Colonel accompanying from excused

been always have we that thing very The indeed. true, very true, “Very
a such at her have to liked have not should we for of; afraid rather
was thing any if come to able together--not months for us, from distance
want They best. the for out turns thing every see, you But happen. to
Mrs. and Colonel with over come to excessively Dixon) Mrs. and (Mr. her
pressing or kind more be can nothing it; upon depend quite Campbell;
presently; hear will you as says, Jane invitation, _joint_ their than
is He attention. any in backward least the in seem not does Dixon Mr.
at Jane rendered he service the since Ever man. young charming most a
the by she, and water, the on party that in out were they when Weymouth,
have would sails, the among other or something of round whirling sudden
he if gone, but all was actually and once, at sea the into dashed been
habit-- her of hold caught mind, of presence greatest the with not, had
the had we since ever trembling!)--But without it of think never can (I
Dixon!” Mr. of fond so been have I day, that of history

seeing of wish own her and urgency, friends’ her all of spite in “But,
Bates?” Mrs. and you to time the devoting prefers Fairfax Miss Ireland,

Colonel and choice; own her entirely doing, own her “Yes--entirely
should they what just right, quite does she think Campbell Mrs. and
native her try to her _wish_ particularly they indeed and recommend;
lately.” usual as well so quite been not has she as air,

Mrs. But wisely. judge they think I it. of hear to concerned am “I
has understand, I Dixon, Mrs. disappointed. much very be must Dixon
be to means, any by not, is beauty; personal of degree remarkable no
Fairfax.” Miss with compared

not. certainly things--but such say to obliging very are You no. “Oh!
absolutely was always Campbell Miss them. between comparison no is There
amiable.” and elegant extremely plain--but

course.” of that “Yes,

November, of 7th the as ago long so thing! poor cold, bad a caught “Jane
long A since. well been never has and you,) to read to going am I (as
mentioned never She her? upon hang to cold a for it, not is time,
so her! like Just us. alarm not would she because before, it
kind her that well, from far so is she however, considerate!--But
air an try and home, come better had she think Campbells the friends
four or three that doubt no have they and her; with agrees always that
great a certainly is it her--and cure entirely will Highbury at months
is she if Ireland, to go than here, come should she that better deal
do.” should we as her, nurse could Nobody unwell.

world.” the in arrangement desirable most the me to appears “It

Campbells the and Saturday, or Friday next us to come to is she so “And
will you following--as Monday the Holyhead to way their in town leave
Woodhouse, Miss dear guess, may sudden!--You So letter. Jane’s from find
of drawback the for not was it If in! me thrown has it flurry a what
and thin, grown her see to expect must we afraid am I illness--but her
to happened thing unlucky an what you tell must I poorly. very looking
through letters Jane’s reading of point a make always I that. to as me,
for know, you mother, my to aloud them read I before first, myself to
me desired Jane her. distress to them in thing any being there of fear
caution; usual my with to-day began I so and do: always I so it, do to
I than unwell, being her of mention the to come I did sooner no but
ill!’--which is Jane poor me! ‘Bless with frightened, quite out, burst
alarmed sadly was and distinctly, heard watch, the on being mother, my
had I as bad so near not was it found I on, read I when However, at.
does she that her, to now it of light so make I and first; at fancied
my off so be could I how imagine cannot I But it. about much think not
The Perry. Mr. in call will we soon, well get not does Jane If guard.
so and liberal, so is he though and of; thought be not shall expense
for thing any charge to mean not would he say dare I that Jane of fond
and wife a has He know. you so, be to it suffer not could we attendance,
I now Well, time. his away giving be to not is and maintain, to family
to turn will we about, writes Jane what of hint a you given just have
better deal great a story own her tells she sure am I and letter, her
her.” for it tell can I than

Harriet, at glancing Emma, said away,” running be must we afraid am “I
no had I us. expecting be will father rise--“My to beginning and
minutes, five than more staying of power no had I thought I intention,
not would I because called, merely I house. the entered first I when
so been have I but Bates; Mrs. after inquiring without door the pass
good Bates Mrs. and you wish must we however, Now, detained! pleasantly
morning.”

regained She succeeded. her detain to urged be could that all not And
her on forced been had much though that this, in street--happy the
of substance whole the heard fact in had she though will, her against
itself. letter the escape to able been had she letter, Fairfax’s Jane



II CHAPTER


youngest Bates’s Mrs. of child only the orphan, an was Fairfax Jane
daughter.

infantry, of ----regiment the of Fairfax Lieut. of marriage The
hope pleasure, and fame of day its had had Bates, Jane Miss and
melancholy the save it, of remained now nothing but interest; and
under sinking widow his abroad--of action in dying him of remembrance
girl. this afterwards--and soon grief and consumption

on old, years three at when and Highbury: to belonged she birth By
consolation, the charge, the property, the became she mother, her losing
every seemed had there aunt, and grandmother her of foundling the
taught being her of there; fixed permanently being her of probability
no with up growing and command, could means limited very what only
what on engrafted be to improvement, or connexion of advantages
and understanding, good person, pleasing a in her given had nature
relations. well-meaning warm-hearted,

change a gave father her of friend a of feelings compassionate the But
regarded highly very had who Campbell, Colonel was This destiny. her to
and man; young deserving most and officer excellent an as Fairfax,
severe a during attentions, such for him to indebted been had farther,
which claims were These life. his saved had believed he as camp-fever,
the from away passed years some though overlook, to learn not did he
in thing any put England to return own his before Fairfax, poor of death
notice took and child the out sought he return, did he When power. his
about girl, a child, living one only with man, married a was He her. of
and visits long them paying guest, their became Jane and age: Jane’s
his old, years nine was she before and all; with favourite a growing
real a being of wish own his and her, for fondness great daughter’s
undertaking of Campbell Colonel from offer an produce to united friend,
period that from and accepted; was It education. her of charge whole the
them with lived had and family, Campbell’s Colonel to belonged had Jane
time. to time from grandmother her visiting only entirely,

the others; educating for up brought be should she that was plan The
making father her from inherited she which pounds hundred few very
Colonel of out was otherwise her for provide To impossible. independence
was appointments, and pay by income, his though for power; Campbell’s
daughter’s; his all be must and moderate was fortune his handsome,
of means the supplying be to hoped he education, an her giving by but,
hereafter. subsistence respectable

known hands, good into fallen had She history. Fairfax’s Jane was Such
excellent an given been and Campbells, the from kindness but nothing
people, well-informed and right-minded with constantly Living education.
discipline of advantage every received had understanding and heart her
every London, in being residence Campbell’s Colonel and culture; and
of attendance the by to, justice full done been had talent lighter
worthy equally were abilities and disposition Her masters. first-rate
was, she nineteen or eighteen at and do; could friendship that all of
children, of care the for qualified be can age early an such as far as
too was she but herself; instruction of office the to competent fully
promote, could mother nor father Neither with. parted be to beloved much
was It off. put was day evil The it. endure not could daughter the and
with remained Jane and young; too still was she that decide to easy
of pleasures rational the all in daughter, another as sharing, them,
with amusement, and home of mixture judicious a and society, elegant an
own her of suggestions sobering the future, the of drawback the only
over. be soon might this all that her remind to understanding good

Miss of attachment warm the family, whole the of affection The
from party each to honourable more the was particular, in Campbell
and beauty in both superiority decided Jane’s of circumstance the
unseen be not could feature in it given had nature That acquirements.
the by unfelt be mind of powers higher her could nor woman, young the by
the till however, regard unabated with together continued They parents.
often so which luck that chance, that by who Campbell, Miss of marriage
is what to attraction giving affairs, matrimonial in anticipation defies
of affections the engaged superior, is what to than rather moderate
were they as soon as almost agreeable, and rich man, young a Dixon, Mr.
had Fairfax Jane while settled, happily and eligibly was and acquainted;
earn. to bread her yet

be to thing any for lately too place; taken lately very had event This
path her on entering towards friend fortunate less her by attempted yet
had judgment own her which age the reached now had she though duty; of
one-and-twenty that resolved long had She beginning. for on fixed
had she novitiate, devoted a of fortitude the With period. the be should
from retire and sacrifice, the complete to one-and-twenty at resolved
peace society, equal intercourse, rational of life, of pleasures the all
ever. for mortification and penance to hope, and

such oppose not could Campbell Mrs. and Colonel of sense good The
no lived, they as long As did. feelings their though resolution, a
for and ever; for hers be might home their necessary, be would exertions
would this but wholly; her retained have would they comfort own their
they Perhaps soon. be better had last, at be must selfishness:--what be
the resisted have to wiser and kinder been have might it feel to began
enjoyments such of taste a from her spared and delay, any of temptation
however, Still, relinquished. be now must as leisure and ease of
hurrying not for excuse reasonable any at catch to glad was affection
of time the since well quite been never had She moment. wretched the on
recovered completely have should she till and marriage; daughter’s their
so which, duties, in engaging her forbid must they strength, usual her
spirits, varying and frame weakened a with compatible being from far
something require to circumstances, favourable most the under seemed,
with discharged be to mind and body of perfection human than more
comfort. tolerable

her to account her Ireland, to them accompanying not her to regard With
truths some be might there though truth, but nothing contained aunt
to absence their of time the give to choice own her was It told. not
with liberty perfect of months last her perhaps, spend, to Highbury;
Campbells, the and dear: very so was she whom to relations kind those
or double, or single, whether motives, or motive their be might whatever
they that said, and sanction, ready their arrangement the gave treble,
recovery the for air, native her in spent months few a on more depended
to was she that was it Certain else. thing any on than health, her of
which novelty perfect that welcoming of instead Highbury, that and come;
the for up put Churchill--must Frank it--Mr. promised long so been had
two a of freshness the only bring could who Fairfax, Jane with present
absence. years’

like not did she person a to civilities pay to have sorry;--to was Emma
wished, she than more doing always be months!--to long three through
a be might Fairfax Jane like not did she Why ought! she than less and
was it her told once had Knightley Mr. answer; to question difficult
she which woman, young accomplished really the her in saw she because
eagerly been had accusation the though and herself; thought be to wanted
which in self-examination of moments were there time, the at refuted
get never could “she But her. acquit quite not could conscience her
such was there but was, it how know not did she her: with acquainted
or pleased she whether indifference apparent reserve--such and coldness
made was she talker!--and eternal an such was aunt her then, not--and
that imagined always been had it body!--and every by with fuss a such
every same, the were ages their intimate--because so be to were they
her were These other.” each of fond so be must they supposed had body
better. no had reasons--she

magnified so was fault imputed just--every little so dislike a was It
any after time first the Fairfax Jane saw never she that fancy, by
and her; injured had she that feeling without absence, considerable
years’ two a after arrival, her on paid, was visit due the when now,
and appearance very the with struck particularly was she interval,
Jane depreciating. been had she years whole two those for which manners,
the herself had she and elegant; remarkably elegant, very was Fairfax
almost as such just pretty, was height Her elegance. for value highest
her tall; very think could nobody and tall, think would body every
between medium, becoming most a size her graceful; particularly figure
point to seemed ill-health of appearance slight a though thin, and fat
and this; all feel but not could Emma two. the of evil likeliest the out
altogether them in beauty more was features--there face--her her then,
pleasing very was it but regular, not was it remembered; had she than
had eyebrows, and eye-lashes dark with grey, deep a eyes, Her beauty.
to used been had she which skin, the but praise; their denied been never
really which delicacy and clearness a had colour, wanting as at, cavil
was elegance which of beauty, of style a was It bloom. fuller no needed
her all by honour, in must, she such, as and character, reigning the
mind, of or person of whether which, it:--elegance, admire principles,
distinction, was vulgar, be to not There, Highbury. in little so saw she
merit. and

with Fairfax Jane at looking visit, first the during sat, she short, In
rendering of sense the and pleasure of sense the complacency; twofold
When longer. no her dislike would she that determining was and justice,
beauty; her as well as situation, her indeed, history, her in took she
was she what to, destined was elegance this all what considered she when
impossible seemed it live, to going was she how from, sink to going
every to if especially, respect; and compassion but thing any feel to
highly the added were interest, to her entitling particular well-known
had she which Dixon, Mr. to attachment an of circumstance probable
more be could nothing case, that In herself. to started naturally so
on. resolved had she sacrifices the than honourable more or pitiable
Dixon’s Mr. seduced having of her acquit to now willing very was Emma
imagination her which mischievous thing any of or wife, his from actions
single, simple, be might it love, were it If first. at suggested had
unconsciously been have might She alone. side her on love successless
her with conversation his of sharer a while poison, sad the in sucking
be now might motives, of purest the best, the from and friend;
herself divide to resolving and Ireland, to visit this herself denying
of career her beginning soon by connexions his and him from effectually
duty. laborious

feelings, charitable softened, such with her left Emma whole, the Upon
Highbury that lament and home, walking in around look her made as
she that nobody independence; her giving of worthy man young no afforded
her. for about scheme to wish could

committed had she Before lasting. not feelings--but charming were These
Fairfax, Jane for friendship eternal of profession public any by herself
than errors, and prejudices past of recantation a towards more done or
than better is she handsome; is certainly “She Knightley, Mr. to saying
grandmother her with Hartfield at evening an spent had Jane handsome!”
state. usual its into much relapsing was thing every and aunt, and
more ever; as tiresome as was aunt The reappeared. provocations Former
admiration to added now was health her for anxiety because tiresome,
how exactly of description the to listen to had they and powers; her of
slice a small how and breakfast, for ate she butter and bread little
new and caps new of exhibitions see to as well as dinner, for mutton of
again. rose offences Jane’s and herself; and mother her for workbags
praise and thanks the and play; to obliged was Emma music; had They
an candour, of affectation an her to appeared followed necessarily which
very own her style higher in off shew to only meaning greatness, of air
so all, of worst the was which besides, was, She performance. superior
in up Wrapt opinion. real her at getting no was There cautious! so cold,
was She nothing. hazard to determined seemed she politeness, of cloak a
reserved. suspiciously was disgustingly,

on reserved more was she most, was all where more, be could thing any If
bent seemed She thing. any than Dixons the and Weymouth of subject the
value own her or character, Dixon’s Mr. into insight real no giving on
all was It match. the of suitableness the of opinion or company, his for
distinguished. or delineated nothing smoothness; and approbation general
saw Emma away. thrown was caution Her however. service no her did It
_was_ probably There surmises. first her to returned and artifice, its
perhaps, Dixon, Mr. preference; own her than conceal to more something
only fixed been or other, the for friend one changing near very been had
pounds. thousand twelve future the of sake the for Campbell, Miss to

Churchill Frank Mr. and She topics. other on prevailed reserve like The
a were they that known was It time. same the at Weymouth at been had
Emma could information real of syllable a not but acquainted; little
believed handsome?”--“She he “Was was. truly he what to as procure
was agreeable?”--“He he “Was man.” young fine very a reckoned was he
young a man; young sensible a appear he “Did so.” thought generally
London common a in or watering-place, a information?”--“At of man
were Manners points. such on decide to difficult was it acquaintance,
than knowledge longer much a under of, judged safely be could that all
his found body every believed She Churchill. Mr. of had yet had they
her. forgive not could Emma pleasing.” manners



III CHAPTER


resentment nor provocation neither as her;--but forgive not could Emma
had and party, the of been had who Knightley, Mr. by discerned were
was he side, each on behaviour pleasing and attention proper only seen
with business on again Hartfield at being morning, next the expressing
might he as openly so not whole; the of approbation his Woodhouse, Mr.
enough plain speaking but room, the of out been father her had done have
to unjust her think to used been had He Emma. to intelligible very be to
improvement. an marking in pleasure great now had and Jane,

been had Woodhouse Mr. as soon as began, he evening,” pleasant very “A
papers the and understood, he that told necessary, was what into talked
some us gave Fairfax Miss and You pleasant. away;--“particularly swept
sitting than sir, state, luxurious more a know not do I music. good very
women; young such two by evening whole a entertained be to ease one’s at
Miss sure am I conversation. with sometimes and music with sometimes
nothing left You Emma. pleasant, evening the found have must Fairfax
instrument no having for much, so play her made you glad was I undone.
indulgence.” real a been have must it grandmother’s, her at

not am I hope I “but smiling; Emma, said approved,” you happy am “I
Hartfield.” at guests to due is what in deficient often

not. are you sure am I “_that_ instantly; father her said dear,” my “No,
thing, any If are. you as civil and attentive so half nobody is There
handed been had it night--if last muffin The attentive. too are you
enough.” been have would it think I once, round

often not are “you time; same the at nearly Knightley, Mr. said “No,”
I comprehension. or manner in either deficient often not deficient;
therefore.” me, understand you think

said she but enough;” well you understand expressed--“I look arch An
reserved.” is Fairfax “Miss only,

all overcome soon will you but little; was--a she you told always “I
its has that all overcome, be to ought which reserve her of part that
honoured.” be must discretion from arises What diffidence. in foundation

it.” see not do I diffident. her think “You

her, by close one into chair his from moving he, said Emma,” dear “My
pleasant a not had you that hope, I me, tell to going not are “you
evening.”

and questions; asking in perseverance own my with pleased was I no; “Oh!
obtained.” I information little how think to amused

answer. only his was disappointed,” am “I

his in Woodhouse, Mr. said evening,” pleasant a had body every hope “I
I then but much; too rather fire the felt I Once, had. “I way. quiet
me. disturb not did it and little, very a little, a chair my back moved
though is, always she as good-humoured, and chatty very was Bates Miss
Mrs. and agreeable, very is she However, quick. too rather speaks she
Jane Miss and friends; old like I way. different a in too, Bates
a and pretty very a lady, young of sort pretty very a is Fairfax
evening the found have must She indeed. lady young well-behaved very
Emma.” had she because Knightley, Mr. agreeable,

Fairfax.” Miss had she because Emma, and sir; “True,

the for least at it, appease to wishing and anxiety, his saw Emma
question-- could one no which sincerity a with and said, present,

from. eyes one’s keep cannot one that creature elegant of sort a is “She
heart.” my from her pity do I and admire; to her watching always am I

to cared he than gratified more were he if as looked Knightley Mr.
whose Woodhouse, Mr. reply, any make could he before and express;
said-- Bates’s, the on were thoughts

a confined! so be should circumstances their that pity great a is “It
can one little so is it wished--but often have I and indeed! pity great
we uncommon--Now thing any of presents, trifling do--small, to venture
leg; a or loin a them sending of thinks Emma and porker, a killed have
other any like not is pork delicate--Hartfield and small very is it
sure be could one unless Emma, dear my pork--and, is it still pork--but
without fried, are ours as fried, nicely steaks, into it making their of
roast bear can stomach no for it, roast not and grease, smallest the
dear?” my so, think you not leg--do the send better had we think pork--I

it. wish would you knew I hind-quarter. whole the sent I papa, dear “My
and nice, very so is which know, you salted, be to leg the be will There
like.” they manner any in directly dressed be to loin the

but before, it of thought not had I right. very dear, my right, “That’s
it if then, and leg; the over-salt not must They way. best the is that
Serle as just boiled, thoroughly very is it if and over-salted, not is
a and turnip, boiled a with of, moderately very eaten and ours, boils
unwholesome.” it consider not do I parsnip, or carrot little

you. for news of piece a have “I presently, Knightley Mr. said “Emma,”
will think I that hither way my in article an heard I news--and like You
you.” interest

smile you do it?--why is What news. like always I yes, Oh! “News!
Randalls?” it?--at hear you did so?--where

say, to only time had He

was door the when Randalls,” near been not have I Randalls; at not “No,
Full room. the into walked Fairfax Miss and Bates Miss and open, thrown
quickest. give to which not knew Bates Miss news, of full and thanks, of
another not that and moment, his lost had he that saw soon Knightley Mr.
him. with rest could communication of syllable

Woodhouse--I Miss dear My morning? this you are how sir, dear my “Oh!
You pork! of hind-quarter beautiful a Such over-powered. quite come
be to going is Elton Mr. news? the heard you Have bountiful! too are
married.”

so was she and Elton, Mr. of think to even time had not had Emma
a and start, little a avoid not could she that surprized completely
sound. the at blush, little

Mr. said you,” interest would it thought news:--I my is “There
what of part some of conviction a implied which smile a with Knightley,
them. between passed had

you could “Where Bates. Miss cried it?” hear _you_ could where “But
I since minutes five not is it For Knightley? Mr. it, hear possibly
least at five--or than more be cannot it note--no, Cole’s Mrs. received
out--I come to ready just on, spencer and bonnet my got had I ten--for
was pork--Jane the about again Patty to speak to down gone only was
so was mother my Jane?--for you, not passage--were the in standing
would I said I So enough. large salting-pan any not had we that afraid
think I for instead? down go I ‘Shall said, Jane and see, and down go
kitchen.’--‘Oh! the washing been has Patty and cold, little a have you
Miss A note. the came then just and I--well, said dear,’ my
Knightley, Mr. But, Bath. of Hawkins Miss A know. I all Hawkins--that’s
told Cole Mr. moment very the for it? heard have possibly you could how
Hawkins--” Miss A me. to wrote and down sat she it, of Cole Mrs.

just had He ago. half a and hour an business on Cole Mr. with was “I
directly.” me to it handed and in, shewn was I as letter Elton’s read

more news of piece a was never there suppose quite--I is that “Well!
My bountiful. too are really you sir, dear My interesting. generally
thousand a and regards, and compliments best very her desires mother
her.” oppress quite really you says and thanks,

it Woodhouse--“indeed Mr. replied pork,” Hartfield our consider “We
cannot I and Emma that pork, other all to superior very so is, certainly
than--” pleasure greater a have

good too only are friends our says, mother my as sir, dear my “Oh!
wealth great having without who, people were there ever If us. to
us. is it sure am I for, wish could they thing every had themselves,
Mr. Well, heritage.’ goodly a in cast is lot ‘our that say well may We
well--” letter; the saw actually you so and Knightley,

course.”-- of exulting, cheerful, announce--but to short--merely was “It
forget to--I as fortunate so been had “He Emma. at glance sly a was Here
information The them. remember to business no has words--one precise the
By Hawkins. Miss a to married be to going was he that state, you as was,
settled.” just it imagine should I style, his

speak. could she as soon as Emma, said married!” be to going Elton “Mr.
happiness.” his for wishes body’s every have will “He

had “He observation. Woodhouse’s Mr. was settle,” to young very is “He
We was. he as off well very me to seemed He hurry. a in be not better
Hartfield.” at him see to glad always were

joyfully; Bates, Miss said Woodhouse!” Miss all, us for neighbour new “A
old poor the have to bear cannot she says pleased!--she so is mother “my
have you Jane, indeed. news, great is This mistress. a without Vicarage
see to curiosity a such have you that wonder Elton!--no Mr. seen never
him.”

to wholly as nature absorbing that of appear not did curiosity Jane’s
her. occupy

appeal; this on starting replied, she Elton,” Mr. seen never have “No--I
man?” tall a he he--is “is

say would father “My Emma. cried question?” that answer shall “Who
the just is he that I and Bates Miss and ‘no;’ Knightley Mr. ‘yes,’
Fairfax, Miss longer, little a here been have you When medium. happy
in perfection of standard the is Elton Mr. that understand will you
mind.” and person in both Highbury,

young best very the is He will. she so Woodhouse, Miss true, “Very
he yesterday you told I remember, you if Jane, dear my man--But,
an say, dare Hawkins,--I Miss Perry. Mr. of height the precisely was
mother--wanting my to attention extreme His woman. young excellent
my for better, the hear might she that pew, vicarage the in sit to her
not does she but much, not is know--it you deaf, little a is mother
He deaf. little a is Campbell Colonel that says Jane quick. quite hear
did it says she bath--but warm it--the for good be might bathing fancied
angel. our quite is know, you Campbell, Colonel benefit. lasting no him
It him. of worthy quite man, young charming very a seems Dixon Mr. And
do. always they together--and get people good when happiness a such is
Coles, the are there and Hawkins; Miss and Elton Mr. be will here Now,
a was never there suppose Perrys--I the and people; good very such
turning sir,” say, I Perry. Mrs. and Mr. than couple better a or happier
as society such with places few are there think “I Woodhouse, Mr. to
dear neighbours.--My our in blessed quite are we say, always I Highbury.
is it another, than better loves mother my thing one is there if sir,
pork--” of loin roast pork--a

acquainted been has he long how or is, Hawkins Miss what or who, to “As
it that feels One known. be can suppose I “nothing Emma, said her,” with
weeks.” four only gone been has He acquaintance. long very a be cannot

wonderings, more few a after and, give; to information any had Nobody
said, Emma

interest an take to mean you hope I Fairfax--but Miss silent, are “You
late of much so seeing and hearing been have who You, news. this in
Miss on business the in deep so been have must who subjects, these on
Mr. about indifferent being your excuse not shall account--we Campbell’s
Hawkins.” Miss and Elton

be shall I say dare “I Jane, replied Elton,” Mr. seen have I “When
some is it as And me. with _that_ requires it believe I interested--but
worn little a be may impression the married, Campbell Miss since months
off.”

Woodhouse,” Miss observe, you as weeks, four just gone been has he “Yes,
had I Hawkins!--Well, Miss yesterday.--A weeks “four Bates, Miss said
that not hereabouts; lady young some be would it fancied rather always
Mr. ‘No, said, immediately I me--but to whispered once Cole ever--Mrs. I
am I think not do I short, man--but’--In young worthy most a is Elton
it. to pretend not do I discoveries. of sort those at quick particularly
if wonder could nobody time, same the At see. I me, before is What
so on, chatter me lets Woodhouse aspired--Miss have should Elton Mr.
does How world. the for offend not would I knows She good-humouredly.
Mrs. from heard you Have now. recovered quite seems She do? Smith Miss
you do Jane, children. little dear those Oh! lately? Knightley John
in mean I Knightley. John Mr. like Dixon Mr. fancy always I know
talkative.” very not look--and of sort that with and person--tall,

all.” at likeness no is there aunt; dear my wrong, “Quite

beforehand. body any of idea just a form does never one but odd! “Very
is say, you Dixon, Mr. it. with away runs and notion, a up takes One
handsome?” speaking, strictly not,

was he you told I plain. it--certainly from no--far Oh! “Handsome!
plain.”

plain, be to him allow not would Campbell Miss that said you dear, “My
yourself--” you that and

regard, a have I Where nothing. worth is judgment my me, for as “Oh!
the believed I what gave I But well-looking. person a think always I
plain.” him called I when opinion, general

does weather The away. running be must we believe I Jane, dear my “Well,
my obliging, too are You uneasy. be will grandmama and well, look not
most a been has This leave. take must really we but Woodhouse; Miss dear
Cole’s; Mrs. by round go just shall I indeed. news of piece agreeable
home go better had you Jane, and, minutes: three stop not shall I but
the is she think shower!--We a in out you have not would directly--I
not shall I indeed. do we you, Thank already. Highbury for better
for cares she think not do really I for Goddard, Mrs. on calling attempt
another be will it leg the dress we when pork: _boiled_ but thing any
coming is Knightley Mr. Oh! sir. dear my you, to morning Good thing.
be will you tired, is Jane if sure am very!--I so is that Well, too.
Hawkins!--Good Miss and Elton, arm.--Mr. your her give to as kind so
you.” to morning

while him by wanted attention her half had father, her with alone Emma,
to marry--and to hurry a such in be would people young that lamented he
view own her to give could she half other the too--and strangers marry
piece welcome very a and amusing an herself to was It subject. the of
she but long; suffered have not could Elton Mr. that proving as news, of
hope could she that all it--and feel must Harriet Harriet: for sorry was
hearing from her save to herself, information first the giving by was,
likely was she that time the about now was It others. from abruptly it
its upon way!--and her in Bates Miss meet to were she If call. to
would weather the that expect to obliged was Emma rain, to beginning
would intelligence the that and Goddard’s, Mrs. at her detaining be
preparation. without her upon rush undoubtedly

minutes, five over been not had it and short; but heavy, was shower The
which look agitated heated, the just with Harriet, came in when
Miss “Oh! the and give; to likely was heart full a with thither hurrying
forth, burst instantly which happened!” has think you do what Woodhouse,
was blow the As perturbation. corresponding of evidence the all had
in than kindness greater shew now not could she that felt Emma given,
to had she what through eagerly ran unchecked, Harriet, and listening;
had ago--she hour an half Goddard’s Mrs. from out set had “She tell.
down pour would it afraid been had rain--she would it afraid been
first--she Hartfield to get might she thought she moment--but every
the by passing was she as then, but possible; as fast as on hurried had
she thought she her, for gown a up making was woman young a where house
seem not did she though and on; went it how see and in step just would
rain, to began it out came she after soon there, moment a half stay to
as fast as directly, on ran she so do; to what know not did she and
principal the was Ford’s.”--Ford’s at shelter took and could, she
shop the united; shop haberdasher’s and linen-draper, woollen-draper,
had she there so, place.--“And the in fashion and size in first
minutes, ten full world, the in thing any of idea an without set,
was it sure be in--to come should who sudden, a of all perhaps--when,
but in, come should Ford’s--who at dealt always they odd!--but very so
I think. only Woodhouse! Miss brother!--Dear her and Martin Elizabeth
sitting was I do. to what know not did I fainted. have should I thought
busy was he not; did he but directly; me saw door--Elizabeth the near
directly, away looked she but me, saw she sure am I umbrella. the with
the of end farther the quite to went both they and notice; no took and
miserable! so was I dear; door!--Oh! the near sitting kept I and shop;
away go not could I gown. my as white as been have must I sure am I
the in anywhere myself wish so did I but rain; the of because know, you
he fancy, I last, at Woodhouse--well, Miss dear, there.--Oh! but world
they buyings, her with on going of instead for me; saw and round looked
and me; of talking were they sure am I another. one to whispering began
me--(do to speak to her persuading was he that thinking help not could I
forward--came came she presently Woodhouse?)--for Miss was, he think you
hands, shake to ready seemed and did, I how me asked and me, to up quite
I used; she that way same the in it of any do not did She would. I if
very be to _try_ to seemed she however, but, altered; was she see could
no know I but time; some talking stood and hands, shook we and friendly,
she said she remember tremble!--I a such in was said--I I what more
Miss Dear, kind! too almost thought I which now; met never we sorry was
to beginning was it time, that By miserable! absolutely was I Woodhouse,
getting from me stop should nothing that determined was I and up, hold
me towards up coming was he found think!--I then--only away--and
and do; to what know quite not did he if as and know, you too--slowly
feeling minute, a for stood I answered--and I and spoke, and came he so
and courage, took I then and how; tell can’t one know, you dreadfully,
got not had I and set; I off so and go; must I and rain, not did it said
was I if say, to only me, after came he when door, the from yards three
Cole’s Mr. by round go better much had I thought he Hartfield, to going
Oh! rain. this by floated quite way near the find should I for stables,
was I said, I So me! of death the been have would it thought I dear,
went he then and less; do not could I know you him: to obliged much very
did--but I believe stables--I the by round came I and Elizabeth, to back
Woodhouse, Miss Oh! it. about thing any or was, I where knew hardly I
know, you yet, and happen: it have than thing any done rather would I
and pleasantly so behave him seeing in satisfaction of sort a was there
and me to talk do Woodhouse, Miss Oh! too. Elizabeth, And kindly. so
again.” comfortable me make

in immediately not was it but so; do to wish Emma did sincerely Very
thoroughly not was She think. and stop to obliged was She power. her
seemed sister’s, his and conduct, man’s young The herself. comfortable
Harriet As them. pity but not could she and feeling, real of result the
affection wounded of mixture interesting an been had there it, described
be to them believed had she But behaviour. their in delicacy genuine and
make this did difference what and before; people worthy well-meaning,
Of it. by disturbed be to folly was It connexion? the of evils the in
Ambition, sorry. all be must her--they lose to sorry be must he course,
hoped have all might They mortified. been probably had love, as well as
of value the was what besides, and acquaintance: Harriet’s by rise to
discerning;--what little pleased--so easily description?--So Harriet’s
praise? her signified

considering by comfortable, her make to try did and herself, exerted She
dwelt being of unworthy quite and trifle, mere a as passed had that all
on,

to seem you “but she; said moment,” the for distressing, be might “It
never, never--can may over--and is it and well; extremely behaved have
about think not need you therefore and again, occur meeting, first a as
it.”

still but it;” about think not “would she and true,” “very said, Harriet
at Emma, and else; nothing of talk could she it--still of talked she
hurry to obliged was head, her of out Martins the put to order in last,
caution; tender much so with give to meant had she which news, the on
only or ashamed angry, be or rejoice to whether herself knowing hardly
of conclusion a Harriet--such poor in mind of state a such at amused,
her! with importance Elton’s Mr.

feel not did she Though revived. gradually however, rights, Elton’s Mr.
hour an or before, day the done have might she as intelligence first the
conversation first their before and increased; soon interest its before,
curiosity, of sensations the all into herself talked had she over, was
Hawkins, Miss fortunate this to as pleasure, and pain regret, and wonder
in subordination proper under Martins the place to conduce could which
fancy. her

It meeting. a such been had there that glad rather be to learned Emma
any retaining without shock, first the deadening in serviceable been had
get not could Martins the lived, now Harriet As alarm. to influence
the either wanted had they hitherto where her, seeking without her, at
the of refusal her since for her; seek to condescension the or courage
twelvemonth a and Goddard’s; Mrs. at been had never sisters the brother,
any with again, together thrown being their without pass might
speech. of power any even or necessity,



IV CHAPTER


interesting in are who those towards disposed well so is nature Human
of sure is dies, or marries either who person, young a that situations,
of. spoken kindly being

in mentioned first was name Hawkins’s Miss since passed not had week A
have to discovered other, or means some by was, she before Highbury,
highly elegant, handsome, be to mind; and person of recommendation every
arrived himself Elton Mr. when and amiable: perfectly and accomplished,
merits, her of fame the circulate and prospects, happy his in triumph to
Christian her tell to than do, to him for more little very was there
played. principally she music whose say and name,

and rejected away gone had He man. happy very a returned, Elton Mr.
what of series a after hope, sanguine very a in mortified--disappointed
right the losing only not and encouragement; strong him to appeared
He one. wrong very a of level the to debased himself finding but lady,
another--and to engaged back came offended--he deeply away gone had
such under as first, the to course, of superior, as another to
gay back came He lost. is what to is always gained is what circumstances
Woodhouse, Miss for nothing caring busy, and eager self-satisfied, and
Smith. Miss defying and

of advantages usual the all to addition in Hawkins, Augusta charming The
fortune, independent an of possession in was merit, and beauty perfect
some of point a ten; called be always would as thousands many so of
not had he well; told story the convenience: some as well as dignity,
thereabouts; or l. 10,000 of woman a gained had away--he himself thrown
of hour first rapidity--the delightful such with her gained had he and
notice; distinguishing by followed soon very so been had introduction
progress and rise the of Cole Mrs. give to had he which history the
accidental the from quick, so steps glorious--the so was affair the of
Mrs. at party the and Green’s, Mr. at dinner the to rencontre,
and consciousness importance--with in rising blushes and Brown’s--smiles
impressed--so easily so been had lady scattered--the richly agitation
phrase, intelligible most a use to short, in disposed--had sweetly
equally were prudence and vanity that him, have to ready very so been
contented.

and affection, and fortune shadow--both and substance both caught had He
and himself of only talking be; to ought he man happy the just was
laughed be to congratulated--ready be to concerns--expecting own his
young the all addressing now smiles, fearless cordial, with at--and,
more been have would he ago, weeks few a whom, to place, the of ladies
gallant. cautiously

to themselves only had parties the as event, distant no was wedding The
and for; wait to preparations necessary the but nothing and please,
which expectation, general a was there again, Bath for out set he when
he when that contradict, to seem not did Cole’s Mrs. of glance certain a
bride. his bring would he Highbury entered next

enough just but him; seen barely had Emma stay, short present his During
impression the her give to and over, was meeting first the that feel to
now pretension, and pique of mixture the by improved being not his of
wonder to much very beginning fact, in was, She air. his over spread
so was sight his and all; at pleasing him thought ever had she that
that, feelings, disagreeable very some with connected inseparably
profitable of source a lesson, a penance, a as light, moral a in except
assured be to thankful been have would she mind, own her to humiliation
gave he but well; very him wished She again. him seeing never of
most administer would off miles twenty welfare his and pain, her
satisfaction.

must however, Highbury, in residence continued his of pain The
be would solicitudes vain Many marriage. his by lessened be certainly
would _Elton_ _Mrs._ A it. by smoothed awkwardnesses prevented--many
sink might intimacy former intercourse; of change any for excuse an be
civility of life their beginning almost be would It remark. without
again.

enough good was She little. very thought Emma individually, lady, the Of
Highbury--handsome for enough accomplished doubt; no Elton, Mr. for
connexion, to As side. Harriet’s by probably, plain, look enough--to
vaunted own his all after that persuaded, easy; perfectly was Emma there
article, that On nothing. done had he Harriet, of disdain and claims
_who_ but uncertain; be must was, she _What_ attainable. seemed truth
not did it l., 10,000 the aside setting and out; found be might was, she
no name, no brought She superior. Harriet’s all at was she that appear
daughters two the of youngest the was Hawkins Miss alliance. no blood,
whole the as but, called; be must he course, of Bristol--merchant, a of
it moderate, very so appeared life mercantile his of profits the of
very been had trade of line his of dignity the guess to unfair not was
Bath; in spend to used been had she winter every of Part also. moderate
the though for Bristol; of heart very the home, her was Bristol but
law the remained--in uncle an ago, years some died had mother and father
than him, of hazarded was honourable distinctly more line--nothing
Emma lived. had daughter the him with and line; law the in was he that
rise. to stupid too and attorney, some of drudge the be to him guessed
elder the on dependent seemed connexion the of grandeur the all And
_great_ a in gentleman a to _married_, _well_ _very_ was who sister,
the of wind-up the was That carriages! two kept who Bristol, near _way_,
Hawkins. Miss of glory the was that history;

had She all! it about feelings her Harriet given have but she Could
out talked be to easily so not was she alas! but, love; into her talked
Harriet’s of vacancies many the occupy to object an of charm The it. of
he another; by superseded be might He away. talked be to not was mind
Martin Robert a even clearer; be could nothing indeed; would certainly
cure would feared, she else, nothing but sufficient; been have would
always be would begun, once having who, those, of one was Harriet her.
this from worse considerably was she girl! poor now, And love. in
him of glimpse a having always was She Elton. Mr. of reappearance
every times three or two but once; only him saw Emma other. or somewhere
him, miss to _just_ or him, with meet to _just_ sure was Harriet day
something have to _just_ shoulder, his see or voice, his hear to _just_
of warmth favouring the all in fancy, her in him preserve to occur
about hearing perpetually moreover, was, She conjecture. and surprize
who those among always was she Hartfield, at when excepting for, him;
as interesting so nothing found and Elton, Mr. in fault no saw
every therefore, report, every and concerns; his of discussion the
the in occur might that all occurred, already had that guess--all
and servants, income, comprehending affairs, his of arrangement
was regard Her her. around agitation in continually was furniture,
kept regrets her and him, of praise invariable by strength receiving
Miss of repetitions ceaseless by irritated feelings and alive,
seemed he much how of, observation continual and happiness, Hawkins’s
his of sitting very house--the the by walked he as air attached!--his
love! in was he much how of proof in all being hat,

her to pain no been there had entertainment, allowable been it Had
mind, Harriet’s of waverings the in herself, to reproach or friend,
Elton Mr. Sometimes variations. its by amused been have would Emma
useful occasionally was each and Martins; the sometimes predominated,
of cure the been had engagement Elton’s Mr. other. the to check a as
the by produced unhappiness The Martin. Mr. meeting of agitation the
Elizabeth by aside put little a been had engagement that of knowledge
had Harriet afterwards. days few a Goddard’s Mrs. at calling Martin’s
written her, for left and prepared been had note a but home; at been not
great a with reproach, of mixture small a touch; to style very the in
much been had she appeared, himself Elton Mr. till and kindness; of deal
return, in done be could what over pondering continually it, by occupied
in Elton, Mr. But confess. to dared she than more do to wishing and
were Martins the staid, he While cares. such all away driven had person,
again, Bath for off setting his of morning very the on and forgotten;
best it judged occasioned, it distress the of some dissipate to Emma,
visit. Martin’s Elizabeth return to her for

necessary--and be would acknowledged--what be to was visit that How
consideration. doubtful some of point a been had safest, be might what
would come, to invited when sisters, and mother the of neglect Absolute
the of renewal a of danger the yet and be: not must It ingratitude. be
acquaintance--!

than better, nothing on determine could she thinking, much After
had they if that, way a in but visit; the returning Harriet’s
formal a only be to was it that them convince should understanding,
the at her leave carriage, the in her take to meant She acquaintance.
again her for call and farther, little a drove she while Mill, Abbey
dangerous or applications insidious for time no allow to as soon, so
degree what of proof decided most the give and past, the to recurrences
future. the for chosen was intimacy of

it in something was there though and better: nothing of think could She
merely ingratitude, of approve--something not could heart own her which
Harriet? of become would what or done, be must over--it glossed



V CHAPTER


her before hour an half Only visiting. for Harriet had heart Small
her led had stars evil her Goddard’s, Mrs. at her for called friend
Rev. _The to directed trunk, a moment, that at where, spot very the to
of operation the under seen be to was Bath_, White-Hart, Elton, Philip
where to it convey to was which cart, butcher’s the into lifted being
trunk that excepting world, this in thing every and past; coaches the
blank. a consequently was direction, the and

be to was she and farm, the reached they when and however; went, She
between led which walk, gravel neat broad, the of end the at down, put
which thing every of sight the door, front the to apple-trees espalier
to beginning was before, autumn the pleasure much so her given had
her observed Emma parted, they when and agitation; local little a revive
determined which curiosity, fearful of sort a with around looking be to
hour. an of quarter proposed the exceed to visit the allow to not her
who servant old an to time of portion that give to herself, on went She
Donwell. in settled and married, was

again; gate white the to punctually her brought hour an of quarter The
and delay, without her with was summons, her receiving Smith Miss and
the down solitarily came She man. young alarming any by unattended
with parting and door, the at appearing just Martin Miss walk--a gravel
civility. ceremonious with seemingly her

was She account. intelligible an give soon very not could Harriet
to enough her from collected Emma last at but much; too feeling
creating. was it pain of sort the and meeting, of sort the understand
her received had They girls. two the and Martin Mrs. only seen had She
had commonplace merest the beyond nothing and coolly; not if doubtingly,
Martin’s Mrs. when last, at just time--till the all almost talked been
had grown, was Smith Miss thought she that sudden, a of all saying,
very that In manner. warmer a and subject, interesting more a on brought
There friends. two her with September, last measured been had she room
window. the by wainscot the on memorandums and marks pencilled the were
hour, the day, the remember to seemed all They it. done had _He_
same the consciousness, same the feel occasion--to the party, the
they and understanding; good same the to return to ready be regrets--to
suspect, must Emma as (Harriet, themselves, like again growing just were
carriage the when happy,) and cordial be to them of best the as ready as
shortness the and visit, the of style The over. was all and reappeared,
given be to minutes Fourteen decisive. be to felt then were it, of
months six not weeks six passed thankfully had she whom with those to
might they justly how feel and all, it picture but not could ago!--Emma
She business. bad a was It suffer. must Harriet naturally how resent,
had have to deal, great a endured or deal, great a given have would
a that deserving, so were They life. of rank higher a in Martins the
she could how was, it as but enough: been have should higher _little_
be must They repent. not could otherwise?--Impossible!--She done have
much process--so the in pain of deal great a was there but separated;
little a of necessity the felt soon she that time, this at herself to
to Randalls of way by home going on resolved and consolation,
The Martins. the and Elton Mr. of sick quite was mind Her it. procure
necessary. absolutely was Randalls of refreshment

neither that heard they door the to driving on but scheme; good a was It
the time; some out been both had they home;” at was mistress nor “master
Hartfield. to gone were they believed man

shall we now “And away. turned they as Emma, cried bad,” too is “This
so been have I when know not do provoking!--I too them; miss just
her indulge to corner, the in back leaned she And disappointed.”
being both--such of little a probably away; them reason to or murmurs,
carriage the Presently mind. ill-disposed not a of process commonest the
were who Weston, Mrs. and Mr. by stopt was it up; looked she stopt;
of sight the in pleasure instant was There her. to speak to standing
Weston Mr. sound--for in conveyed was pleasure greater still and them,
with, her accosted immediately

father--glad your with sitting been have do?--We d’ye do?--how d’ye “How
this letter a had to-morrow--I comes Frank well. so him see to
at is certainty--he a to dinner-time by to-morrow him see morning--we
be would it knew I fortnight; whole a for comes he and to-day, Oxford
I days; three staid have not could he Christmas at come had he If so.
have to going are we now Christmas; at come not did he glad always was
shall We weather. settled dry, fine, him, for weather right the just
could we as exactly out turned has thing every completely; him enjoy
wish.”

the avoiding of possibility no news, such resisting no was There
was all it as confirmed Weston’s, Mr. as face happy a such of influence
not but quieter, and fewer wife, his of countenance the and words the by
was certain coming his thought _she_ that know To purpose. the to less
in rejoice she did sincerely and so, it consider Emma make to enough
spirits. exhausted of reanimation delightful most a was It joy. their
in and coming; was what of freshness the in sunk was past worn-out The
now would Elton Mr. hoped she thought, moment’s a half of rapidity the
more. no of talked be

which Enscombe, at engagements the of history the her gave Weston Mr.
command, his at fortnight entire an having for answer to son his allowed
listened, she and journey; his of method the and route the as well as
congratulated. and smiled, and

conclusion. the at he, said Hartfield,” to over him bring soon shall “I

his from speech, this at arm the of touch a saw she imagine could Emma
wife.

the detaining are “we she, said Weston,” Mr. on, move better had “We
girls.”

must you “but Emma, to again turning ready;”--and am I well, “Well,
only have you man; young fine _very_ a such expecting be not
nothing really is he say dare I know; you account _my_ had
were moment the at eyes sparkling own his extraordinary:”--though
conviction. different very a speaking

a in answer and innocent, and unconscious perfectly look could Emma
nothing. appropriated that manner

Mrs. was o’clock,” four about Emma, dear my to-morrow, me of “Think
only meant and anxiety, some with spoken injunction; parting Weston’s
her. for

Mr. was three,” by here be will he it upon o’clock!--depend “Four
meeting. satisfactory most a ended so and amendment; quick Weston’s
wore thing every happiness; to up quite mounted were spirits Emma’s
as sluggish so half not seemed horses his and James air; different a
least at elder the thought she hedges, the at looked she When before.
saw she Harriet, to round turned she when and out; coming be soon must
there. even smile tender a spring, of look a like something

a Oxford?”--was as well as Bath through pass Churchill Frank Mr. “Will
much. augur not did which however, question,

Emma and once, at all come could tranquillity nor geography neither But
time. in come both should they that resolve to humour a in now was

faithful Weston’s Mrs. and arrived, day interesting the of morning The
that o’clock, twelve or eleven, or ten, at either forget not did pupil
four. at her of think to was she

while soliloquy, mental in she, friend,”--said anxious dear dear, “My
every for overcareful “always room, own her from downstairs walking
fidgets, little your all in now you see I own; your but comfort body’s
right.” is all that sure be to room, his into again and again going
twelve; “‘Tis hall. the through passed she as twelve struck clock The
this by and hence; hours four you of think to forget not shall I
the of thinking be may I later, little a or perhaps, to-morrow, time
him bring will they sure am I here. calling all their of possibility
soon.”

her with sitting gentlemen two saw and door, parlour the opened She
few a only arrived been had They son. his and Weston father--Mr.
Frank’s of explanation his finished scarcely had Weston Mr. and minutes,
his of midst the in yet was father her and time, his before day a being
her have to appeared, she when congratulations, and welcome civil very
pleasure. and introduction, surprize, of share

actually was interest, in high so of, talked long so Churchill Frank The
had much too think not did she and her, to presented was her--he before
height, man; young looking good _very_ a was he praise; his in said been
great a had countenance his and unexceptionable, were all address, air,
and quick looked he father’s; his of liveliness and spirit the of deal
was there and him; like should she that immediately felt She sensible.
her convinced which talk, to readiness a and manner, of ease well-bred a
acquainted that and her, with acquainted be to intending came he that
be. must soon they

the with pleased was She before. evening the Randalls reached had He
travel and plan, his alter him made had which arrive to eagerness
day. a half gain might he that quicker, and later, earlier,

you told “I exultation, with Weston Mr. cried yesterday,” you told “I
I what remembered I named. time the before here be would he that all
help cannot one journey; a upon creep cannot One myself. do to used
in coming of pleasure the and planned; has one than faster on getting
deal great a worth is begins, look-out the before friends one’s upon
needs.” it exertion little any than more

young the said it,” in indulge can one where pleasure great a is “It
far; so on presume should I that houses many not are there “though man,
thing.” any do might I felt I _home_ coming in but

complacency. fresh with him on look father his made _home_ word The
the agreeable; himself make to how knew he that sure directly was Emma
pleased much very was He followed. what by strengthened was conviction
hardly would house, arranged admirably most a it thought Randalls, with
to walk the situation, the admired small, very be to even it allow
himself professed and more, still Hartfield itself, Highbury Highbury,
but none which country the in interest of sort the felt always have to
That it. visit to curiosity greatest the and gives, country _own_ one’s
before, feeling a amiable so indulge to able been have never should he
a were it if still, but brain; Emma’s through suspiciously passed
had manner His handled. pleasantly and one, pleasant a was it falsehood,
a in if as speak and look really did He exaggeration. or study of air no
enjoyment. common no of state

opening an to belong as such were general in subjects Their
a she inquiries,--“Was the were side his On acquaintance.
large a they walks?--Had rides?--Pleasant horsewoman?--Pleasant
were enough?--There society afforded perhaps, neighbourhood?--Highbury,
balls?--Was they it.--Balls--had about and in houses pretty very several
society?” musical a it

acquaintance their and points, these all on satisfied when But
while opportunity, an find to contrived he advanced, proportionably
his introducing of other, each with engaged were fathers two their
much so praise, handsome much so with her of speaking and mother-in-law,
his to secured she happiness the for gratitude much so admiration, warm
additional an was as himself, of reception kind very her and father,
it thinking certainly his of please--and to how knowing his of proof
praise of word a advance not did He her. please to try to while worth
but, Weston; Mrs. by deserved thoroughly be to knew she what beyond
understood He matter. the of little very know could he undoubtedly
father’s “His else. little of sure be could he welcome; be would what
must friend every measure, wisest the been “had said, he marriage,”
blessing a such received had he whom from family the and it; in rejoice
on obligation highest the conferred having as considered ever be must
him.”

merits, Taylor’s Miss for her thanking to could he as near as got He
it things of course common the in that forget to quite seeming without
Woodhouse’s Miss formed had Taylor Miss that supposed rather be to was
if as last, at And Taylor’s. Miss Woodhouse Miss than character,
its to round travelling for completely opinion his qualify to resolved
of beauty and youth the at astonishment with up all it wound he object,
person. her

I “but he; said for,” prepared was I manners, agreeable “Elegant,
a than more expected not had I thing, every considering that, confess
that know not did I age; certain a of woman well-looking tolerably very
Weston.” Mrs. in woman young pretty a find to was I

feelings,” my for Weston Mrs. in perfection much too see cannot “You
with listen should I _eighteen_, be to her guess to you “were Emma; said
such using for you with quarrel to ready be would _she_ but pleasure;
pretty a as her of spoken have you that imagine her let Don’t words.
woman.” young

a (with it, upon depend “no, replied; he better,” know should I hope “I
whom understand should I Weston Mrs. addressing in that bow,) gallant
my in extravagant thought being of danger any without praise might I
terms.”

from expected be might what of suspicion same the whether wondered Emma
mind, her of possession strong taken had which other, each knowing their
considered be to were compliments his whether and his; crossed ever had
more see must She defiance. of proofs or acquiescence, of marks as
were they felt only she present at ways; his understand to him of
agreeable.

quick His about. thinking often was Weston Mr. what of doubt no had She
happy a with them towards glancing again and again detected she eye
was she look, to not determined have might he when even, and expression;
listening. often was he that confident

the kind, the of thought any from exemption perfect father’s own Her
suspicion, or penetration of sort such all of him in deficiency entire
from farther not was he Happily circumstance. comfortable most a was
objecting always it.--Though foreseeing from than matrimony approving
from beforehand suffered never he arranged, was that marriage every to
of ill so think not could he if as seemed it any; of apprehension the
it till marry to meant they suppose to as understanding persons’ two any
could He blindness. favouring the blessed She them. against proved were
a without surmise, unpleasant single a of drawback the without now,
all to way give guest, his in treachery possible any at forward glance
Mr. after inquiries solicitous in civility kind-hearted natural his
evils sad the through journey, his on accommodation Churchill’s Frank
unmixed genuine very express and road, the on nights two sleeping of
cold--which, catching escaped certainly had he that know to anxiety
till himself of assured quite feel to him allow not could he however,
night. another after

going. be must move.--“He to began Weston Mr. paid, visit reasonable A
for errands many great a and hay, his about Crown the at business had He
son, His else.” body any hurry not need he but Ford’s, at Weston Mrs.
saying, also, immediately rose hint, the hear to bred well too

opportunity the take will I sir, business, on farther going are you “As
therefore and other, or day some paid be must which visit, a paying of
with acquainted being of honour the have I now. paid be well as may
near or in residing lady a Emma,) to (turning yours, of neighbour a
difficulty, no have shall I Fairfax. of name the of family a Highbury;
not is believe, I Fairfax, though house; the finding in suppose, I
any know you Do Bates. or Barnes, say rather should name--I proper the
name?” that of family

her passed Bates--we “Mrs. father; his cried do,” we sure be “To
acquainted are you true, True, window. the at Bates Miss saw house--I
girl fine a and Weymouth, at her knew you remember I Fairfax; Miss with
means.” all by her, upon Call is. she

man; young the said morning,” this calling my for necessity no is “There
acquaintance of degree that was there but well; as do would day “another
which--” Weymouth at

done be to right is What it. defer not Do to-day. go to-day, go “Oh!
Frank; hint, a you give must I besides, And, soon. too done be cannot
saw You avoided. carefully be should _here_ her to attention of want any
mixed she body every of equal the was she when Campbells, the with her
enough barely has who grandmother, old poor a with is she here but with,
slight.” a be will it early call not do you If on. live to

convinced. looked son The

very a is “she Emma; said acquaintance,” the of speak her heard have “I
woman.” young elegant

to almost her inclined as “Yes,” a quiet so with but it, to agreed He
sort distinct very a be must there yet and concurrence; real his doubt
thought be could Fairfax Jane if world, fashionable the for elegance of
it. with gifted ordinarily only

she, said before,” manners her by struck particularly never were you “If
and her see advantage; to her see will You to-day. will you think “I
an has she for all, at her hear not will you afraid am I her--no, hear
tongue.” her holds never who aunt

Mr. said you?” are sir, Fairfax, Jane Miss with acquainted are “You
give “then conversation; in way his make to last the always Woodhouse,
young agreeable very a her find will you that you assure to leave me
very aunt, and grandmama her to visit a on here staying is She lady.
extremely be will They life. my all them known have I people; worthy
to you with go shall servants my of one and sure; am I you, see to glad
way.” the you shew

me.” direct can father my world; the in account no upon sir, dear “My

Crown, the to going only is he far; so going not is father your “But
many great a are there and street, the of side other the on quite
walk, dirty very a is it and loss, a at much very be might you houses;
you where you tell can coachman my but footpath; the on keep you unless
street.” the cross best had

could, he as serious as looking it, declined still Churchill Frank Mr.
friend, good “My out, calling by support hearty his gave father his and
sees he when water of puddle a knows Frank unnecessary; quite is this
hop, a in Crown the from there get may he Bates’s, Mrs. to as and it,
jump.” and step,

a and one, from nod cordial a with and alone; go to permitted were They
remained Emma leave. took gentlemen two the other, the from bow graceful
now could and acquaintance, the of beginning this with pleased well very
full with day, the of hour any Randalls at all them of think to engage
comfort. their in confidence



VI CHAPTER


Mrs. with came He again. Churchill Frank Mr. brought morning next The
had He cordially. very take to seemed he Highbury to and whom to Weston,
till home, at companionably most appeared, it her, with sitting been
walk, their chuse to desired being on and exercise; of hour usual her
very being there doubt not did Highbury.--“He on fixed immediately
always should he him, to left if but direction, every in walks pleasant
Highbury, happy-looking cheerful, airy, that Highbury, same. the chuse
stood Weston, Mrs. with attraction.”--Highbury, constant his be would
with construction same the bearing its to trusted she and Hartfield; for
directly. thither walked They him.

for in called had who Weston, Mr. for them: expected hardly had Emma
knew handsome, very was son his that hear to order in minute, a half
her, to surprize agreeable an was it and plans; their of nothing
in arm together, house the to up walking them perceive to therefore,
in him see to especially and again, him see to wanting was She arm.
him of opinion her whom to behaviour his upon Weston, Mrs. with company
amends make should nothing there, deficient were he If depend. to was
It satisfied. perfectly became she together, them seeing on But it. for
his paid he that compliment hyperbolical or words fine in merely not was
to manner whole his than pleasing or proper more be could nothing duty;
as her considering of wish his denote agreeably more could her--nothing
Emma for enough time was there And affection. her securing and friend a
of rest the all included visit their as judgment, reasonable a form to
hour an for together about walking three all were They morning. the
afterwards and Hartfield, of shrubberies the round two--first or
Hartfield admired thing; every with delighted was He Highbury. in
was farther going their when and ear; Woodhouse’s Mr. for sufficiently
whole the with acquainted made be to wish his confessed on, resolved
than oftener much interest and commendation of matter found and village,
supposed. have could Emma

He feelings. amiable very spoke curiosity his of objects the of Some
and long, so in lived had father his which house the shewn be to begged
that recollecting on and father; father’s his of home the been had which
of quest in walked living, still was him nursed had who woman old an
in though and other; the to street the of end one from cottage her
they merit, positive no was there observation or pursuit of points some
must which general, in Highbury towards good-will a altogether, shewed,
with. was he those to merit a like very be

it shewn, now were as feelings such with that decided, and watched Emma
absenting voluntarily ever been had he that supposed fairly be not could
of parade a making or part, a acting been not had he that himself;
him done not had certainly Knightley Mr. that and professions; insincere
justice.

though house, inconsiderable an Inn, Crown the at was pause first Their
post-horses of pair of couple a where sort, the of one principal the
any from than neighbourhood the of convenience the for more kept, were
by detained be to expected not had companions his and road; the on run
of history the gave they it passing in but there; excited interest any
for ago years many built been had it added; visibly room large the
particularly a in been had neighbourhood the while and ball-room, a
such such;--but as used occasionally been had state, dancing populous,
for purpose highest the now and away, passed long had days brilliant
established club whist a accommodate to was wanted ever was it which
immediately was He place. the of half-gentlemen and gentlemen the among
of instead and him; caught ball-room a as character Its interested.
sashed superior two the at minutes several for stopt he on, passing
capabilities, its contemplate and in look to open, were which windows
fault no saw He ceased. have should purpose original its that lament and
it No, suggested. they which none acknowledge would he room, the in
the hold would It enough. handsome enough, broad enough, long was
every least at there balls have to ought They comfort. for number very
revived Woodhouse Miss not had Why winter. the through fortnight
in thing any do could who room?--She the of days old good former the
conviction the and place, the in families proper of want The Highbury!
tempted be could environs immediate its and place the beyond none that
be not could He satisfied. not was he but mentioned; were attend, to
could him, around saw he as houses good-looking many so that persuaded
particulars when even and meeting; a such for enough numbers furnish not
that admit to unwilling still was he described, families and given were
there that or thing, any be would mixture a such of inconvenience the
their into returning body’s every in difficulty smallest the be would
bent much very man young a like argued He morning. next the place proper
of constitution the see to surprized rather was Emma and dancing; on
Churchills. the of habits the against decidedly so prevail Weston the
social and feelings, cheerful spirit, and life the all have to seemed He
of reserve or pride the of nothing and father, his of inclinations
his enough; scarcely perhaps, was, there indeed, pride, Of Enscombe.
of inelegance on much too bordered rank, of confusion a to indifference
cheap. holding was he evil the of however, judge, no be could He mind.
spirits. lively of effusion an but was It

Crown; the of front the from on move to persuaded was he last At
Emma lodged, Bateses the where house the facing almost now being and
had he if him asked and before, day the visit intended his recollected
it. paid

very A it. mention to going just was “I replied; yes”--he oh! “Yes,
much very felt and ladies; three the all saw visit:--I successful
taken had aunt talking the If hint. preparatory your for you to obliged
I was, it As me. of death the been have must it surprize, by quite me
minutes Ten visit. unreasonable most a paying into betrayed only was
and proper; was that all perhaps necessary, was that all been have would
there him--but before home at be certainly should I father my told had I
found, I astonishment, utter my to and, pause; no away, getting no was
had I that last, at there me joined else) nowhere me (finding he when
hour. an of three-quarters nearly very them with sitting actually been
before.” escape of possibility the me given not had lady good The

looking?” Fairfax Miss think you did how “And

look to allowed be ever can lady young a if is, ill--that very “Ill,
Ladies it? is Weston, Mrs. admissible, hardly is expression the But ill.
so naturally is Fairfax Miss seriously, And, ill. look never can
most health.--A ill of appearance the give to always almost as pale,
complexion.” of want deplorable

Fairfax’s Miss of defence warm a began and this, to agree not would Emma
not would she but brilliant, never certainly was “It complexion.
and softness a was there and general; in hue sickly a have to it allow
of character the to elegance peculiar gave which skin her in delicacy
had he that acknowledged deference; due all with listened He face.” her
him to that confess, must he yet same--but the say people many heard
Where health. of glow fine the of want the for amends make could nothing
all; them to beauty gave complexion fine a indifferent, were features
not need he was--fortunately effect the good, were they where and
was. effect the what describe to attempt

you least taste.--At about disputing no is “there Emma, said “Well,”
complexion.” her except her admire

her and Fairfax Miss separate cannot laughed.--“I and head his shook He
complexion.”

society?” same the in often you Were Weymouth? at often her see you “Did

exclaimed, hastily he and Ford’s, approaching were they moment this At
of day every attends body every that shop very the be must this “Ha!
he himself, Highbury to comes He me. informs father my as lives, their
Ford’s. at business always has and seven, the of out days six says,
prove may I that in, go us let pray you, to inconvenient not be it If
must I Highbury. of citizen true a be to place, the to belong to myself
say dare freedom.--I my out taking be will It Ford’s. at something buy
gloves.” sell they

will You patriotism. your admire do I thing. every and gloves yes, “Oh!
because came, you before popular very were You Highbury. in adored be
your and Ford’s, at guinea a half out lay son--but Weston’s Mr. were you
virtues.” own your upon stand will popularity

Beavers” “Men’s of parcels well-tied sleek, the while and in; went They
he counter, the on displaying and down bringing were Tan” “York and
me, to speaking were you Woodhouse, Miss pardon, your beg I said--“But
_amor_ my of burst this of moment very the at something saying were you
of stretch utmost the you assure I it. lose me let not Do _patriae_.
in happiness any of loss the for amends me make not would fame public
life.” private

her and Fairfax Miss of much known had you whether asked, merely “I
Weymouth.” at party

a be to it pronounce must I question, your understand I that now “And
degree the on decide to right lady’s the always is It one. unfair very
account.--I her given have already must Fairfax Miss acquaintance. of
allow.” to chuse may she than more claiming by myself commit not shall

But herself. do could she as discreetly as answer you word! my “Upon
very so is she guessed, be to much so leaves thing every of account her
any about information least the give to unwilling very so reserved,
acquaintance your of like you what say may you think really I that body,
her.” with

so me suits nothing and truth, the speak will I indeed?--Then I, “May
a Campbells the known had I Weymouth. at frequently her met I well.
set. same the in much very were we Weymouth at and town; in little
friendly, a Campbell Mrs. and man, agreeable very a is Campbell Colonel
all.” them like I woman. warm-hearted

is she what conclude; I life, in situation Fairfax’s Miss know “You
be?” to destined

do.” I believe hesitatingly)--I “Yes--(rather

smiling; Weston Mrs. said Emma,” subjects, delicate upon get “You
say to what knows hardly Churchill Frank here.--Mr. am I that “remember
little a move will I life. in situation Fairfax’s Miss of speak you when
off.” farther

ever having “as Emma, said _her_,” of think to forget do certainly “I
friend.” dearest my and friend my but thing any been

sentiment. a such honoured and understood fully he if as looked He

“Did again, shop the quitted had they and bought, were gloves the When
Frank said play?” of, speaking were we lady young the hear ever you
Churchill.

to belongs she much how forget “You Emma. repeated her!” hear “Ever
began. both we since lives our of year every her heard have I Highbury.
charmingly.” plays She

who one some of opinion the wanted you?--I do so, think “You
with is, that well, play to me to appeared She judge. really could
am myself.--I matter the of nothing know I but taste, considerable
right or skill smallest the without but music, of fond excessively
her’s hear to used been have performance.--I body’s any of judging of
well:--a play to thought being her of proof one remember I and admired;
to woman--engaged another with love in and man, musical very a man,
woman other that ask never yet marriage--would of point the her--on
down sit could question in lady the if instrument, the to down sit to
other. the hear could he if one hear to like to seemed instead--never
proof.” some was talent, musical known of man a in thought, I That,

musical, very is Dixon amused.--“Mr. highly Emma, said indeed!” “Proof
you, from hour, an half in all, them about more know shall We he? is
year.” a half in vouchsafed have would Fairfax Miss than

a it thought I and persons; the were Campbell Miss and Dixon Mr. “Yes,
proof.” strong very

stronger deal great a truth, the own to was; it strong “Certainly--very
agreeable all at been have would Campbell, Miss been had _I_ if than,
ear love--more than music more having man’s a excuse not could I me. to
feelings. my to than sounds fine to sensibility acute more eye--a than
it?” like to appear Campbell Miss did How

know.” you friend, particular very her was “It

stranger a have rather would “One laughing. Emma, said comfort!” “Poor
might it stranger a friend--with particular very one’s than preferred
friend particular very a having of misery the again--but recur not
oneself!--Poor does one than better thing every do to hand, at always
Ireland.” in settle to gone is she glad am I Well, Dixon! Mrs.

she but Campbell; Miss to flattering very not was It right. are “You
it.” feel to seem not did really

But which. know not do worse:--I the much so better--or the much “So
or friendship, of her--quickness in stupidity it be or sweetness it be
felt have must who think, I person, one was feeling--there of dulness
dangerous and improper the felt have must She herself. Fairfax Miss it:
distinction.”

not--” do that--I to “As

Fairfax’s Miss of account an expect I that imagine not do “Oh!
human no to known are They else. body any from or you, from sensations
she whenever play to continued she if But herself. but guess, I being,
chuses.” one what guess may one Dixon, Mr. by asked was

all--” them among understanding good perfectly a such appeared “There
is it “however, added, himself, checking but quickly, rather began he
might it were--how really they terms what on say to me for impossible
smoothness was there that say only can I scenes. the behind be all
be must child, a from Fairfax Miss known have who you, But outwardly.
conduct to likely is she how of and character, her of judge better a
be.” can I than situations, critical in herself

children been have we undoubtedly; child, a from her known have “I
be should we that suppose to natural is it and together; women and
visited she whenever other each to taken have should we intimate,--that
a happened; has it how know hardly I did. never we But friends. her
take to prone was which side my on wickedness that from perhaps, little,
was, always she as up cried so and idolized so girl a towards disgust
reserve--I her then, And set. their all and grandmother, and aunt her by
reserved.” completely so one any to myself attach could never

very “Oftentimes he. said indeed,” quality, repulsive most a is “It
reserve, in safety is There pleasing. never but doubt, no convenient,
person.” reserved a love cannot One attraction. no but

attraction the then and oneself; towards ceases reserve the till “Not
an or friend, a of want in more be must I But greater. the be may
of trouble the take to been, yet have I than companion, agreeable
Miss between Intimacy one. procure to reserve body’s any conquering
think to reason no have I question. the of out quite is me and Fairfax
perpetual and extreme such that least--except the her--not of ill
idea distinct a giving of dread a such manner, and word of cautiousness
to something being there of suspicions suggest to apt is body, any about
conceal.”

and long, so together walking after and her: with agreed perfectly He
him, with acquainted well so herself felt Emma alike, much so thinking
was He meeting. second their only be to it believe hardly could she that
some in world the of man the of less expected; had she what exactly not
better therefore fortune, of child spoiled the of less notions, his of
feelings moderate--his more seemed ideas His expected. had she than
Mr. considering of manner his by struck particularly was She warmer.
at, look and go would he church, the as well as which, house, Elton’s
not could he No, with. fault much finding in them join not would and
for pitied be to was man a as house a such not house; bad a it believe
not could he loved, he woman the with shared be to were it If having.
ample be must There house. that having for pitied be to man any think
who blockhead a be must man The comfort. real every for it in room
more. wanted

about. talking was he what know not did he said and laughed, Weston Mrs.
many how thinking ever without and himself, house large a to only Used
no be could he size, its to attached were accommodations and advantages
Emma, But one. small a to belonging inevitably privations the of judge
talking was he what know _did_ he that determined mind, own her in
in early settle to inclination amiable very a shewed he that and about,
the of aware be not might He motives. worthy from marry, to and life,
or room, housekeeper’s no by occasioned be to peace domestic on inroads
Enscombe that feel perfectly did he doubt no but pantry, butler’s bad a
would he attached, were he whenever that and happy, him make not could
establishment. early an allowed be to wealth of much up give willingly



VII CHAPTER


the shaken little a was Churchill Frank of opinion good very Emma’s
have to merely London, to off gone was he that hearing by day, following
and breakfast, at him seized have to seemed freak sudden A cut. hair his
dinner, to return to intending off, set and chaise a for sent had he
cut. hair his having than appeared that view important more no with but
over twice miles sixteen travelling his in harm no certainly was There
it in nonsense and foppery of air an was there but errand; an such on
of rationality the with accord not did It approve. not could she which
heart, of warmth unselfish the even or expense, in moderation the plan,
Vanity, yesterday. him in discern to herself believed had she which
be must which temper, of restlessness change, of love extravagance,
his of pleasure the to as heedlessness bad; or good something, doing
appear might conduct his how to as indifferent Weston, Mrs. and father
only father His charges. these all to liable became he general; in
Mrs. that but story; good very a it thought and coxcomb, a him called
as over it passing her by enough, clear was it, like not did Weston
young “all that than comment other no making and possible, as quickly
whims.” little their have would people

visit his that found Emma blot, little this of exception the With
Weston Mrs. him. of ideas good only friend her given had hitherto
made he companion a pleasant and attentive how say to ready very was
He altogether. disposition his in like to saw she much himself--how
and cheerful very a temper--certainly open very a have to appeared
deal great a notions, his in wrong nothing observe could she one; lively
of fond was regard, warm with uncle his of spoke he right; decidedly
were he if world the in man best the be would he him--said of talking
he aunt, the to attached being no was there though and himself; to left
to always mean to seemed and gratitude, with kindness her acknowledged
for but and, promising; very all was This respect. with her of speak
to nothing was there cut, hair his having for fancy unfortunate an such
imagination her which honour distinguished the of unworthy him denote
her, with love in really being of not if honour, the him; given had
own her by only saved and it, near very least at being of
marrying)--the never of held resolution her still indifference--(for
joint their all by her for out marked being of short, in honour,
acquaintance.

must which account the to virtue a added side, his on Weston, Mr.
her admired Frank that understand to her gave He weight. some have
so with and charming; very and beautiful very her extremely--thought
him judge not must she found she altogether, him for said be to much
their have would people young “all observed, Weston Mrs. As harshly.
whims.” little

so not Surry, in acquaintance new his among person one was There
of parishes the throughout judged, was he general In disposed. leniently
made were allowances liberal candour; great with Highbury, and Donwell
so smiled who man--one young handsome a such of excesses little the for
be to not them among spirit one was there but well; so bowed and often
Knightley. smiles--Mr. or bows by censure, of power its from softened,
was he moment, the for Hartfield; at him told was circumstance The
himself, to say afterwards immediately almost him heard Emma but silent;
silly trifling, the just “Hum! hand, his in held he newspaper a over
instant’s an but resent; to mind a half had She for.” him took I fellow
his relieve to only said really was it that her convinced observation
pass. it let she therefore and provoke; to meant not and feelings, own

and Mr. tidings, good not of bearers the instance one in Although
particularly respect another in was morning this visit Weston’s Mrs.
Emma make to Hartfield, at were they while occurred Something opportune.
exactly wanted she lucky, more still was which and, advice; their want
gave. they advice the

in years some settled been had Coles occurrence:--The the was This
and liberal, people--friendly, of sort good very were and Highbury,
trade, in origin, low of were they hand, other the on but, unpretending;
country, the into coming first their On genteel. moderately only and
little keeping quietly, income, their to proportion in lived had they
had two or year last the but unexpensively; little that and company,
had town in house means--the of increase considerable a them brought
With them. on smiled had general in fortune and profits, greater yielded
their house, larger a of want their increased; views their wealth, their
number their to house, their to added They company. more for inclination
were, time this by and sort; every of expenses their to servants, of
Hartfield. at family the to only second living, of style and fortune in
body every prepared dining-room, new their and society, of love Their
the among chiefly parties, few a and dinner-company; keeping their for
Emma families best and regular The place. taken already had men, single
nor Donwell, invite--neither to presume would they suppose hardly could
did; they if go, to _her_ tempt should Nothing Randalls. nor Hartfield,
giving be would habits known father’s her that regretted she and
very were Coles The wish. could she than meaning less refusal her
not was it that taught be to ought they but way, their in respectable
visit would families superior the which on terms the arrange to them for
from only receive would they feared, much very she lesson, This them.
Weston. Mr. of none Knightley, Mr. of hope little had she herself;

weeks many so presumption this meet to how mind her up made had she But
her found it last, at came insult the when that appeared, it before
their received had Randalls and Donwell affected. differently very
Mrs. and herself; and father her for come had none and invitation,
the take not will they suppose “I with it for accounting Weston’s
quite not was out,” dine not do you know they you; with liberty
of power the had have to like should she that felt She sufficient.
there, assembled be to party the of idea the as afterwards, and refusal;
occurred her, to dearest was society whose those of precisely consisting
tempted been have not might she that know not did she again, and again
They Bateses. the and evening, the in there be to was Harriet accept. to
before, day the Highbury about walked they as it of speaking been had
Might absence. her lamented earnestly most had Churchill Frank and
bare The his. of question a been had dance? a in end evening the not
and spirits; her on irritation farther a as acted it of possibility
be to omission the supposing even grandeur, solitary in left being her
comfort. poor but was compliment, a as intended

at were Westons the while invitation very this of arrival the was It
first her though for acceptable; so presence their made which Hartfield,
so she declined,” be must it course “of that was it, reading on remark,
their that do, to her advised they what them ask to proceeded soon very
successful. and prompt most was going her for advice

absolutely not was she thing, every considering that, owned She
so themselves expressed Coles The party. the for inclination without
much it--so of manner the in attention real much so was properly--there
honour the solicited have would “They father. her for consideration
from folding-screen a of arrival the waiting been had but earlier,
of draught any from Woodhouse Mr. keep might hoped they which London,
honour the them give to readily more the him induce therefore and air,
being it and persuadable; very was she whole, the Upon company.” his of
neglecting without done be might it how themselves among settled briefly
be might Bates, Mrs. not if Goddard, Mrs. certainly comfort--how his
talked be to was Woodhouse company--Mr. him bearing for on depended
now day a on dinner to out going daughter’s his of acquiescence an into
_his_ for As him. from away evening whole the spending and hand, at near
be would hours the possible, it think to him wish not did Emma going,
resigned. well pretty soon was He numerous. too party the and late, too

is more No was. never he--“I said dinner-visiting,” of fond not am “I
Cole Mrs. and Mr. sorry am I us. with agree not do hours Late Emma.
come would they if better much be would it think I it. done have should
us us--take with tea their take and summer, next afternoon one in
so are hours our as do, might they which walk; afternoon their in
the of damp the in out being without home get yet and reasonable,
any expose not would I what are evening summer a of dews The evening.
dine Emma dear have to desirous very so are they as However, to. body
take to too, Knightley Mr. and there, be both will you as and them, with
what be weather the provided it, prevent to wish cannot I her, of care
Mrs. to turning Then windy.” nor cold, nor damp, neither ought, it
not had you if Taylor, Miss reproach--“Ah! gentle of look a with Weston,
me.” with home at staid have would you married,

is it away, Taylor Miss took I “as Weston, Mr. cried sir,” “Well,
Mrs. to step will I and can; I if place, her supply to me on incumbent
it.” wish you if moment, a in Goddard

increasing, was _moment_, a in done be to thing any of idea the But
how better knew ladies The agitation. Woodhouse’s Mr. lessening, not
deliberately thing every and quiet, be must Weston Mr. it. allay to
arranged.

talking for enough composed soon was Woodhouse Mr. treatment, this With
regard great a had He Goddard. Mrs. see to happy be should “He usual. as
James her. invite and line, a write should Emma and Goddard; Mrs. for
written answer an be must there all, of first But note. the take could
Cole.” Mrs. to

say will You possible. as civilly as dear, my excuses, my make will “You
decline must therefore and where, no go and invalid, an quite am I that
course. of _compliments_, my with beginning invitation; obliging their
be to is what you tell not need I right. thing every do will you But
be will carriage the that know James let to remember must We done.
never have We him. with you for fears no have shall I Tuesday. on wanted
have I still but made; was approach new the since once above there been
there, get you when And safely. very you take will James that doubt no
again; you for come him have would you time what at him tell must you
late. staying like not will You hour. early an name better had you and
over.” is tea when tired very get will You

papa?” tired, am I before away come to me wish not would you “But

many great a be will There tired. be soon will you but love; my no, “Oh!
noise.” the like not will You once. at talking people

will it early, away comes Emma “if Weston, Mr. cried sir,” dear my “But,
party.” the up breaking be

every sooner “The Woodhouse. Mr. said does,” it if harm great no “And
better.” the up, breaks party

going Emma’s Coles. the to appear may it how consider not do you “But
good-natured are They offence. giving be might tea after directly away
must they still but claims; own their of little think and people,
Miss and compliment; great no is away hurrying body’s any that feel
in person’s other any than of thought more be would it doing Woodhouse’s
am I Coles, the mortify and disappoint to wish not would You room. the
have who and lived, ever as people of sort good friendly, sir; sure,
years.” _ten_ these neighbours your been

to obliged much am I Weston; Mr. world, the in account no upon “No,
any them giving be to sorry extremely be should I me. reminding for you
Cole Mr. that me tells Perry are. they people worthy what know I pain.
but him, at look to it think not would You liquor. malt touches never
means the be not would I No, bilious. very is Cole bilious--Mr. is he
sure, am I this. consider must we Emma, dear My pain. any them giving of
a stay would you Cole, Mrs. and Mr. hurting of risk the run than rather
You tired. being regard not will You wish. might you than longer little
friends.” your among know, you safe, perfectly be will

no have should I and myself; for all at fears no have I papa. yes, “Oh
am I account. your on but Weston, Mrs. as late as staying of scruples
being not your of afraid not am I me. for up sitting your of afraid only
you piquet, loves She Goddard. Mrs. with comfortable exceedingly
by up sitting be will you afraid am I home, gone is she when but know;
of idea the time--and usual your at bed to going of instead yourself,
sit to not me promise must You comfort. my destroy entirely would that
up.”

that, as such side: her on promises some of condition the on did, He
if thoroughly; herself warm to sure be would she cold, home came she if
should maid own her that eat; to something take would she that hungry,
every that see should butler the and Serle that and her; for up sit
usual. as house, the in safe were thing



VIII CHAPTER


dinner father’s his kept he if and again; back came Churchill Frank
anxious too was Weston Mrs. for Hartfield; at known not was it waiting,
imperfection any betray to Woodhouse, Mr. with favourite a being his for
concealed. be could which

very a with himself at laughed and cut, hair his had had back, came He
had he what of ashamed all at really seeming without but grace, good
confusion any conceal to longer, hair his wish to reason no had He done.
spirits. his improve to unspent, money the wish to reason no face; of
him, seeing after and, ever; as lively as and undaunted as quite was He
herself:-- to moralised thus Emma

things silly certainly but so, be to ought it whether know not do “I
impudent an in people sensible by done are they if silly be to cease do
folly.--It always not is folly but wickedness, always is Wickedness way.
is he Knightley, Mr. it. handle who those of character the upon depends
this done have would he were, he If man. young silly trifling, a _not_
or achievement, the in gloried have either would He differently.
of ostentation the either been have would There it. of ashamed been
own its defend to weak too mind a of evasions the or coxcomb, a
silly.” or trifling not is he that sure perfectly am I vanities.--No,

for and again, him seeing of prospect agreeable the came Tuesday With
by and manners, general his of judging of hitherto; than time longer a
guessing of herself; towards manners his of meaning the of inference,
air; her into coldness throw to her for necessary be might it soon how
were who be, might those all of observations the what fancying of and
time. first the for together them seeing now

Mr. at laid being scene the of spite in happy, very be to meant She
Mr. of failings the among that forget to able being without and Cole’s;
than more her disturbed had none favour, his of days the in even Elton,
Cole. Mr. with dine to propensity his

Mrs. as well as Bates Mrs. secured, amply was comfort father’s Her
left she before duty, pleasing last her and come; to able being Goddard
after together sat they as them to respects her pay to was house, the
her of beauty the noticing fondly was father her while and dinner;
helping by power, her in amends the all ladies two the make to dress,
whatever for wine, of glasses full and cake of slices large to them
obliged have might constitution their of care his self-denial unwilling
dinner plentiful a provided had meal.--She the during practise to them
eat to allowed been had they that know could she wished she them; for
it.

see to pleased was and door; Cole’s Mr. to carriage another followed She
horses, no keeping Knightley Mr. for Knightley’s; Mr. was it that
and activity, health, of deal great a and money spare little having
could, he as about get to opinion, Emma’s in apt, too was independence,
Abbey. Donwell of owner the became as often so carriage his use not and
from warm while approbation her speaking of now opportunity an had She
out. her hand to stopped he for heart, her

am gentleman.--I a “like she; said do,” should you as coming is “This
you.” see to glad quite

same the at arrive should we that lucky “How observing, her, thanked He
whether doubt I drawing-room, the in first met had we if for, moment!
usual.--You than gentleman a of more be to me discerned have would you
manner.” or look my by came, I how distinguished have not might

of look a always is There should. I sure am I should, I “Yes
be to know they which way a in come people when bustle or consciousness
but say, dare I well, very off it carry you think You them. beneath
always I unconcern; affected of air an bravado, of sort a is it you with
have you _Now_ circumstances. those under you meet I whenever it observe
You ashamed. supposed being of afraid not are You for. try to nothing
really shall I _Now_ else. body any than taller look to striving not are
you.” with room same the into walk to happy very be

anger. in all at not but reply, his was girl!” “Nonsensical

as party the of rest the with satisfied be to reason much as had Emma
could which respect cordial a with received was She Knightley. Mr. with
for. wish could she consequence the all given and please, but not
of strongest the love, of looks kindest the arrived, Westons the When
approached son the wife; and husband both from her, for were admiration
object, peculiar his as her marked which eagerness cheerful a with her
believed, firmly she as her--and, by seated him found she dinner at and
side. his on dexterity some without not

proper a family, other one included it as large, rather was party The
of advantage the had Coles the whom family, country unobjectionable
family, Cox’s Mr. of part male the and acquaintance, their among naming
the in come to were females worthy less The Highbury. of lawyer the
already, but Smith; Miss and Fairfax, Miss Bates, Miss with evening,
be to conversation of subject any for numerous too were they dinner, at
could Emma over, talked were Elton Mr. and politics while and, general;
neighbour. her of pleasantness the to attention her all surrender fairly
was attend, to obliged herself felt she which to sound remote first The
of something relating be to seemed Cole Mrs. Fairfax. Jane of name the
found and listened, She interesting. very be to expected was that her
fancy, her Emma, of part dear very That to. listening worth well it
been had she that telling was Cole Mrs. supply. amusing an received
had room the entered she as soon as and Bates, Miss on calling
looking elegant very pianoforte--a a of sight the by struck been
the and pianoforte; square large-sized a but grand, a instrument--not
of ensued which dialogue the all of end the story, the of substance
explanations and side, her on congratulations and inquiry, and surprize,
from arrived had pianoforte this that was, Bates’s, Miss on
and aunt both of astonishment great the to before, day the Broadwood’s
account, Bates’s Miss by first, at that unexpected; niece--entirely
could who think to bewildered quite loss, a at quite was herself Jane
satisfied perfectly both were they now, it--but ordered have possibly
from be must it course quarter;--of one only from be could it that
Campbell. Colonel

only was I “and Cole, Mrs. added else,” nothing suppose can “One
seems, it Jane, But doubt. a been have ever could there that surprized
it. about said was word a not and lately, very them from letter a had
as silence their consider not should I but best; ways their knows She
chuse might They present. the make to meaning not their for reason any
her.” surprize to

the on spoke who body every her; with agree to many had Cole Mrs.
Campbell, Colonel from come must it that convinced equally was subject
were there and made; been had present a such that rejoiced equally and
still and way, own her think to Emma allow to speak to ready enough
Cole. Mrs. to listen

me given has that thing any heard have I when know not do I declare, “I
who Fairfax, Jane that me hurt quite has always satisfaction!--It more
quite seemed It instrument. an have not should delightfully, so plays
fine where are there houses many how considering especially shame, a
ourselves giving like is This away. thrown absolutely are instruments
Cole, Mr. telling was I yesterday but was it and sure! be to slap, a
the in pianoforte grand new our at look to ashamed was really I
little our and another, from note one know not do I while drawing-room,
of thing any make never may perhaps beginning, just but are who girls,
not has music, of mistress is who Fairfax, Jane poor is there and it;
old pitifullest the even not instrument, an of nature the of thing any
to this saying was with.--I herself amuse to world, the in spinet
so is he only me; with agreed quite he and yesterday, but Cole Mr.
himself indulging help not could he that music of fond particularly
so be might neighbours good our of some that hoping purchase, the in
that and can; we than use better a to it put to occasionally obliging
sure am I else bought--or was instrument the why reason the is really
Woodhouse Miss that hopes great in are it.--We of ashamed be to ought we
evening.” this it try to with prevailed be may

nothing that finding and acquiescence; proper the made Woodhouse Miss
turned Cole’s, Mrs. of communication any from entrapped be to was more
Churchill. Frank to

she. said smile?” you do “Why

you?” do why “Nay,

rich so being Campbell’s Colonel at pleasure for smile I suppose “Me!--I
present.” handsome a is liberal.--It so and

“Very.”

before.” made never was it that wonder rather “I

before.” long so here staying been never has Fairfax Miss “Perhaps

must instrument--which own their of use the her give not did he that “Or
body.” any by untouched London, in up shut be now

Mrs. for large too it think might he and pianoforte, grand a is “That
house.” Bates’s

your that testifies countenance your chuse--but you what _say_ may “You
mine.” like much very are subject this on _thoughts_

for credit more me giving are you believe rather I know. not do “I
probably shall and smile, you because smile I deserve. I than acuteness
what see not do I present at but suspect; you find I whatever suspect
can who person, the not is Campbell Colonel If question. to is there
be?”

Dixon?” Mrs. to say you do “What

must She Dixon. Mrs. of thought not had I indeed. true very Dixon! “Mrs.
and be; would instrument an acceptable how father, her as well as know
young a like more is surprize, the mystery, the it, of mode the perhaps
I say. dare I Dixon, Mrs. is It man’s. elderly an than scheme woman’s
mine.” guide would suspicions your that you told

in Dixon _Mr_. comprehend and suspicions your extend must you so, “If
them.”

the be must it that perceive immediately I Yes, well. Dixon.--Very “Mr.
you day, other the speaking were We Dixon. Mrs. and Mr. of present joint
performance.” her of admirer an warm so being his of know,

had I which idea an confirmed head, that on me told you what and “Yes,
intentions good the upon reflect to mean not do before.--I entertained
either suspecting help cannot I but Fairfax, Miss or Dixon Mr. either of
misfortune the had he friend, her to proposals his making after that,
little a of conscious became he that or _her_, with love in fall to
guessing without things twenty guess might One side. her on attachment
for cause particular a be must there sure am I but right; the exactly
Campbells the with going of instead Highbury to come to chusing her
penance; and privation of life a leading be must she Here, Ireland. to
her trying of pretence the to As enjoyment. all been have would it there
might it summer the excuse.--In mere a as that upon look I air, native
the in them for do air native body’s any can what but passed; have
would carriages and fires Good March? and February, January, of months
dare I and health, delicate of cases most in purpose the to more much be
though suspicions, my all adopt to you require not do I her’s. in say
what you tell honestly I but it, doing of profession a noble so make you
are.” they

Dixon’s Mr. probability. great of air an have they word, my upon “And,
very being for answer can I friend’s, her to music her of preference
decided.”

water that?--A of hear ever you Did life. her saved he then, “And
her.” caught He overboard. falling was she accident some by and party;

party.” the of there--one was I did. “He

it for course, of nothing observed you really?--Well!--But you “Were
should I think I there, been had I you.--If to idea new a be to seems
discoveries.” some made have

that fact, the but nothing saw I, simple I, but would; you say dare “I
caught Dixon Mr. that and vessel the from dashed nearly was Fairfax Miss
and shock consequent the though And moment. a of work the was her.--It
was it believe I durable--indeed more much and great very was alarm
too was that again--yet comfortable were us of any before hour an half
be to anxiety peculiar of thing any for sensation a general
made have not might you that however, say, to mean not do I observable.
discoveries.”

share to on called were They interrupted. here was conversation The
and courses, the between interval long rather a of awkwardness the in
table the when but others; the as orderly as and formal as be to obliged
exactly placed was dish corner every when covered, safely again was
said, Emma restored, generally were ease and occupation and right,

know to wanted I me. with decisive is pianoforte this of arrival “The
shall we it, upon Depend enough. quite me tells this and more, little a
Dixon.” Mrs. and Mr. from present a is it that hear soon

must we it of knowledge all deny absolutely should Dixons the if “And
Campbells.” the from come to it conclude

is it knows Fairfax Miss Campbells. the from not is it sure am I “No,
She first. at guessed been have would they or Campbells, the from not
have not may I them. on fix dared she had puzzled, been have not would
Mr. that myself convinced perfectly am I but perhaps, you convinced
business.” the in principal a is Dixon

reasonings Your unconvinced. me suppose you if me injure you “Indeed
supposed I while first, At entirely. them with along judgment my carry
as only it saw I giver, the was Campbell Colonel that satisfied you
world. the in thing natural most the it thought and kindness, paternal
it that probable more much how felt I Dixon, Mrs. mentioned you when But
in it see can I now And friendship. female warm of tribute the be should
love.” of offering an as than light other no

seemed conviction The farther. matter the press to occasion no was There
subjects other more, no said She it. felt he if as looked he real;
dessert the away; passed dinner the of rest the and turn; their took
the amid admired and to talked were and in, came children the succeeded,
downright few a said, things clever few a conversation; of rate usual
the nor one the neither proportion larger the much by but silly,
news, old repetitions, dull remarks, everyday than worse other--nothing
jokes. heavy and

other the before drawing-room, the in long been not had ladies The
entree the watched Emma arrived. divisions, different their in ladies,
her in exult not could she if and friend; little particular own her of
and sweetness blooming the love only not could she grace, and dignity
light, that in rejoice heartily most could but manner, artless the
many so her allowed which disposition unsentimental cheerful,
disappointed of pangs the of midst the in pleasure, of alleviations
she tears many how guessed have would who sat--and she There affection.
and herself dressed nicely company, in be To shedding? lately been had
say and pretty, look and smile and sit to dressed, nicely others seeing
Fairfax Jane hour. present the of happiness the for enough was nothing,
been have might she suspected Emma but superior; move and look did
the purchased have to glad very Harriet, with feelings change to glad
in Elton Mr. even loved having of loved--yes, having of mortification
herself knowing of pleasure dangerous the all of surrender the vain--by
friend. her of husband the by beloved

her. approach should Emma that necessary not was it party a large so In
the in much too felt she pianoforte, the of speak to wish not did She
fair, interest or curiosity of appearance the think to herself, secret
the others, the by but distance; a at kept purposely therefore and
of blush the saw she and introduced, immediately almost was subject
blush the received, were congratulations which with consciousness
Colonel friend excellent “my of name the accompanied which guilt of
Campbell.”

interested particularly was musical, and kind-hearted Weston, Mrs.
her at amused being help not could Emma and circumstance, the by
and ask to much so having and subject; the on dwelling in perseverance
wish that of unsuspicious totally pedal, and touch, tone, to as say to
the in read plainly she which possible, as it about little as saying of
countenance. heroine’s fair

first very the and gentlemen; the of some by joined soon were They
the and first the walked, he In Churchill. Frank was early the of
Bates Miss to passant en compliments his paying after and handsomest;
circle, the of side opposite the to directly way his made niece, her and
would her, by seat a find could he till and Woodhouse; Miss sat where
thinking. be must present body every what divined Emma all. at sit not
him introduced She it. perceive must body every and object, his was She
heard afterwards, moments convenient at and, Smith, Miss friend, her to
and face, a lovely so seen never had “He other. the of thought each what
paying was it sure be to “Only she, And naivete.” her with delighted was
a looks some were there think did she but compliment, a great too him
turned only and indignation, her restrained Emma Elton.” Mr. like little
silence. in her from

first on gentleman the and her between passed intelligence of Smiles
speech. avoid to prudent most was it but Fairfax; Miss towards glancing
dining-room--hated the leave to impatient been had he that her told He
his could--that he when move to first the always long--was sitting
over busy very left were Cole, Mr. and Cox, Mr. Knightley, Mr. father,
been had it however, staid, had he as long as business--that parish
gentlemanlike, of set a general in them found had he as enough, pleasant
it altogether--thought Highbury of handsomely so spoke and men; sensible
been had she feel to began Emma families--that agreeable in abundant so
the to as him questioned She much. too rather place the despise to used
Enscombe, about neighbourhood the of extent Yorkshire--the in society
as far as that, answers his from out make could and sort; the and
their that on, going little very was there concerned, was Enscombe
and near; very none families, great of range a among were visitings
even an was it accepted, invitations and fixed, were days when even that
going; for spirits and health in not were Churchill Mrs. that chance
though that, and person; fresh no visiting of point a made they that
without difficulty, without not was it engagements, separate his had he
introduce or away, get could he that _times_, _at_ address considerable
night. a for acquaintance an

at taken Highbury, that and satisfy, not could Enscombe that saw She
at retirement more had who man young a please reasonably might best, its
did He evident. very was Enscombe at importance His liked. he than home
his persuaded had he that itself, betrayed naturally it but boast, not
noticing and laughing her on and nothing, do could uncle his where aunt
could he points) two or one (excepting believed he that owned he it,
which on points those of One thing. any to her persuade _time_ _with_
to much very wanted had He mentioned. then he failed, influence his
she travel--but to allowed be to indeed eager very been abroad--had go
said, he _Now_, before. year the happened had This it. of hear not would
wish. same the longer no have to beginning was he

be to guessed Emma mention, not did he which point, unpersuadable The
father. his to behaviour good

pause.-- short a after he, said discovery,” wretched most a made have “I
fly days knew never I time. my to-morrow--half week a here been have “I
myself. enjoy to begun hardly have I to-morrow!--And week A fast. so
the hate others!--I and Weston, Mrs. with acquainted got just But
recollection.”

out day, whole one spent you that regret to begin now may you “Perhaps
cut.” hair your having in few, so of

have I all. at regret of subject no is “that smiling, he, said “No,”
be to fit myself believe can I unless friends, my seeing in pleasure no
seen.”

herself found Emma room, the in now being gentlemen the of rest The
When Cole. Mr. to listen and minutes, few a for him from turn to obliged
before, as restored be could attention her and away, moved had Cole Mr.
Miss at room the across intently looking Churchill Frank saw she
opposite. exactly sitting was who Fairfax,

she. said matter?” the is “What

have I believe “I replied. he me,” rousing for you “Thank started. He
a odd so in hair her done has Fairfax Miss really but rude; very been
saw never I her. from eyes my keep cannot I way--that a odd very way--so
I own. her of fancy a be must curls!--This outree!--Those so thing any
it whether her ask and go must her!--I like looking else nobody see
you will--and I declare will--I I I?--Yes, Shall fashion. Irish an is
colours.” she it;--whether takes she how see shall

Miss before standing him saw soon Emma and immediately; gone was He
lady, young the on effect its to as but her; to talking and Fairfax,
in exactly them, between exactly himself placed improvidently had he as
nothing. distinguish absolutely could she Fairfax, Miss of front

Weston. Mrs. by taken was it chair, his to return could he Before

near get can she:--“one said party,” large a of luxury the is “This
talk to longing am I Emma, dear My thing. every say and body, every
like just plans, forming and discoveries making been have I you. to
how know you Do fresh. is idea the while them tell must I and yourself,
here?” came niece her and Bates Miss

they?” not were invited, were “How?--They

their of manner hither?--the conveyed were they how yes--but “Oh!
coming?”

come?” they could else How conclude. I walked, “They

sad very how me to occurred it ago while little a true.--Well, “Very
and night, at late again, home walking Fairfax Jane have to be would it
saw never I though her, at looked I as And now. are nights the as cold
and heated, was she that me struck it advantage, more to appear her
could I girl! Poor cold. take to liable particularly be therefore would
room, the into came Weston Mr. as soon as so, it; of idea the bear not
guess may You carriage. the about him to spoke I him, at get could I and
made I approbation, his having and wishes; my into came he readily how
be would carriage the that her assure to Bates, Miss to directly way my
making be would it thought I for home; us took it before service her at
you possible, as grateful as was she soul! Good once. at comfortable her
many, with herself!’--but as fortunate so ever was ‘Nobody sure. be may
Knightley’s Mr. for us, trouble to occasion no was thanks--‘there many
quite was I again.’ home them take to was and brought, had carriage
a Such surprized. quite really but sure; am I glad, surprized;--very
thing of sort attention!--the an thoughtful so attention--and kind very
his knowing from short, in And, of. think would men few so that
their for was it that think to inclined much very am I ways, usual
not would he suspect do I all. at used was carriage the accommodation
excuse an as only was it that and himself, for horses of pair a had have
them.” assisting for

more man no know I likely. more Emma--“nothing said likely,” “Very
thing any do thing--to of sort the do to Knightley Mr. than likely
a not is He benevolent. or considerate, useful, good-natured, really
Jane considering this, and one; humane very a is he but man, gallant
for him;--and to humanity of case a appear would ill-health, Fairfax’s
on fix would I whom nobody is there kindness, unostentatious of act an
arrived we to-day--for horses had he know I Knightley. Mr. on than more
that word a not said he but it, about him at laughed I and together;
betray.” could

simple, more for credit him give “you smiling, Weston, Mrs. said “Well,”
Miss while for do; I than instance this in benevolence disinterested
never have I and head, my into darted suspicion a speaking, was Bates
probable more the it, of think I more The again. out it get to able been
Jane and Knightley Mr. between match a made have I short, In appears. it
to say you do company!--What you keeping of consequence the See Fairfax.
it?”

how Weston, Mrs. “Dear Emma. exclaimed Fairfax!” Jane and Knightley “Mr.
not must Knightley Knightley!--Mr. thing?--Mr. a such of think you could
no, Donwell?--Oh! from out cut Henry little have not would marry!--You
Knightley’s Mr. to consent all at cannot I Donwell. have must Henry no,
you that amazed am I likely. all at not is it sure am I and marrying;
thing.” a such of think should

want not do I it. of think to me led what you told have I Emma, dear “My
has idea the Henry--but little dear injure to want not do match--I the
to wished really Knightley Mr. if and circumstances; by me given been
six of boy a account, Henry’s on refrain him have not would you marry,
matter?” the of nothing knows who old, years

supplanted.--Mr. Henry have to bear not could I would. I “Yes,
adopt cannot I and idea, an such had never have I marry!--No, Knightley
women!” all of too, Fairfax, Jane And now. it

well very you as him, with favourite first a been always has she “Nay,
know.”

match!” a such of imprudence the “But

probability.” its merely prudence; its of speaking not am “I

than foundation better any have you unless it, in probability no see “I
would you, tell I as humanity, his good-nature, His mention. you what
the for regard great a has He horses. the for account to enough quite be
to glad always is Fairfax--and Jane of independent know, you Bateses,
match-making. to take not do Weston, Mrs. dear My attention. them shew
no, Abbey!--Oh! the of mistress Fairfax Jane ill. very it do You
so do him have not would I sake, own his For revolts. feeling no;--every
thing.” a mad

fortune, of inequality Excepting mad. not please--but you if “Imprudent,
unsuitable.” nothing see can I age, of disparity little a perhaps and

the not has he sure am I marry. to want not does Knightley Mr. “But
marry?--He he should Why head. his into it put not Do it. of idea least
and sheep, his and farm, his with himself; by possible as happy as is
of fond extremely is he and manage; to parish the all and library, his
up fill to either marry, to occasion no has He children. brother’s his
heart.” his or time his

loves really he if but so; is it so, thinks he as long as Emma, dear “My
Fairfax--” Jane

am I love, of way the In Fairfax. Jane about care not does He “Nonsense!
but--” family; her or her, to good any do would He not. does he sure

could he good greatest the “perhaps laughing, Weston, Mrs. said “Well,”
home.” respectable a such Jane give to be would them, do

a himself; to evil be would it sure am I her, to good be would it “If
Miss have to bear he would How connexion. degrading and shameful very
thanking and Abbey, the haunting her have him?--To to belonging Bates
very Jane?--‘So marrying in kindness great his for long day all him
neighbour!’ kind very a such been had always he obliging!--But and kind
old mother’s her to sentence, a half through off, fly then And
still either--for petticoat old very a such was it that ‘Not petticoat.
that say thankfully must she indeed, while--and, great a last would it
strong.’” very all were petticoats their

conscience. my against me divert You her. mimic not Do Emma! shame, “For
disturbed much be would Knightley Mr. think not do I word, my upon And,
and on; talk might She him. irritate not do things Little Bates. Miss by
and louder, talk only would he himself, thing any say to wanted he if
bad a be would it whether not, is question the But voice. her drown
have I does. he think I and it; wishes he whether but him, for connexion
The Fairfax! Jane of highly very so you, must so and speak, him heard
that concern health--his her about anxiety her--his in takes he interest
himself express him heard have I prospect! happier no have should she
the on performance her of admirer an points!--Such those on warmly so
listen could he that say him heard have I voice! her of and pianoforte,
occurred that idea one forgotten almost had I and Oh! ever. for her to
somebody--though by here sent been has that pianoforte me--this to
the from present a it consider to satisfied well so been all have we
suspecting help cannot I Knightley? Mr. from be not it may Campbells,
in being without even it, do to person the just is he think I him.
love.”

not do I But love. in is he that prove to argument no be can it “Then
does Knightley Mr. do. to him for thing likely a all at is it think
mysteriously.” nothing

oftener repeatedly; instrument no having her lamenting him heard have “I
of course common the in would, circumstance a such suppose should I than
him.” to occur things,

told have would he one, her give to intended had he if and well; “Very
so.” her

strong very a have I Emma. dear my delicacy, of scruples be might “There
when silent particularly was he sure am I him. from comes it that notion
dinner.” at it of us told Cole Mrs.

have you as it; with away run and Weston, Mrs. idea, an up take “You
attachment--I of sign no see I doing. with me reproached time a many
that me convince shall only proof pianoforte--and the of nothing believe
Fairfax.” Jane marrying of thought any has Knightley Mr.

rather Emma way; same the in longer time some point the combated They
most the was Weston Mrs. for friend; her of mind the over ground gaining
them shewed room the in bustle little a till yield; to two the of used
same the at preparation;--and in instrument the and over, was tea that
the them do would Woodhouse Miss entreat to approaching Cole Mr. moment
her of eagerness the in whom, of Churchill, Frank it. trying of honour
that except nothing, seeing been had she Weston, Mrs. with conversation
very his add to Cole, Mr. followed Fairfax, Miss by seat a found had he
to best Emma suited it respect, every in as, and entreaties; pressing
compliance. proper very a gave she lead,

than more attempt to well too powers own her of limitations the knew She
in spirit nor taste neither wanted she credit; with perform could she
accompany could and acceptable, generally are which things little the
by agreeably her took song her to accompaniment One well. voice own her
Her Churchill. Frank by taken correctly but slightly second, surprize--a
usual thing every and song, the of close the at begged duly was pardon
perfect a and voice, delightful a having of accused was He followed.
nothing knew he that and denied; properly was which music; of knowledge
sang They asserted. roundly all, at voice no had and matter, the of
Miss to place her resign then would Emma and more; once together
could never she instrumental, and vocal both performance, whose Fairfax,
own. her to superior infinitely was herself, from conceal to attempt

the from distance little a at herself seated she feelings, mixed With
again. sang Churchill Frank listen. to instrument, the round numbers
the But Weymouth. at appeared, it twice, or once together sung had They
half away drew soon attentive, most the among Knightley Mr. of sight
of subject the on thinking of train a into fell she and mind; Emma’s
voices united the of sounds sweet the which to suspicions, Weston’s Mrs.
Knightley’s Mr. to objections Her interruptions. momentary only gave
evil but nothing see could She subside. least the in not did marrying
Knightley; John Mr. to disappointment great a be would It it. in
most children--a the to injury real A Isabella. to consequently
great very all;--a them to loss material and change, mortifying
could she herself, to as comfort--and, daily father’s her from deduction
Mrs. A Abbey. Donwell at Fairfax Jane of idea the endure all at not
never must Knightley to!--No--Mr. way give to all them for Knightley
Donwell. of heir the remain must Henry Little marry.

They her. by down sat and came and back, looked Knightley Mr. Presently
certainly was admiration His performance. the of only first at talked
have not would it Weston, Mrs. for but thought, she yet warm; very
his of speak to began she however, touchstone, of sort a As her. struck
in was answer his though and niece; and aunt the conveying in kindness
only indicate to it believed she short, matter the cutting of spirit the
own. his of kindness any on dwell to disinclination his

carriage our make not dare I “that she, said concern,” feel often “I
but wish; the without am I that not is It occasions. such on useful more
put-to should James that it deem would father my impossible how know you
purpose.” a such for

he question,” the of out quite question, the of out “Quite
with smiled he And sure.” am I it, wish often must you replied;--“but
another proceed must she that conviction, the at pleasure seeming such
step.

very is pianoforte she--“this said Campbells,” the from present “This
given.” kindly

apparent smallest the without and replied, he “Yes,”
given they had better done have would they embarrassment.--“But
not is pleasure The things. foolish are Surprizes it. of notice her
have should I considerable. often is inconvenience the and enhanced,
Campbell.” Colonel in judgment better expected

had Knightley Mr. that oath her taken have could Emma moment, that From
were he whether But instrument. the giving in concern no had
actual no were there attachment--whether peculiar from free entirely
Jane’s of end the Towards doubtful. longer little a preference--remained
thick. grew voice her song, second

have aloud--“you thinking finished, was it when he, said do,” will “That
quiet.” be evening--now one for enough quite sung

not would more;--they “One for. begged soon was however, song, Another
more.” one for ask only would and account, any on Fairfax Miss fatigue
this manage could you think “I say, to heard was Churchill Frank And
the of strength The trifling. very so is part first the effort; without
second.” the on falls song

angry. grew Knightley Mr.

off shewing but nothing of “thinks indignantly, he, said fellow,” “That
that at who Bates, Miss touching And be.” not must This voice. own his
sing niece your let to mad, you are Bates, near--“Miss passed moment
on mercy no have They interfere. and Go, manner? this in hoarse herself
her.”

to even stay hardly could Jane, for anxiety real her in Bates, Miss
farther all to end an put and forward stept she before grateful, be
Woodhouse Miss for evening, the of part concert the ceased Here singing.
(within soon but performers; lady young only the were Fairfax Miss and
knew exactly nobody dancing--originating of proposal the minutes) five
every that Cole, Mrs. and Mr. by promoted effectually so where--was
Weston, Mrs. space. proper give to away, clearing rapidly was thing
irresistible an beginning and seated, was country-dances, her in capital
to gallantry becoming most with up coming Churchill, Frank and waltz;
top. the to up her led and hand, her secured had Emma,

off, themselves pair could people young other the till waiting While
on receiving was she compliments the of spite in time, found Emma
Mr. of became what see and about, look to taste, her and voice her
he If general. in dancer no was He trial. a be would This Knightley.
augur might it now, Fairfax Jane engaging in alert very be to were
Mrs. to talking was he No; appearance. immediate no was There something.
else, somebody by asked was Jane unconcerned; on looking was Cole--he
Cole. Mrs. to talking still was he and

and safe; yet was interest his Henry; for alarm an longer no had Emma
than more Not enjoyment. and spirit genuine with dance the off led she
of suddenness the and rarity the but mustered; be could couple five
a in matched well herself found she and delightful, very it made it
at. looking worth couple a were They partner.

was It allowed. be could that all were unfortunately, dances, Two
mother’s her on home, get to anxious became Bates Miss and late, growing
again, begin to permitted be to therefore, attempts, some After account.
done. have and sorrowful, look Weston, Mrs. thank to obliged were they

to Emma attended he as Churchill, Frank said well,” as is it “Perhaps
dancing languid her and Fairfax, Miss asked have must “I carriage. her
yours.” after me, with agreed have not would



IX CHAPTER


visit The Coles. the to going in condescension her repent not did Emma
she that all and day; next the recollections pleasant many her afforded
must seclusion, dignified of side the on lost have to supposed be might
delighted have must She popularity. of splendour the in repaid amply be
a left happy!--And made be to deserved who people, Coles--worthy the
away. die soon not would that her behind name

two were there and common; not is memory, in even happiness, Perfect
not had she whether doubted She easy. quite not was she which on points
of suspicions her betraying in woman, by woman of duty the transgressed
it but right; hardly was It Churchill. Frank to feelings Fairfax’s Jane
submission his and her, escape would it that idea, an strong so been had
made which penetration, her to compliment a was told, she that all to
her held have to ought she that certain quite be to her for difficult it
tongue.

and Fairfax; Jane to also related regret of circumstance other The
the regret unequivocally and unfeignedly did She doubt. no had she there
heartily most did She singing. and playing own her of inferiority
practised and down sat childhood--and her of idleness the over grieve
half. a and hour an vigorously

praise Harriet’s if and in; coming Harriet’s by interrupted then was She
comforted. been have soon might she her, satisfied have could

Fairfax!” Miss and you as well as play but could I if “Oh!

her’s, like more no is playing My Harriet. together, us class “Don’t
sunshine.” like is lamp a than

quite play you think I two. the of best the play you think dear--I “Oh!
body Every you. hear rather much had I sure am I does. she as well as
played.” you well how said night last

The difference. the felt have must it, about thing any knew who “Those
praised, be to enough good just is playing my that Harriet, is, truth
it.” beyond much is Fairfax’s Jane but

or does, she as well as quite play you that think shall always I “Well,
Cole Mr. out. it find ever would nobody difference any is there if that
deal great a talked Churchill Frank Mr. and had; you taste much how said
execution.” than more much taste valued he that and taste, your about

Harriet.” both, them has Fairfax Jane but “Ah!

any had she know not did I but execution, had she saw I sure? you “Are
no is singing.--There Italian hate I And it. about talked Nobody taste.
you well, very so play does she if Besides, it. of word a understanding
to have will she because do, to obliged is she than more no is it know,
into get would she whether night last wondering were Coxes The teach.
looked?” Coxes the think you did How family. great any

vulgar.” do--very always they as “Just

is it “but hesitatingly; rather Harriet said something,” me told “They
consequence.” any of nothing

its of fearful though her, told had they what ask to obliged was Emma
Elton. Mr. producing

Saturday.” last them with dined Martin Mr. me--that told “They

“Oh!”

to stay to him asked he and business, some upon father their to came “He
dinner.”

“Oh!”

know not do I Cox. Anne especially him, about deal great a talked “They
there stay and go should I thought I if me asked she but meant, she what
summer.” next again

should Cox Anne an such as just curious, impertinently be to meant “She
be.”

at her by sat He there. dined he day the agreeable very was he said “She
marry to glad very be would Coxes the of either thinks Nash Miss dinner.
him.”

vulgar most the exception, without are, they think likely.--I “Very
Highbury.” in girls

with go to prudent most it thought Ford’s.--Emma at business had Harriet
in and possible, was Martins the with meeting accidental Another her.
dangerous. be would state, present her

always was word, a half by swayed and thing every by tempted Harriet,
muslins over hanging still was she while and purchase; a at long very
could amusement.--Much for door the to went Emma mind, her changing and
Highbury;--Mr. of part busiest the even of traffic the from hoped be not
the at in himself letting Cox William Mr. by, hastily walking Perry
a or exercise, from returning carriage-horses Cole’s Mr. office-door,
she objects liveliest the were mule, obstinate an on letter-boy stray
with butcher the on only fell eyes her when and expect; to presume could
full her with shop from homewards travelling woman old tidy a tray, his
dawdling of string a and bone, dirty a over quarrelling curs two basket,
she gingerbread, the eyeing bow-window little baker’s the round children
enough quite enough; amused was and complain, to reason no had she knew
with do can ease, at and lively mind A door. the at stand to still
answer. not does that nothing see can and nothing, seeing

persons two enlarged; scene The road. Randalls the down looked She
into walking were they son-in-law; her and Weston Mrs. appeared;
the in however, stopping, were They course. of Hartfield Highbury;--to
nearer little a was house whose Bates’s; Mrs. at place first
their caught Emma when knocked, but all had and Ford’s; than Randalls
the and her; to forward came and road the crossed they eye.--Immediately
to pleasure fresh give to seemed engagement yesterday’s of agreeableness
call to going was she that her informed Weston Mrs. meeting. present the
instrument. new the hear to order in Bateses, the on

Miss promised absolutely I “that she, said me,” tells companion my “For
it of aware not was I morning. this come would I that night, last Bates
I did, I says he as but day, a fixed had I that know not did I myself.
now.” going am

said hope,” I allowed, be may I visit, her pays Weston Mrs. while “And
Hartfield--if at her for wait and party your join “to Churchill, Frank
home.” going are you

disappointed. was Weston Mrs.

pleased.” much very be would They me. with go to meant you thought “I

the in equally be may perhaps--I But, way. the in quite be should I “Me!
always aunt My me. want not did she if as looks Woodhouse Miss here. way
and death; to her fidget I says She shopping. is she when off me sends
to I am What same. the say almost could she if as looks Woodhouse Miss
do?”

for waiting only am “I Emma; said own,” my of business no on here am “I
home. go shall we then and done, soon have probably will She friend. my
instrument.” the hear and Weston Mrs. with go better had you But

should Campbell Colonel if smile) a (with it.--But advise you “Well--if
an have to prove should it if and friend, careless a employed have
Mrs. to support no be shall I say? I shall tone--what indifferent
be would truth disagreeable A herself. by well very do might She Weston.
world the in being wretchedest the am I but lips, her through palatable
falsehood.” civil a at

that persuaded am Emma.--“I replied thing,” such any believe not do “I
but necessary; is it when neighbours, your as insincere as be can you
Quite indifferent. is instrument the suppose to reason no is there
night.” last opinion Fairfax’s Miss understood I if indeed, otherwise

to disagreeable very not be it “if Weston, Mrs. said me,” with come “Do
afterwards. Hartfield to go will We long. us detain not need It you.
It me. with call to you wish really I Hartfield. to them follow will We
it.” meant you thought always I and attention! an great so felt be will

him, reward to Hartfield of hope the with and more; no say could He
in, them watched Emma door. Bates’s Mrs. to Weston Mrs. with returned
all with counter,--trying, interesting the at Harriet joined then and
plain wanted she if that her convince to mind, own her of force the
be ribbon, blue a that and figured; at look to use no of was it muslin
At pattern. yellow her match never still would beautiful, so ever it
parcel. the of destination the to even settled, all was it last

Mrs. asked ma’am?” Goddard’s, Mrs. to it send I “Should
at is gown pattern my Only Goddard’s. Mrs. to Ford.--“Yes--no--yes,
then, But please. you if Hartfield, to it send shall you No, Hartfield.
gown pattern the take could I it.--And see to want will Goddard Mrs.
go better had it directly--so ribbon the want shall I But day. any home
parcels, two into it make could You ribbon. the least Hartfield--at to
you?” not could Ford, Mrs.

two of trouble the Ford Mrs. give to Harriet, while, worth not is “It
parcels.”

is.” it more “No

Ford. Mrs. obliging the said ma’am,” world, the in trouble “No

you if Then, one. in only it have rather much would I indeed but “Oh!
I know--No, not do Goddard’s--I Mrs. to all it send shall you please,
and Hartfield, to sent it have well as just may I Woodhouse, Miss think,
advise?” you do What night. at me with home it take

Hartfield, To subject. the to half-second another give not do you “That
Ford.” Mrs. please, you if

should “I satisfied, quite Harriet, said best,” much be will that “Aye,
Goddard’s.” Mrs. to sent it have to like all at not

Mrs. ladies: two and voice one rather shop--or the approached Voices
door. the at them met Bates Miss and Weston

to across run just am “I latter, the said Woodhouse,” Miss dear “My
while, little a us with down sit and come to you of favour the entreat
How Smith. Miss and you instrument; new our of opinion your us give and
Weston Mrs. begged I you.--And thank I well Smith?--Very Miss do, you do
succeeding.” of sure be might I that me, with come to

are--” Fairfax Miss and Bates Mrs. hope “I

well; delightfully is mother My you. to obliged much am I well, “Very
glad so am Woodhouse?--I Mr. is How night. last cold no caught Jane and
here.--Oh! were you me told Weston Mrs. account. good a such hear to
me allow will Woodhouse Miss sure am I across, run must I I, said then,
so be will mother my in; come to her entreat and across run to just
cannot she party, nice a such are we now her--and see to happy very
Woodhouse’s ‘Miss Churchill, Frank Mr. said do,’ pray refuse.--‘Aye,
shall I I, said having.’--But, worth be will instrument the of opinion
said me.--‘Oh,’ with go will you of one if succeeding of sure more be
you would job;’--For, my finished have I till minute, a half ‘wait he,
in manner obliging most the in is, he there Woodhouse, Miss it, believe
rivet spectacles.--The mother’s my of rivet the in fastening world, the
had mother my obliging!--For very morning.--So this know, you out, came
every bye, the by And, on. them put not spectacles--could her of use no
said Jane indeed. should they spectacles; of pair two have to ought body
did, I thing first the Saunders John to over them take to meant I so.
thing, one first morning; the all me hindered other or something but
came Patty time one At know. you what, saying no is there another, then
I, said Oh, sweeping. wanted chimney kitchen the thought she say to
your of rivet the is Here me. to news bad your with come not do Patty
Wallis Mrs. home, came apples baked the Then out. spectacles mistress’s
the us, to obliging and civil extremely are they boy; her by them sent
be can Wallis Mrs. that say people some heard have always--I Wallises,
thing any known never have we but answer, rude very a give and uncivil
value the for be cannot it And them. from attention greatest the but
know? you bread, of consumption our is what for now, custom our of
eats really she present--and at Jane dear us.--besides of three Only
frightened quite be would you breakfast, shocking a such nothing--makes
I eats--so she little how know mother my let not dare I it. saw you if
the about But off. passes it and another, say I then and thing one say
so likes she nothing is there and hungry, gets she day the of middle
took I for wholesome, extremely are they and apples, baked these as well
meet to happened I Perry; Mr. asking of day other the opportunity the
often so have before--I doubt any had I that Not street. the in him
only the is it believe I apple. baked a recommend Woodhouse Mr. heard
We wholesome. thoroughly fruit the thinks Woodhouse Mr. that way
excellent an makes Patty often. very however, apple-dumplings, have
these and hope, I prevailed, have you Weston, Mrs. Well, apple-dumpling.
us.” oblige will ladies

at did they and &c.,” Bates, Mrs. on wait to happy “very be would Emma
than, Bates Miss from delay farther no with shop, the of out move last

before. you see not did I pardon. your beg I Ford? Mrs. do, you do “How
Jane town. from ribbons new of collection charming a have you hear I
a well--only very do gloves the ye, Thank yesterday. delighted back came
in.” them taking is Jane but wrist; the about large too little

in all were they when again beginning she, said of?” talking I was “What
street. the

fix. would she medley, the all of what, on wondered Emma

mother’s my of.--Oh! talking was I what recollect cannot I declare “I
he, said ‘Oh!’ Churchill! Frank Mr. of obliging very So spectacles.
kind this of job a like I rivet; the fasten can I think do ‘I
must I Indeed very.... so be to him shewed know you excessively.’--Which
expected, had I as much and before him of heard had I as much that, say
Weston, Mrs. you, congratulate do I thing.... any exceeds far very he
could.... parent fondest the thing every seems He warmly. most
sort that of job a like I rivet. the fasten can ‘I he, said ‘Oh!’
out brought I when And manner. his forget shall never I excessively.’
very so be would friends our hoped and closet, the from apples baked the
nothing is ‘there directly, he said ‘Oh!’ some, take to as obliging
finest-looking the are these and good, so half fruit of way the in
so was know, you That, life.’ my in saw ever I apples home-baked
they Indeed compliment. no was it manner, his by sure, am I And very....
justice--only full them does Wallis Mrs. and apples, delightful very are
us made Woodhouse Mr. and twice, than more baked them have not do we
so be will Woodhouse Miss times--but three done them have to promise
finest very the are themselves apples The it. mention to not as good
Mr. of Donwell--some from all doubt; a beyond baking, for sort
and year; every sack a us sends He supply. liberal most Knightley’s
his of one as anywhere apple keeping a such was never there certainly
was orchard the says mother My them. of two is there believe trees--I
the shocked quite really was I But days. younger her in famous always
eating was Jane and morning, one called Knightley Mr. day--for other
enjoyed she much how said and them about talked we and apples, these
‘I stock. our of end the to got not were we whether asked he and them,
for supply; another you send will I ‘and he, said be,’ must you sure am
me let Larkins William use. ever can I than more many great a have I
more, some you send will I year. this usual than quantity larger a keep
really not--for would he begged I So nothing.’ for good get they before
great a had we that say absolutely not could I gone, being ours to as
kept all be should they but indeed; dozen a half but was left--it many
more, us sending be should he that bear all at not could I and Jane; for
when And same. the said Jane and already; been had he as liberal so
say not should I me--No, with quarrelled almost she gone, was he
quite was she but lives; our in quarrel a had never we for quarrelled,
wished she gone; nearly so were apples the owned had I that distressed
dear, my I, said Oh, left. many great a had we believe him made had I
William evening same very the However, could. I as much as say did I
of sort same the apples, of basket large a with over came Larkins
down went and obliged, much very was I and least, at bushel a apples,
suppose. may you as thing, every said and Larkins William to spoke and
see to glad always am I acquaintance! old an such is Larkins William
it said William that Patty, from afterwards found I however, But, him.
them brought had he had; master his sort _that_ of apples the all was
did William boil. or bake to left one not had master his now all--and
had master his think to pleased so was he himself, it mind to seem not
profit master’s his of more thinks know, you William, for many; so sold
their at displeased quite was said, he Hodges, Mrs. but thing; any than
be not should master her that bear not could She away. sent all being
bid but this, Patty told He spring. this apple-tart another have to able
for it, about us to thing any say to not sure be and it, mind not her
sacks many so as long as and sometimes, cross be _would_ Hodges Mrs.
told Patty so And remainder. the ate who signify not did it sold, were
Knightley Mr. have not would I indeed! shocked excessively was I and me,
wanted I very.... so be would He world! the for it about thing any know
it mentioned had I unluckily, but, knowledge; Jane’s from it keep to
aware.” was I before

visitors her and door; the opened Patty as done just had Bates Miss
to, attend to narration regular any having without upstairs walked
good-will. desultory her of sounds the by only pursued

take Pray turning. the at step a is there Weston, Mrs. care, take “Pray
darker staircase--rather dark a rather is ours Woodhouse, Miss care,
Miss care. take pray Smith, Miss wish. could one than narrower and
Miss foot. your hit you sure am I concerned, quite am I Woodhouse,
turning.” the at step the Smith,



X CHAPTER


was entered, they as sitting-room little the of appearance The
employment, usual her of deprived Bates, Mrs. itself; tranquillity
near table a at Churchill, Frank fire, the of side one on slumbering
Fairfax, Jane and spectacles, her about occupied deedily most her,
pianoforte. her on intent them, to back her with standing

happy most a shew to able yet was man young the however, was, he as Busy
again. Emma seeing on countenance

least at “coming voice, low a rather in he, said pleasure,” a is “This
be to trying me find You calculated. had I than earlier minutes ten
succeed.” shall I think you if me tell useful;

not would you yet? it finished you not “have Weston, Mrs. said “What!”
rate.” this at silversmith working a as livelihood good very a earn

been have “I replied, he uninterruptedly,” working been not have “I
steadily, stand instrument her make to trying in Fairfax Miss assisting
see You believe. I floor, the in unevenness an firm; quite not was it
be to you of kind very was This paper. with leg one wedging been have we
home.” hurrying be would you afraid almost was I come. to persuaded

sufficiently was and him; by seated be should she that contrived He
make to trying and her, for apple baked best the out looking in employed
ready quite was Fairfax Jane till work, his in him advise or help her
ready, immediately not was she That again. pianoforte the to down sit to
yet not had she nerves; her of state the from arise to suspect did Emma
she emotion; without it touch to enough long instrument the possessed
not could Emma and performance; of power the into herself reason must
resolve but not could and origin, their whatever feelings, such pity but
again. neighbour her to them expose to never

the given, feebly were bars first the though and began, Jane last At
Mrs. to. justice full done gradually were instrument the of powers
Emma again; delighted was and before, delighted been had Weston
proper every with pianoforte, the and praise; her all in her joined
promise. highest the of altogether be to pronounced was discrimination,

a with Churchill, Frank said employ,” might Campbell Colonel “Whoever
of deal good a heard I ill. chosen not has person “the Emma, at smile
upper the of softness the and Weymouth; at taste Campbell’s Colonel
would _party_ _that_ _all_ and he what exactly is sure am I notes
his gave either he that Fairfax, Miss say, dare I prize. particularly
you not Do himself. Broadwood to wrote or directions, minute very friend
so?” think

had Weston Mrs. hear. to obliged not was She round. look not did Jane
moment. same the at her to speaking been

Do guess. random a was “mine whisper; a in Emma, said fair,” not is “It
her.” distress not

little very had he if as looked and smile, a with head his shook He
again, began he afterwards Soon mercy. little very and doubt

this on pleasure your enjoying be must Ireland in friends your much “How
wonder and you, of think often they say dare I Fairfax. Miss occasion,
to coming instrument’s the of day precise the day, the be will which
going be to business the knows Campbell Colonel imagine you Do hand.
consequence the be to it imagine you time?--Do this at just forward
only sent have may he that or him, from commission immediate an of
upon depend to time, to as indefinite order an direction, general a
conveniences?” and contingencies

answering, avoid not could she hear; but not could She paused. He

of voice a in she, said Campbell,” Colonel from letter a have I “Till
be must It confidence. any with nothing imagine can “I calmness, forced
conjecture.” all

one sometimes and right, conjectures one sometimes “Conjecture--aye,
this make shall I soon how conjecture could I wish I wrong. conjectures
hard when Woodhouse, Miss talks, one nonsense What firm. quite rivet
their hold suppose, I workmen, real all;--your at talks one if work, at
word--Miss a of hold get we if labourers gentlemen we but tongues;
the have I done. is it There, conjecturing. about something said Fairfax
healed spectacles, your restoring of Bates,) Mrs. (to madam, pleasure,
present.” the for

a escape to daughter; and mother by both thanked warmly very was He
Miss begged and pianoforte, the to went he latter, the from little
more. something play to it, at sitting still was who Fairfax,

we waltzes the of one be will “it he, said kind,” very are you “If
them enjoy not did You again. over them live me night;--let last danced
we glad were you believe I time. whole the tired appeared you did; I as
ever one worlds the worlds--all given have would I but longer; no danced
half-hour.” another give--for to has

played. She

one made _has_ which again tune a hear to is it felicity “What
Weymouth.” at danced was that not mistake I happy!--If

something played and deeply, coloured moment, a for him at up looked She
turning and pianoforte, the near chair a from music some took He else.
said, Emma, to

here it?--Cramer.--And know you Do me. to new quite something is “Here
might one quarter, a such from That, melodies. Irish of set new a are
of thoughtful Very instrument. the with sent all was This expect.
music no have could Fairfax Miss knew it?--He not was Campbell, Colonel
to it shews it particularly; attention the of part that honour I here.
nothing done; hastily Nothing heart. the from thoroughly so been have
it.” prompted have could only affection True incomplete.

amused; being help not could yet pointed, less be would he wished Emma
remains the caught she Fairfax Jane towards eye her glancing on when and
consciousness, of blush deep the all with that saw she when smile, a of
the in scruple less had she delight, secret of smile a been had there
her.--This to respect with compunction less much and amusement,
very cherishing apparently was Fairfax Jane perfect upright, amiable,
feelings. reprehensible

together.--Emma over it looked they and her, to music the all brought He
whispering, of opportunity the took

you.” understand must She plain. too speak “You

least the in not am I me. understand her have would I does. she hope “I
meaning.” my of ashamed

idea.” the up taken never had I wish and ashamed, half am I really, “But

now have I me. to it communicated you that and did, you glad very am “I
does she If her. to shame Leave ways. and looks odd her all to key a
it.” feel to ought she wrong,

think.” I it, without entirely not is “She

this at _Adair_ _Robin_ playing is She it. of sign much see not do “I
favourite.” moment--_his_

Mr. descried window, the near passing Bates, Miss afterwards Shortly
off. far not horse-back on Knightley

to just possible, if him to speak must declare!--I I Knightley “Mr.
cold; all you give would it here; window the open not will I him. thank
come will he say dare I know. you room mother’s my into go can I but
meet all you have to delightful Quite here. is who knows he when in
honoured!” so room little so!--Our

the opening and spoke, still she while chamber adjoining the in was She
every and attention, Knightley’s Mr. called immediately there, casement
as others, the by heard distinctly as was conversation their of syllable
apartment. same the within passed had it if

you to obliged So you. thank I well, do?--Very d’ye do?--how ye d’ “How
ready just mother my time; in just were We night. last carriage the for
here.” friends some find will You in. come do in; come Pray us. for

in heard be to determined seemed Knightley Mr. and Bates; Miss began So
say, he did commandingly and resolutely most for turn, his

but all, you after inquire to want Bates?--I Miss niece, your is “How
cold no caught she hope Fairfax?--I Miss is How niece. your particularly
is.” Fairfax Miss how me Tell to-day? she is How night. last

hear would he before answer direct a give to obliged was Bates Miss And
gave Weston Mrs. and amused; were listeners The else. thing any in her
in head her shook still Emma But meaning. particular of look a Emma
scepticism. steady

carriage,” the for you to obliged much very you!--so to obliged “So
Bates. Miss resumed

with, short her cut He

you?” for thing any do I Can Kingston. to going am “I

she day other the saying was Cole you?--Mrs. Kingston--are dear, “Oh!
Kingston.” from something wanted

_you_?” for thing any do I Can send. to servants has Cole “Mrs.

here?--Miss is think you do Who in. come do But you. thank I “No,
pianoforte. new the hear to call to as kind so Smith; Miss and Woodhouse
in.” come and Crown, the at horse your up put Do

perhaps.” minutes, five “for manner, deliberating a in he, said “Well,”

delightful; too!--Quite Churchill Frank Mr. and Weston Mrs. is here “And
friends!” many so

on get must I minutes. two stay not could I you. thank I now, not “No,
can.” I as fast as Kingston to

you.” see to happy very so be will They in. come do “Oh!

the hear and day, another call will I enough. full is room your no; “No,
pianoforte.”

last party delightful a what Knightley, Mr. sorry!--Oh! so am I “Well,
not dancing?--Was such see ever you pleasant.--Did extremely how night;
any saw never I Churchill; Frank Mr. and Woodhouse delightful?--Miss it
it.” to equal thing

Miss suppose I for less, nothing say can I indeed; delightful very “Oh!
passes. that thing every hearing are Churchill Frank Mr. and Woodhouse
should Fairfax Miss why see not do I more) still voice his (raising And
Mrs. and well; very dances Fairfax Miss think I too. mentioned be not
exception, without player, country-dance best very the is Weston
say will they gratitude, any have friends your if Now, England. in
to stay cannot I but return; in me and you about loud pretty something
it.” hear

consequence--so of something more; moment one Knightley, Mr. “Oh!
apples!” the about shocked so both are I and shocked!--Jane

now?” matter the is “What

had you said You apples. store your all us sending your of think “To
shocked! so are really We left. one not have you now and many, great a
You here. it mentioned Larkins William angry. be well may Hodges Mrs.
never He off. is he Ah! not. should you indeed it, done have not should
it and now, staid have would he thought I But thanked. be to bear can
the to (returning Well, mentioned.... have to not pity a been have would
is He stop. cannot Knightley Mr. succeed. to able been not have I room,)
thing....” any do could he if me asked He Kingston. to going

thing.” every heard we offers, kind his heard “we Jane, said “Yes,”

was door the know, you because might, you say dare I dear, my yes, “Oh!
must You loud. spoke Knightley Mr. and open, was window the and open,
at you for thing any do I ‘Can sure. be to thing every heard have
you must Woodhouse, Miss Oh! mentioned.... just I so he; said Kingston?’
you.” of obliging very come--so just but seem going?--You be

lasted already had visit the home; at be to time really it found Emma
perceived was morning the of much so watches, examining on and long;
could also, leave taking companion her and Weston Mrs. that gone, be to
Hartfield to ladies young two the with walk to only themselves allow
Randalls. for off set they before gates,



XI CHAPTER


been have Instances entirely. dancing without do to possible be may It
without successively, months many many, passing people young of known
accrue injury material no and description, any of ball any at being
the made--when is beginning a when mind;--but or body to either
felt--it slightly, though been, once have motion rapid of felicities
more. for ask not does that set heavy very a be must

again; dance to longed and Highbury, at once danced had Churchill Frank
persuaded was Woodhouse Mr. which evening an of half-hour last the and
young two the by passed was Randalls, at daughter his with spend to
his and idea; first the was Frank’s subject. the on schemes in people
the of judge best the was lady the for it; pursuing in zeal greatest the
appearance. and accommodation for solicitous most the and difficulties,
how again people shewing for enough inclination had she still But
danced--for Woodhouse Miss and Churchill Frank Mr. delightfully
Jane with herself compare to blush not need she which in that doing
wicked the of any without itself, dancing simple for even Fairfax--and
in were they room the out pacing in first him assist vanity--to of aids
dimensions the taking in then hold--and to made be could it what see to
that all of spite in discovering, of hope the in parlour, other the of
little a was it that size, equal exactly their of say could Weston Mr.
largest. the

Cole’s Mr. at begun dance the that request, and proposition first His
collected, be should party same the there--that finished be should
Mr. acquiescence. readiest the with met engaged, musician same the and
Weston Mrs. and enjoyment, thorough with idea the into entered Weston
dance; to wish could they as long as play to undertook willingly most
who exactly up reckoning of followed, had employment interesting the and
space of division indispensable the out portioning and be, would there
couple. every to

Miss two the and three, be will Fairfax, Miss and Smith, Miss and “You
the be will there “And over. times many repeated been had five,” Coxes
Knightley. Mr. besides myself, and father, my Cox, young Gilberts, two
and Smith, Miss and You pleasure. for enough quite be will that Yes,
five for and five; Coxes Miss two the and three, be will Fairfax, Miss
room.” of plenty be will there couple

side, one on be to came it soon But

think not do really couple?--I five for room good be there will “But
will.” there

another, On

to while worth it make to enough not are couple five all, after “And
it. about seriously thinks one when nothing, are couple Five up. stand
the as only allowable be can It couple. five _invite_ to do not will It
moment.” the of thought

and brother’s, her at expected was Gilbert _Miss_ that said Somebody
Gilbert _Mrs_. believed else Somebody rest. the with invited be must
was word A asked. been had she if evening, other the danced have would
family one naming Weston Mr. last, at and Cox; young second a for in put
acquaintance old very of another and included, be must who cousins of
couple five the that certainty a became it out, left be not could who
what in speculation interesting very a and ten, least at be would
of. disposed be could they manner possible

not “Might other. each opposite just were rooms two the of doors The
the seemed It passage?” the across dance and rooms, both use they
a wanted them of many that but good so not was it yet and scheme; best
about distress in was Weston Mrs. awkward; be would it said Emma better.
of score the on earnestly, it opposed Woodhouse Mr. and supper; the
be not could it that indeed, unhappy, very so him made It health.
in. persevered

not could I imprudence. of extreme the be would “it he; said no,” “Oh!
cold. dreadful a catch would She strong. not is Emma!--Emma for it bear
would you Weston, Mrs. all. would you So Harriet. little poor would So
do Pray thing. wild a such of talk them let not do up; laid quite be
very is lower) (speaking man young That it. of talk them let not
quite not is man young that but father, his tell not Do thoughtless.
evening, this often very doors the opening been has He thing. the
the of think not does He inconsiderately. very open them keeping and
not is he indeed but him, against you set to mean not do I draught.
thing!” the quite

of importance the knew She charge. a such for sorry was Weston Mrs.
now was door Every away. it do to power her in thing every said and it,
only dancing of scheme first the and up, given plan passage the closed,
on good-will such with and again; to resorted in were they room the in
before hour an of quarter a which space the that part, Churchill’s Frank
endeavoured now was couple, five for sufficient barely deemed been had
ten. for enough quite out made be to

Ten room. unnecessary allowed “We he. said magnificent,” too were “We
well.” very here stand may couple

be could what and crowd; sad crowd--a a be would “It demurred. Emma
in?” turn to space without dancing than worse

on went he still But bad.” very was “it replied; gravely he true,” “Very
with, ended he still and measuring,

couple.” ten for room tolerable very be will there think “I

dreadful be would It unreasonable. quite are “you she, said no,” “No,
be to than pleasure from farther be can Nothing close! so standing be to
room!” little a in crowd a crowd--and a in dancing

crowd A exactly. you with agree “I replied. he it,” denying no is “There
pictures giving of art the have you Woodhouse, room--Miss little a in
having however, exquisite!--Still, quite Exquisite, words. few a in
be would It up. matter the give to unwilling is one far, so proceeded
am that--I know not do altogether--I father--and my to disappointment a
well.” very here stand might couple ten that opinion of rather

little a was gallantry his of nature the that perceived Emma
of pleasure the lose than oppose rather would he that and self-willed,
rest. the forgave and compliment, the took she but her; with dancing
to while worth been have might it him, _marry_ to ever intended she Had
preference, his of value the understand to try and consider, and pause
their of purposes the all for but temper; his of character the and
enough. amiable quite was he acquaintance,

entered he and Hartfield; at was he day, next the of middle the Before
of continuance the certified as smile agreeable an such with room the
improvement. an announce to came he that appeared soon It scheme. the

inclination “your began, immediately almost he Woodhouse,” Miss “Well,
terrors the by hope, I away, frightened quite been not has dancing for
subject:--a the on proposal new a bring I rooms. little father’s my of
acted be to approbation your only waits which father’s, my of thought
dances first two the for hand your of honour the for hope I May upon.
the at but Randalls, at not given, be to ball, projected little this of
Inn?” Crown

Crown!” “The

cannot, you trust I and objection, no see Woodhouse Mr. and you if “Yes;
there. him visit to as kind so be will friends his hopes father my
grateful less a not and them, promise can he accommodations, Better
no sees Weston Mrs. idea. own his is It Randalls. at than welcome
feel. all we what is This satisfied. are you provided it, to objection
Randalls the of either in couple, Ten right! perfectly were you Oh!
you right how felt insufferable!--Dreadful!--I been have would rooms,
_thing_ _any_ securing for anxious too was but time, whole the were
you hope consent--I exchange?--You good a it not Is yield. to like to
consent?”

Mrs. and Mr. if to, object can nobody that plan a me to appears “It
for answer can I as far as and, admirable; it think I not. do Weston
could that improvement only the seems happy--It most be shall myself,
improvement?” excellent an it think not you do Papa, be.

fully was it before it, explain and repeat to obliged was She
were representations farther new, quite being then, and comprehended;
acceptable. it make to necessary

plan--much bad very improvement--a an from far very it thought he “No;
dangerous; and damp always was inn an at room A other. the than worse
they dance, must they If inhabited. be to fit or aired, properly never
Crown the at room the in been never had He Randalls. at dance better had
no--a sight.--Oh! by it kept who people the know not life--did his in
anywhere.” than Crown the at colds worse catch would They plan. bad very

the of one “that Churchill, Frank said sir,” observe, to going was “I
danger little very the be would change this of recommendations great
at than Crown the at danger less much cold--so catching body’s any of
but alteration, the regret to reason have might Perry Mr. Randalls!
could.” else nobody

mistaken much very are “you warmly, rather Woodhouse, Mr. said “Sir,”
is Perry Mr. character. of sort that be to Perry Mr. suppose you if
how understand not do I But ill. are us of any when concerned extremely
house.” father’s your than you for safer be can Crown the at room the

no have shall We sir. larger, being its of circumstance very the “From
it and evening; whole the once all--not at windows the open to occasion
upon air cold in letting windows, the opening of habit dreadful that is
mischief.” the does sir) know, well you (as which bodies, heated

of think would nobody Churchill, Mr. surely, windows!--but the “Open
never I imprudent! so be could Nobody Randalls. at windows the opening
neither sure, am windows!--I open with Dancing thing. a such of heard
suffer would was) that Taylor Miss (poor Weston Mrs. nor father your
it.”

a behind step sometimes will person young thoughtless a sir--but “Ah!
have I suspected. being its without sash, a up throw and window-curtain,
myself.” done it known often

I But it. supposed have could never I me! sir?--Bless indeed, you “Have
However, hear. I what at astonished often am and world, the of out live
it talk to come we when perhaps, and, difference; a make does this
One consideration. of deal good a require things of sort these over--but
so be will Weston Mrs. and Mr. If hurry. a in them upon resolve cannot
what see and over, it talk may we morning, one here call to as obliging
done.” be can

limited--” so is time my sir, unfortunately, “But,

every talking for time of plenty be will “there Emma, interrupted “Oh!”
at be to contrived be can it If all. at hurry no is There over. thing
be will They horses. the for convenient very be will it papa, Crown, the
stable.” own their near so

ever James that Not thing. great a is That dear. my will, they “So
could I If can. we when horses our spare to right is it but complains;
be to Stokes Mrs. is aired--but thoroughly being rooms the of sure be
sight.” by even her, know not do I it. doubt I trusted?

be will it because sir, nature, that of thing every for answer can “I
whole.” the direct to undertakes Weston Mrs. care. Weston’s Mrs. under

who Weston, Mrs. dear own satisfied--Our be must you papa!--Now “There,
many so said, Perry Mr. what remember you not Do itself. carefulness is
to undertakes _Taylor_ _Miss_ ‘If measles? the had I when ago, years
I have often How sir.’ fears, any have not need you up, Emma Miss wrap
her!” to compliment a such as it of speak you heard

Poor it. forget never shall I so. say did Perry Mr. true. very “Aye,
have would you is, that measles; the with bad very were You Emma! little
day a times four came He attention. great Perry’s for but bad, very been
sort--which good very a was it first, the from said, He week. a for
hope I complaint. dreadful a are measles the but comfort; great our was
for send will she measles, the have ones little Isabella’s poor whenever
Perry.”

Frank said moment,” this at Crown the at are Weston Mrs. and father “My
there them left I house. the of capabilities the “examining Churchill,
you hoping and opinion, your for impatient Hartfield, to on came and
was I spot. the on advice your give and them join to persuaded be might
to pleasure greatest the be would It both. from so say to desired
nothing do can They there. you attend to me allow could you if them,
you.” without satisfactorily

father, her and council; a such to called be to happy most was Emma
people young two the gone, was she while over all it think to engaging
Mrs. and Mr. were There Crown. the for delay without together off set
and busy very approbation, her receive and her see to delighted Weston;
he, and distress; little some in she, way; different their in happy very
perfect. thing every finding

places in Look! expected. I than worse is paper “this she, said “Emma,”
and yellow more is wainscot the and dirty; dreadfully is it see you
imagined.” have could I thing any than forlorn

that all does “What husband. her said particular,” too are you dear, “My
as be will It candlelight. by it of nothing see will You signify?
our on it of thing any see never We candlelight. by Randalls as clean
club-nights.”

know never “Men meant, which looks exchanged probably here ladies The
to each thought perhaps gentlemen the and not;” or dirty are things when
cares.” needless and nonsenses little their have will “Women himself,

disdain. not did gentlemen the which arose, however, perplexity, One
built, being ballroom’s the of time the At supper-room. a regarded It
was adjoining, card-room small a and question; in been not had suppers
wanted be would card-room This done? be to was What addition. only the
unnecessary voted conveniently were cards if or, now; card-room a as
comfortable any for small too not it was still selves, four their by
the for secured be might size better much of room Another supper?
awkward long a and house, the of end other the at was it but purpose;
Mrs. difficulty. a made This it. at get to through gone be must passage
passage; that in people young the for draughts of afraid was Weston
being of prospect the tolerate could gentlemen the nor Emma neither and
supper. at crowded miserably

sandwiches, merely supper; regular no having proposed Weston Mrs.
wretched a as scouted was that but room; little the in out set &c.,
was supper, to down sitting without dance, private A suggestion.
and women; and men of rights the upon fraud infamous an pronounced
of line another took then She again. it of speak not must Weston Mrs.
observed, room, doubtful the into looking and expediency,

know.” you many, be not shall We small. very so _is_ it think not do “I

through steps long with briskly walking time, same the at Weston Mr. And
out, calling was passage, the

a is It dear. my passage, this of length the of deal great a talk “You
stairs.” the from draught least the not and all; after nothing mere

guests our arrangement which know could “one Weston, Mrs. said wish,” “I
pleasing generally most be would what do To best. like would general in
be.” would that what tell but could one object--if our be must

neighbours’ your want You true. “very Frank, cried true,” very “Yes,
chief the what ascertain could one If you. at wonder not do I opinions.
call I Shall off. far not are They instance. for Coles, them--the of
know not do I nearer.--And still is She Bates? Miss Or them? upon
of inclinations the understand to likely as not is Bates Miss whether
council. larger a want do we think I body. any as people the of rest the
us?” join to Bates Miss invite and go I Suppose

think you “if hesitating, rather Weston Mrs. said please,” you “Well--if
use.” any of be will she

“She Emma. said Bates,” Miss from purpose the to nothing get will “You
She nothing. you tell will she but gratitude, and delight all be will
consulting in advantage no see I questions. your to listen even not will
Bates.” Miss

hearing of fond very am I amusing! extremely so amusing, so is she “But
know.” you family, whole the bring not need I And talk. Bates Miss

it gave proposed, was what hearing on and them, joined Weston Mr. Here
approbation. decided his

at matter the end us let and Bates, Miss fetch and Frank.--Go do, “Aye,
properer a know not do I and sure; am I scheme, the enjoy will She once.
Bates. Miss Fetch difficulties. away do to how us shewing for person
be to how of lesson standing a is She nice. too little a growing are We
both.” them Invite both. them fetch But happy.

lady?”... old the Can sir! “Both

great a you think shall I sure. be to lady, young the No, lady! old “The
niece.” the without aunt the bring you if Frank, blockhead,

recollect. immediately not did I sir. pardon, your beg I “Oh!
And both.” them persuade to endeavour will I it, wish you if Undoubtedly
ran. he away

aunt, brisk-moving neat, short, the attending reappeared, he before Long
and woman sweet-tempered a like Weston, niece,--Mrs. elegant her and
it of evils the found and again, passage the examined had wife, good a
here and trifling; very before--indeed supposed had she than less much
at speculation in rest, the All decision. of difficulties the ended
and table of arrangements minor the All smooth. perfectly was least,
left were or themselves; made supper, and tea music, and lights chair,
Mrs. and Weston Mrs. between time any at settled be to trifles mere as
already had Frank come; to certainly was invited, body Stokes.--Every
fortnight, his beyond days few a staying propose to Enscombe to written
to was it dance delightful a And refused. be possibly not could which
be.

must. it that agree she did arrived, Bates Miss when cordially, Most
safer much (a approver, an as but wanted; not was she counsellor a As
general once at approbation, Her welcome. truly was she character,)
another for and please; but not could incessant, and warm minute, and
rooms, different the between fro, and to walking all were they half-hour
the of enjoyment happy in all and attending, some suggesting, some
positively being Emma’s without up break not did party The future.
without nor evening, the of hero the by dances first two the for secured
my her, asked has “He wife, his to whisper Weston Mr. overhearing her
would!” he knew I right. That’s dear.



XII CHAPTER


completely ball the of prospect the make to wanting was only thing One
granted the within day a for fixed being Emma--its to satisfactory
Weston’s Mr. of spite in for, Surry; in stay Churchill’s Frank of term
the that impossible very so it think not could she confidence,
his beyond day a remain to nephew their allow not might Churchills
take must preparations The feasible. judged not was this But fortnight.
were week third the till ready properly be could nothing time, their
and proceeding planning, be must they days few a for and on, entered
of risk, great the opinion, her risk--in the uncertainty--at in hoping
vain. in all being its

His word. in not if fact, in gracious gracious, was however Enscombe
opposed. not was it but please; not did evidently longer staying of wish
solicitude one of removal the as and prosperous; and safe was All
her of certain now being Emma, another, for way makes generally
provoking Knightley’s Mr. vexation next the as adopt to began ball,
or himself, dance not did he because Either it. about indifference
he consulted, being his without formed been had plan the because
its against determined him, interest not should it that resolved seemed
amusement. future any him affording or curiosity, present any exciting
reply, approving more no get could Emma communications voluntary her To
than,

this all at be to while worth it think Westons the If well. “Very
say to nothing have I entertainment, noisy of hours few a for trouble
yes, me.--Oh! for pleasures chuse not shall they that but it, against
as awake much as keep will I and refuse; not could I there; be must I
Larkins’s William over looking home, at be rather would I but can; I
seeing in confess.--Pleasure I rather, much account; week’s
who know not do it--I at look never indeed--I I, dancing!--not
reward. own its be must virtue, like believe, I dancing, does.--Fine
very something of thinking usually are by standing are who Those
different.”

not was It angry. quite her made it and her; at aimed was felt Emma This
so or indifferent, so was he that however Fairfax Jane to compliment in
ball, the reprobating in feelings _her_ by guided not was he indignant;
made It degree. extraordinary an to it of thought the enjoyed _she_ for
said;-- voluntarily hearted--she animated--open her

ball. the prevent to happen may nothing hope I Woodhouse, Miss “Oh!
with own, I it, to forward look do I be! would it disappointment a What
pleasure.” great _very_

preferred have would he that therefore Fairfax Jane oblige to not was It
convinced more and more was No!--she Larkins. William of society the
great a was There surmise. that in mistaken quite was Weston Mrs. that
no side--but his on attachment compassionate of and friendly of deal
love.

Two Knightley. Mr. with quarrelling for leisure no soon was there Alas!
of over-throw the by followed immediately were security joyful of days
nephew’s his urge to Churchill Mr. from arrived letter A thing. every
without do to unwell too unwell--far was Churchill Mrs. return. instant
husband) her said (so state suffering very a in been had she him;
usual her from though before, days two nephew her to writing when
of thinking never of habit constant and pain, give to unwillingness
trifle, to ill too was she now but it; mentioned not had she herself,
delay. without Enscombe for off set to him entreat must and

Mrs. from note a in Emma, to forwarded was letter this of substance The
gone be must He inevitable. was it going, his to As instantly. Weston,
aunt, his for alarm real any feeling without though hours, few a within
but occurred never they illnesses; her knew He repugnance. his lessen to
convenience. own her for

to hurry to time himself allow only could he “that added, Weston Mrs.
there friends few the of leave take and breakfast, after Highbury,
be might he that and him; in interest any feel to suppose could he whom
soon.” very Hartfield at expected

had it once When breakfast. Emma’s of finale the was note wretched This
The exclaim. and lament but thing, any doing no was there read, been
man young the that all man--and young the of loss ball--the the of loss
as evening delightful a wretched!--Such too was feeling!--It be might
the partner her and she and happy! so body been!--Every have would it
consolation. only the was so,” be would it said happiest!--“I

of principally thought He distinct. quite were feelings father’s Her
as and treated; was she how know to wanted and illness, Churchill’s Mrs.
they but disappointed; Emma dear have to shocking was it ball, the for
home. at safer be all would

this if but appeared; he before time some visitor her for ready was Emma
want total and look sorrowful his impatience, his upon all at reflected
away going the felt He him. redeem might come did he when spirits of
He evident. most was dejection His it. of speak to much too almost
rousing when and minutes; few first the for thought in lost really sat
say, to only was it himself,

worst.” the is leave-taking things, horrid all “Of

visit only your be not will “This Emma. said again,” come will you “But
Randalls.” to

to able be may I when of uncertainty head)--the his “Ah!--(shaking
of object the be will zeal!--It a with it for try shall return!--I
this town to go aunt and uncle my if cares!--and and thoughts my all
it afraid am spring--I last stir not did afraid--they am I spring--but
ever.” for gone custom a is

up.” given quite be must ball poor “Our

the seize not thing?--why any for wait we did ball!--why that “Ah!
preparation, by destroyed happiness is often once?--How at pleasure
Woodhouse, Miss so.--Oh! be would it us told preparation!--You foolish
right?” so always you are why

much would I instance. this in right be to sorry very am I “Indeed,
wise.” than merry been have rather

depends father My ball. our have to still are we again, come can I “If
engagement.” your forget not Do it. on

graciously. looked Emma

more day “every continued; he been!” has it as fortnight a “Such
making day before!--every day the than delightful more and precious
at remain can who those, Happy place. other any bear to fit less me
Highbury!”

will “I laughing, Emma, said now,” justice ample such us do you “As
first? at doubtfully little a come not did you whether ask, to venture
sure am I do. we sure am I expectations? your surpass rather we not Do
in long so been have not would You us. like to expect much not did you
Highbury.” of idea pleasant a had had you if coming,

Emma sentiment, the denying though and consciously; rather laughed He
so. been had it that convinced was

morning?” very this off be must you “And

I and together, back walk shall we here: me join to is father my “Yes;
bring will moment every that afraid almost am I immediately. off be must
him.”

Miss and Fairfax Miss friends your for even spare to minutes five “Not
have might mind argumentative powerful, Bates’s Miss unlucky! How Bates?
yours.” strengthened

It better. it thought I door, the passing there; called _have_ “Yes--I
detained was and minutes, three for in went I do. to thing right a was
not impossible it felt I and out; was She absent. being Bates’s Miss by
_must_ one that may, one that woman a is She in. came she till wait to
my pay to better was It slight. to wish not would one that but at; laugh
then”-- visit,

window. a to walked up, got hesitated, He

be hardly can you think Woodhouse--I Miss “perhaps, he, said short,” “In
suspicion”-- without quite

knew hardly She thoughts. her read to wanting if as her, at looked He
absolutely something of forerunner the like seemed It say. to what
in therefore, speak, to herself Forcing wish. not did she which serious,
said, calmly she by, it putting of hope the

visit, your pay to natural most was it right; the in quite are “You
then”--

reflecting probably her; at looking was he believed She silent. was He
heard She manner. the understand to trying and said, had she what on
sigh. to _cause_ had he that feel to him for natural was It sigh. him
moments awkward few A him. encouraging be to her believe not could He
said, manner determined more a in and again; down sat he and passed,

to given be might time my of rest the all that feel to something was “It
warm”-- most is Hartfield for regard My Hartfield.

more was embarrassed.--He quite seemed and again, rose again, stopt He
might it how say can who and supposed; had Emma than her with love in
Woodhouse Mr. appearance? his made not had father his if ended, have
composed. him made exertion of necessity the and followed; soon

Mr. trial. present the completed however, more, minutes few very A
of incapable as and done, be to was business when alert always Weston,
that any foreseeing of as inevitable, was that evil any procrastinating
he though man, young the and go;” to time was “It said, doubtful, was
leave. take to agree, but not could sigh, did and might

consolation. chief my is “that he; said all,” you about hear shall “I
engaged have I you. among on going is that thing every of hear shall I
promise to as kind so been has She me. with correspond to Weston Mrs.
really is one when correspondent, female a of blessing the Oh! it.
letters her In thing. every me tell will absent!--she the in interested
again.” Highbury dear at be shall I

the closed “Good-bye,” earnest very a hand, the of shake friendly very A
been had Short Churchill. Frank out shut soon had door the and speech,
sorry so felt Emma and gone; was he meeting; their notice--short the
his from society little their to loss a great so foresaw and part, to
too it feeling and sorry, too being of afraid be to begin to as absence
much.

his since day every almost meeting been had They change. sad a was It
to spirit great given had Randalls at being his Certainly arrival.
expectation the idea, the spirit; weeks--indescribable two last the
his of assurance the brought, had morning every which him seeing of
happy very a been had It manners! his liveliness, his attentions,
common the into it from sinking the be must forlorn and fortnight,
had he recommendation, other every complete To days. Hartfield of course
of constancy what or strength, What her. loved he that her told _almost_
present at but point; another was to, subject be might he affection
conscious a admiration, warm decidedly a having his doubt not could she
rest, the all to joined persuasion, this and herself; of preference
of spite in him, with love in little a be _must_ she that think her made
it. against determination previous every

listlessness, of sensation “This she. said must,” certainly “I
myself, employ and down sit to disinclination this stupidity, weariness,
house!-- the about insipid and dull being thing’s every of feeling this
I if world the in creature oddest the be should I love; in be must I
to good always is some to evil Well! least. at weeks few a not--for were
Frank for not if ball, the for fellow-mourners many have shall I others.
evening the spend may He happy. be will Knightley Mr. but Churchill;
likes.” he if now Larkins William dear his with

say not could He happiness. triumphant no shewed however, Knightley, Mr.
have would look cheerful very his account; own his on sorry was he that
he that steadily, very and said, he but had; he if him contradicted
considerable with and others, the of disappointment the for sorry was
added, kindness

out really are you dancing, of opportunities few so have who Emma, “You,
luck!” of out much very are you luck; of

honest her of judge to Fairfax, Jane saw she before days some was It
composure her meet, did they when but change; woeful this in regret
from suffering however, unwell, particularly been had She odious. was
ball the had that declare, aunt her made which degree, a to headache
was it and it; attended have could Jane think not did she place, taken
of languor the to indifference unbecoming her of some impute to charity
ill-health.



XIII CHAPTER


ideas Her love. in being her of doubt no entertain to continued Emma
good a was it thought she first, At much. how the to as varied only
hearing in pleasure great had She little. but afterwards, and deal;
ever than pleasure greater sake, his for and, of; talked Churchill Frank
and him, of thinking often very was she Weston; Mrs. and Mr. seeing in
were how was, he how know might she that letter, a for impatient quite
to coming his of chance the was what and aunt, his was how spirits, his
admit not could she hand, other the on But, spring. this again Randalls
disposed less be to morning, first the after nor, unhappy, be to herself
and, cheerful; and busy still was she usual; than employment for
and faults; have to him imagine yet could she was, he as pleasing
or drawing sat she as and, much, so him of thinking though farther,
close and progress the for schemes amusing thousand a forming working,
inventing and dialogues, interesting fancying attachment, their of
his on declaration imaginary every of conclusion the letters; elegant
subside to always was affection Their _him_. _refused_ she that was side
their mark to was charming and tender thing Every friendship. into
this, of sensible became she When part. to were they still but parting;
of spite in for love; in much very be not could she that her struck it
never father, her quit to never determination fixed and previous her
struggle a of more produce must certainly attachment strong a marry, to
feelings. own her in foresee could she than

said _sacrifice_,” word the of use any making myself find not do “I
is negatives, delicate my replies, clever my all of one not she.--“In
not is he that suspect do I sacrifice. a making to allusion any there
will certainly I better. the much So happiness. my to necessary really
I love. in enough quite am I do. I than more feel to myself persuade not
more.” be to sorry be should

feelings. his of view her with contented equally was she whole, the Upon

it--very denotes thing love--every in much very undoubtedly is “_He_
affection his if again, comes he when indeed!--and love in much
most be would it.--It encourage to not guard my on be must I continue,
I that Not up. made quite is mind own my as otherwise, do to inexcusable
he if No, hitherto. him encouraging been have I think can he imagine
been have not would he feelings, his share to all at me believed had
and looks his encouraged, himself thought have he Could wretched. so
must I however, different.--Still, been have would parting at language
continuing attachment his of supposition the in is This guard. my on be
look not do I will; it expect I that know not do I but is; now it what
upon build altogether not do man--I of sort the quite be to him upon
imagine can I but warm, are feelings constancy.--His or steadiness his
short, in subject, the of consideration changeable.--Every rather them
involved.--I deeply more not is happiness my that thankful me makes
a be will it then, while--and little a after again well very do shall
lives, their in once love in is body every say they for over; thing good
easily.” off let been have shall I and

and it; of perusal the had Emma arrived, Weston Mrs. to letter his When
her made which admiration and pleasure of degree a with it read she
had she think and sensations, own her over head her shake first at
giving letter, well-written long, a was It strength. their undervalued
the all expressing feelings, his of and journey his of particulars the
honourable, and natural was which respect and gratitude, affection,
supposed be could that local and exterior thing every describing and
of now flourishes suspicious No precision. and spirit with attractive,
Mrs. towards feeling real of language the was it concern; or apology
contrast the Enscombe, to Highbury from transition the and Weston;
was life social of blessings first the of some in places the between
more much how and felt, was it keenly how shew to on touched enough just
charm propriety.--The of restraints the for but said been have might
than more appeared _Woodhouse_ _Miss_ wanting. not was name own her of
a either connexion, pleasing of something a without never and once,
in and said; had she what of remembrance a or taste, her to compliment
any by was it as unadorned eye, her meeting its of time last very the
of effect the discern could yet she gallantry, of wreath broad such
all of perhaps compliment greatest the acknowledge and influence her
these were corner vacant lowest very the into Compressed conveyed.
Miss for know, you as Tuesday, on moment spare a not had words--“I
adieus and excuses my make Pray friend. little beautiful Woodhouse’s
was Harriet herself. for all was doubt, not could Emma This, her.” to
prospects and information His friend. _her_ being from only remembered
anticipated; been had than better nor worse neither were Enscombe to as
own his in even yet, not dared he and recovering, was Churchill Mrs.
again. Randalls to coming for time a fix imagination,

material the in letter the was as stimulative and however, Gratifying,
returned and up folded was it when found, yet she sentiments, its part,
could she that warmth, lasting any added not had it that Weston, Mrs. to
her. without do to learn must he that and writer, the without do still
more grew only refusal of resolution Her unchanged. were intentions Her
consolation subsequent his for scheme a of addition the by interesting
which words the and Harriet, of recollection His happiness. and
the her to suggested friend,” little “beautiful the it, clothed
it Was affections. his in her succeeding Harriet’s of idea
in inferior his greatly was undoubtedly impossible?--No.--Harriet
loveliness the with struck much very been had he but understanding;
the all and manner; her of simplicity warm the and face her of
favour.--For her in were connexion and circumstance of probabilities
indeed. delightful and advantageous be would it Harriet,

know I it. of think not must she.--“I said it,” upon dwell not must “I
have things stranger But speculations. such indulging of danger the
it now, do we as other each for care to cease we when and happened;
disinterested true of sort that in us confirming of means the be will
pleasure.” with to forward look already can I which friendship

it though behalf, Harriet’s on store in comfort a have to well was It
quarter that in evil for seldom; it touch fancy the let to wise be might
Elton’s Mr. succeeded had arrival Churchill’s Frank As hand. at was
interest latest the as Highbury, of conversation the in engagement
Churchill’s Frank upon now so first, the down borne entirely had
irresistible most the assuming were concerns Elton’s Mr. disappearance,
Mr. again; them among be soon would He named. was wedding-day form.--His
letter first the over talk to time hardly was There bride. his and Elton
body’s every in was bride” his and Elton “Mr. before Enscombe from
sound. the at sick grew Emma forgotten. was Churchill Frank and mouth,
Harriet’s and Elton; Mr. from exemption happy of weeks three had had She
strength. gaining lately been had hope, to willing been had she mind,
of deal great a been had there least, at view in ball Weston’s Mr. With
had she that evident too now was it but things; other to insensibility
actual the against stand could as composure of state a such attained not
all. and bell-ringing, carriage, approach--new

the all required which spirits of flutter a in was Harriet Poor
could Emma that kind every of attentions and soothings and reasonings
had Harriet that her, for much too do not could she that felt Emma give.
work heavy was it but patience; her all and ingenuity her all to right a
agreed ever for effect, any producing without convincing ever for be to
listened Harriet same. the opinions their make to able being without to,
Woodhouse Miss as just was true--it very was “it said and submissively,
not would she them--and about think to while worth not was described--it
and avail, could subject of change no but longer” any them about think
as Eltons the about restless and anxious as her saw half-hour next the
ground. another on her attacked Emma last At before.

Mr. about unhappy so and occupied so be to yourself allowing “Your
_me_. make can you reproach strongest the is Harriet, marrying, Elton’s
into. fell I mistake the for reproof greater a me give not could You
assure I it, forgotten not have I know. I doing, my all was It
will it you--and deceive miserably very did I myself, you.--Deceived
of danger in me imagine not Do ever. for me to reflection painful a be
it.” forgetting

eager of words few a than more utter to much too this felt Harriet
continued, Emma exclamation.

talk less, think sake; my for Harriet yourself exert said, not have “I
I rather, sake own your for because sake; my for Elton Mr. of less
my than important more is what of sake the for done, be to it wish would
your is what of consideration a you, in self-command of habit a comfort,
of suspicions the avoid to endeavour an propriety, to attention an duty,
tranquillity. your restore and credit, and health your save to others,
very are They you. on pressing been have I which motives the are These
act to sufficiently them feel cannot you that am I sorry important--and
consideration. secondary very a is pain from saved being My them. upon
sometimes may I Perhaps pain. greater from yourself save to you want I
what rather due--or was what forget not would Harriet that felt have
me.” by kind be would

of idea The rest. the all than more did affections her to appeal This
really she whom Woodhouse, Miss for consideration and gratitude wanting
violence the when and while, a for wretched her made extremely, loved
to prompt to enough powerful remained still away, comforted was grief of
tolerably. very it in her support and right was what

life--Want my in had ever I friend best the been have who “You,
do I as nobody for care you!--I to equal is you!--Nobody to gratitude
been!” have I ungrateful how Woodhouse, Miss you!--Oh! for

and look that thing every by were they as assisted expressions, Such
so Harriet loved never had she that feel Emma made do, could manner
before. highly so affection her valued nor well,

to afterwards she said heart,” of tenderness to equal charm no is “There
tenderness and Warmth it. to compared be to nothing is “There herself.
the all beat will manner, open affectionate, an with heart, of
It will. it sure am I attraction, for world, the in head of clearness
generally so father dear my makes which heart of tenderness is
not--but it have popularity.--I her all Isabella gives beloved--which
the all in superior my is it.--Harriet respect and prize to how know I
change not would Harriet!--I Dear gives. it felicity the all and charm
female best-judging longest-sighted, clearest-headed, the for you
a worth is Fairfax!--Harriet Jane a of coldness the Oh! breathing.
I invaluable. is wife--it man’s sensible wife--a a for such--And hundred
Harriet!” for Emma changes who man the happy but names; no mention



XIV CHAPTER


be might devotion though but church: at seen first was Elton Mrs.
and pew, a in bride a by satisfied be not could curiosity interrupted,
to paid, be to then were which form in visits the for left be must it
or pretty, rather only or indeed, pretty very were she whether settle
all. at pretty not

make to propriety, or pride of than curiosity of less feelings, had Emma
a made she and respects; her pay to last the being not on resolve her
might business the of worst the that her, with going Harriet’s of point
possible. as soon as through gone be

to room same the in be not could again, house the enter not could She
to ago, months three retreated artifice vain such with had she which
thoughts vexatious thousand A _recollecting_. without boot, her up lace
was it and blunders; horrible and charades, Compliments, recur. would
but too; recollecting be not should Harriet poor that supposed be to not
visit The silent. and pale rather only was and well, very behaved she
occupation and embarrassment much so was there and short; course of was
to entirely herself allow not would Emma that it, shorten to mind of
the beyond one, give to account no on and lady, the of opinion an form
pleasing.” very and dressed, “elegantly being of terms nothing-meaning

fault, find to hurry a in be not would She her. like really not did She
elegance.-- not but elegance;--ease, no was there that suspected she but
there bride, a stranger, a woman, young a for that sure almost was She
unpretty; not face her good; rather was person Her ease. much too was
Emma elegant. were manner, nor voice, nor air, nor feature, neither but
so. out turn would it least at thought

not would she no, appear--but not did manners his Elton, Mr. for As
an was It manners. his about herself from word witty a or hasty a permit
man a and visits, wedding receiving be to time any at ceremony awkward
woman The it. through well himself acquit to grace all be need had
the and clothes, fine of assistance the have might she off; better was
to sense good own his only had man the but bashfulness, of privilege
Mr. poor unlucky peculiarly how considered she when and on; depend
just had he woman the with once at room same the in being in was Elton
had he whom woman the and marry, to wanted had he woman the married,
as look to right the have to him allow must she marry, to expected been
as easy really little as and affectedly, much as be to and wise, little
be. could

the quitted had they when Harriet, said Woodhouse,” Miss “Well,
Miss “Well, begin; to friend her for vain in waiting after and house,
she not her?--Is of think you do what sigh,) gentle a (with Woodhouse,
charming?” very

answer. Emma’s in hesitation little a was There

woman.” young pleasing very yes--very--a “Oh!

beautiful.” quite beautiful, her think “I

gown.” elegant remarkably a indeed; dressed, nicely “Very

love.” in fallen have should he that surprized all at not am “I

and fortune; pretty all.--A at one surprize to nothing is no--there “Oh!
way.” his in came she

very was she say dare “I again, sighing Harriet, returned say,” dare “I
him.” to attached much

woman the marry to fate man’s every not is it but might; she “Perhaps
this thought and home, a wanted perhaps Hawkins Miss best. him loves who
have.” to likely was she offer best the

ever could nobody might, she well “and earnestly, Harriet said “Yes,”
Miss now, And heart. my all with happy them wish I Well, better. a have
as just is He again. them seeing mind shall I think not do I Woodhouse,
different a quite is it know, you married, being ever;--but as superior
and sit can I afraid; be not need you Woodhouse, Miss indeed, No, thing.
thrown not has he that know To misery. great any without now him admire
woman, young charming a seem does comfort!--She a such is away, himself
How ‘Augusta.’ her called He creature! Happy deserves. he what just
delightful!”

see then could She mind. her up made Emma returned, was visit the When
Hartfield, at be to not happening Harriet’s From better. judge and more
quarter a had she Elton, Mr. engage to present being father’s her and
composedly could and herself, to conversation lady’s the of hour an of
that her convinced quite hour an of quarter the and her; to attend
and herself, with satisfied well extremely woman, vain a was Elton Mrs.
very be and shine to meant she that importance; own her of much thinking
pert school, bad a in formed been had which manners with but superior,
people, of set one from drawn were notions her all that familiar; and
that and ignorant, was she foolish not if that living; of style one and
good. no Elton Mr. do certainly would society her

herself, refined or wise not If match. better a been have would Harriet
it Hawkins, Miss but were; who those with him connected have would she
of best the been had conceit, easy her from supposed fairly be might
the of pride the was Bristol near brother-in-law rich The set. own her
him. of pride the were carriages his and place his and alliance,

brother “My Grove, Maple was seated being after subject first very The
The Grove. Maple to Hartfield of comparison seat;”--a Suckling’s Mr.
was house the and pretty; and neat but small, were Hartfield of grounds
impressed favourably most seemed Elton Mrs. well-built. and modern
or see could she that all and entrance, the room, the of size the by
the by struck quite was indeed!--She Grove Maple like “Very imagine.
morning-room the of size and shape very the was room likeness!--That
appealed was Elton room.”--Mr. favourite sister’s her Grove; Maple at
fancy almost really could like?--She astonishingly it not to.--“Was
Grove.” Maple at herself

the like very how observed I in, came I as know, staircase--You the “And
really I house. the of part same the in exactly placed was; staircase
very is it Woodhouse, Miss you, assure I exclaiming! help not could
to partial extremely so am I place a of reminded be to me, to delightful
little a (with there! months happy many so spent have I Grove. Maple as
who body Every undoubtedly. place, charming A sentiment). of sigh
home. a quite been has it me, to but beauty; its by struck is it sees
will you Woodhouse, Miss me, like transplanted, are you Whenever
like all at thing any with meet to is it delightful very how understand
of evils the of one quite is this say always I behind. left has one what
matrimony.”

sufficient fully was it but could; she as reply a slight as made Emma
herself. talking be to wanted only who Elton, Mrs. for

house--the the merely not is it And Grove! Maple like extremely “So
like. strikingly are observe, could I as far as you, assure I grounds,
stand and here, as profusion same the in are Grove Maple at laurels The
glimpse a had I and lawn; the across way--just same the in much very
in exactly so me put which it, round bench a with tree, large fine a of
People place. this with enchanted be will sister and brother My mind!
thing any with pleased always are themselves grounds extensive have who
style.” same the in

that idea great a had She sentiment. this of truth the doubted Emma
the for little very cared themselves grounds extensive had who people
attack to while worth not was it but else; body any of grounds extensive
reply, in said only therefore and double-dyed, so error an

you think will you afraid am I country, this of more seen have you “When
beauties.” of full is Surry Hartfield. overrated have

you England, of garden the is It that. of aware quite am I yes, “Oh!
England.” of garden the is Surry know.

Many distinction. that on claims our rest not must we but “Yes;
as well as England, of garden the called are believe, I counties,
Surry.”

smile. satisfied most a with Elton, Mrs. replied not,” fancy I “No,
so.” called Surry but county any heard never “I

silenced. was Emma

summer or spring, the in visit a us promised have sister and brother “My
for time our be will that “and Elton; Mrs. continued farthest,” at
dare I deal, great a explore shall we us, with are they While exploring.
four holds which course, of barouche-landau, their have will They say.
carriage, _our_ of thing any saying without therefore, and perfectly;
They well. extremely beauties different the explore to able be should we
the of season that at think, I chaise, their in come hardly would
their recommend decidedly shall I on, draws time the when Indeed, year.
preferable. much very so be will it barouche-landau; the bringing
Miss know, you sort, this of country beautiful a into come people When
Mr. and possible; as much as see to them wishes naturally one Woodhouse,
King’s-Weston to explored We exploring. of fond extremely is Suckling
their after just delightfully, most way, that in summer, last twice
kind that of parties many have You barouche-landau. the having first
summer?” every Woodhouse, Miss suppose, I here,

very the of distance of out rather are We here. immediately not “No;
we and of; speak you parties of sort the attract which beauties striking
home at stay to disposed more believe; I people, of set quiet very a are
pleasure.” of schemes in engage than

can Nobody comfort. real for home at staying like nothing is there “Ah!
Maple at it for proverb a quite was I am. I than home to devoted more be
Bristol, to going been has she when said, Selina has time a Many Grove.
must absolutely I house. the from move to girl this get cannot really ‘I
barouche-landau the in up stuck being hate I though myself, by in go
good-will, own her with believe, I Augusta, but companion; a without
so; said she has time a Many paling.’ park the beyond stir never would
contrary, the on think, I seclusion. entire for advocate no am I yet and
very a is it society, from entirely up themselves shut people when
in world the in mix to advisable more much is it that and thing; bad
I little. too or much too either it in living without degree, proper a
Woodhouse--(looking Miss however, situation, your understand perfectly
great a be must health of state father’s Your Woodhouse), Mr. towards
recommend me Let should. he Bath?--Indeed try he not does Why drawback.
Woodhouse Mr. doing its of doubt no have I you assure I you. to Bath
good.”

any receiving without but formerly; once, than more it tried father “My
you, to unknown not is say, dare I name, whose Perry, Mr. and benefit;
now.” useful be to likely more all at be would it conceive not does

the where Woodhouse, Miss you, assure I for pity; great a that’s “Ah!
Bath my In give. they relief the wonderful quite is it agree, do waters
place, a cheerful so is it And it! of instances such seen have I life,
spirits, Woodhouse’s Mr. to use of being of fail not could it that
its to as And depressed. much sometimes are understand, I which,
dwell to pains much take not need I fancy I _you_, to recommendations
generally pretty are young the to Bath of advantages The them. on
lived have who you, for introduction charming a be would It understood.
best the of some you secure immediately could I and life; a secluded so
of host little a you bring would me from line A place. the in society
have I lady the Partridge, Mrs. friend, particular my and acquaintance;
any you shew to happy most be would Bath, in when with resided always
public into go to you for person very the be would and attentions,
with.”

idea The impolite. being without bear, could Emma as much as was It
an called was what for Elton Mrs. to indebted being her of
friend a of auspices the under public into going her _introduction_--of
the with who, widow, dashing vulgar, some Elton’s--probably Mrs. of
Miss of dignity live!--The to shift a made just boarder, a of help
indeed! sunk was Hartfield, of Woodhouse,

have could she reproofs the of any from however, herself, restrained She
was Bath to going their “but coolly; Elton Mrs. thanked only and given,
that convinced perfectly not was she and question; the of out quite
prevent to then, And father.” her than better her suit might place the
directly. subject the changed indignation, and outrage farther

occasions, these Upon Elton. Mrs. musical, are you whether ask not do “I
known long has Highbury and her; precedes generally character lady’s a
performer.” superior a are you that

superior A idea. such any against protest must I indeed; no, “Oh!
partial how from Consider you. assure I it, from far performer!--very
of fond doatingly am I came. information your quarter a
devoid entirely not am I say friends my fond;--and music--passionately
is performance my honour my upon else, thing any to as but taste; of
play know, well I Woodhouse, Miss You, degree. last the to _mediocre_
satisfaction, greatest the been has it you assure I delightfully.
got am I society musical a what hear to me, to delight and comfort,
to life of necessary a is It music. without do cannot absolutely I into.
at both society, musical very a to used been always having and me;
I sacrifice. serious most a been have would it Bath, in and Grove Maple
future my of speaking was he when E. Mr. to much as said honestly
be should it of retirement the lest fears his expressing and home,
had I what too--knowing house the of inferiority the and disagreeable;
apprehension. without wholly not was he course to--of accustomed been
_the_ that said honestly I way, that in it of speaking was he When
of fear no had I plays--for balls, up--parties, give could I _world_
was world the myself, within resources many so with Blessed retirement.
had who those To it. without well very do could I _me_. to necessary not
quite me made resources my but thing; different a was it resources no
I to, used been had I than rooms smaller-sized to as And independent.
any to equal perfectly was I hoped I thought. a it give not could really
every to accustomed been had I Certainly description. that of sacrifice
not were carriages two that him assure did I but Grove; Maple at luxury
I, said ‘But,’ apartments. spacious were nor happiness, my to necessary
a of something without live can I think not do I honest, quite be ‘to
life music, without but else; nothing for condition I society. musical
me.’” to blank a be would

hesitate would Elton Mr. “that smiling, Emma, said suppose,” cannot “We
and Highbury; in society musical _very_ a being there of you assure to
be may than more truth the outstepped has he find not will you hope I
motive.” the of consideration in pardoned,

to delighted am I head. that on all at doubts no have I indeed, “No,
little sweet many have shall we hope I circle. a such in myself find
a establish must I and you Woodhouse, Miss think, I together. concerts
ours. or house, your at meetings weekly regular have and club, musical
shall we think I ourselves, exert _we_ If plan? good a be it not Will
be would nature that of Something allies. of want in long be not
in me keep to inducement an as _me_, for desirable particularly
against story sad a is know--there you women, married for practice;
music.” up give to apt too but are They general. in them,

danger, no be can it--there of fond extremely so are who you, “But
surely?”

acquaintance, my among around look I when really but not; hope should “I
the touches music--never up given entirely has Selina tremble. I
Mrs. of said be may same the And sweetly. played she instrument--though
Mrs. now Milmans, two the of was--and that Partridge, Jeffereys--Clara
my Upon enumerate. can I than more of and Cooper; James Mrs. and Bird
with angry quite be to used I fright. a in one put to enough is it word
has woman married a that comprehend to now begin I really but Selina;
this hour an half was I believe I attention. her call to things many
housekeeper.” my with up shut morning

a regular so in be soon “will Emma, said kind,” that of thing every “But
train--”

see.” shall “we laughing, Elton, Mrs. said “Well,”

nothing had music, her neglecting upon determined so her finding Emma,
another chose Elton Mrs. pause, moment’s a after and, say; to more
subject.

at both them found “and she, said Randalls,” at calling been have “We
extremely. them like I be. to seem they people pleasant very and home;
favourite first-rate a creature--quite excellent an seems Weston Mr.
is good--there truly so appears _she_ And you. assure I already, me with
one upon wins it that her, about kind-hearted and motherly so something
think?” I governess, your was She directly.

hardly Elton Mrs. but answer; to astonished much too almost was Emma
on. went she before affirmative the for waited

very so her find to astonished rather was I much, as understood “Having
gentlewoman.” the quite really is she But lady-like!

good. particularly always “were Emma, said manners,” Weston’s “Mrs.
safest the them make would elegance, and simplicity, propriety, Their
woman.” young any for model

there?” were we while in came think you do who “And

acquaintance--and old some implied tone The loss. a at quite was Emma
guess? possibly she could how

it not himself!--Was “Knightley Elton; Mrs. continued “Knightley!”
never had I day, other the called he when within being not lucky?--for,
E.’s, Mr. of friend a particular so as course, of and before; him seen
often so been had Knightley’ friend ‘My curiosity. great a had I
my do must I and him; see to impatient really was I that mentioned,
friend. his of ashamed be not need he that say to justice the sposo caro
I Decidedly, much. very him like I gentleman. the quite is Knightley
man.” gentleman-like very a think,

could Emma and off; were They gone. be to time now was it Happily,
breathe.

had I than “Worse exclamation. immediate her was woman!” “Insufferable
have not could Knightley!--I insufferable! Absolutely supposed.
call and before, life her in him seen Knightley!--never it. believed
upstart, little A gentleman! a is he that discover Knightley!--and him
her and _sposo_, _caro_ her and E., Mr. her with being, vulgar
finery. underbred and pretension pert of airs her all and resources,
whether doubt I gentleman! a is Knightley Mr. that discover to Actually
could I lady. a be to her discover and compliment, the return will he
to unite should I and she that propose to And it! believed have not
Mrs. And friends! bosom were we fancy would One club! musical a form
a be should up me brought had who person the that Weston!--Astonished
beyond Much equal. her with met never I worse. and Worse gentlewoman!
Frank would what Oh! comparison. any by disgraced is Harriet hopes. my
he diverted how and angry How here? were he if her, to say Churchill
first the Always directly. him of am--thinking I there Ah! be! would
comes Churchill Frank out! myself catch I How of! thought be to person
mind!”-- my into regularly as

father her time the by that thoughts, her through glibly so ran this All
was and departure, Eltons’ the of bustle the after himself, arranged had
attending. of capable tolerably very was she speak, to ready

her saw never we “considering began, deliberately he dear,” my “Well,
she say dare I and lady; young of sort pretty very a seems she before,
little A quick. too little a speaks She you. with pleased much very was
believe I But ear. the hurts rather which is there voice of quickness
and you like speaks nobody and voices; strange like not do I nice; am I
pretty-behaved obliging, very a seems she However, Taylor. Miss poor
think I Though wife. good very a him make will doubt no and lady, young
not for could I excuses best the made I married. have not better had he
I occasion; happy this on Elton Mrs. and him on wait to able been having
to ought I But summer. the of course the in _should_ I hoped I that said
shews it Ah! remiss. very is bride a upon wait to Not before. gone have
Vicarage into corner the like not do I But am! I invalid sad a what
Lane.”

you.” knows Elton Mr. sir. accepted, were apologies your say dare “I

her to respects my paid have to ought bride--I lady--a young a but “Yes:
deficient.” very being was It possible. if

why therefore and matrimony; to friend no are you papa, dear my “But,
to ought It _bride_? a to respects your pay to anxious so be you should
you if marry to people encouraging is It _you_. to recommendation no be
them.” of much so make

always would I but marry, to body any encouraged never I dear, my “No,
especially, bride, a lady--and a to attention proper every pay to wish
you bride, A _her_. to due avowedly is More neglected. be to never is
who be others the let company, in first the always is dear, my know,
may.” they

what know not do I marry, to encouragement not is this if papa, “Well,
to sanction your lending be to you expected have never should I And is.
ladies.” young poor for vanity-baits such

mere of matter a is This me. understand not do you dear, “My
any with do to nothing has and good-breeding, and politeness common
marry.” to people to encouragement

understand not could and nervous, growing was father Her done. had Emma
long, very long, and offences, Elton’s Mrs. to returned mind Her _her_.
her. occupy they did



XV CHAPTER


ill her retract to discovery, subsequent any by required, not was Emma
as Such correct. pretty been had observation Her Elton. Mrs. of opinion
appeared she such interview, second this on her to appeared Elton Mrs.
ignorant, familiar, presuming, again,--self-important, met they whenever
accomplishment, little a and beauty little a had She ill-bred. and
superior with coming herself thought she that judgment little so but
neighbourhood; country a improve and enliven to world, the of knowledge
Mrs. as society in place a such held have to Hawkins Miss conceived and
surpass. could only consequence Elton’s

from differently all at thought Elton Mr. suppose to reason no was There
air the had He proud. but her, with happy merely not seemed He wife. his
Highbury, to woman a such brought having on himself congratulating of
her of part greater the and equal; could Woodhouse Miss even not as
judging, of habit the in not or commend, to disposed acquaintance, new
granted for it taking or good-will, Bates’s Miss of lead the following
professed she as agreeable as and clever as be must bride the that
praise Elton’s Mrs. that so satisfied; well very were herself,
Miss by unimpeded do, to ought it as another to mouth one from passed
with talked and contribution first her continued readily who Woodhouse,
dressed.” elegantly very and pleasant “very being her of grace good a

at appeared had she than worse even grew Elton Mrs. respect one In
the by probably, Emma.--Offended, towards altered feelings Her first.
drew she with, met intimacy of proposals her which encouragement little
and distant; and cold more much became gradually and turn her in back
was it produced which ill-will the agreeable, was effect the though
Mr. too--and manners, Her dislike. Emma’s increasing necessarily
and sneering were They Harriet. towards unpleasant were Elton’s,
the but cure; Harriet’s work rapidly must it hoped Emma negligent.
very both them sunk behaviour such prompt could which sensations
been had attachment Harriet’s poor that doubted be to not was much.--It
under story, the in share own her and unreserve, conjugal to offering an
him, to soothing most the and her to favourable least the colouring a
object the course, of was, She also. given been likelihood all in had
be must it say, to else nothing had they dislike.--When joint their of
which enmity the and Woodhouse; Miss abusing begin to easy always
in vent broader a found her, to disrespect open in shew not dared they
Harriet. of treatment contemptuous

Not first. the from and Fairfax; Jane to fancy great a took Elton Mrs.
to supposed be might lady young one with warfare of state a when merely
satisfied not was she and first; very the from but other, the recommend
without admiration--but reasonable and natural a expressing with
and assist to wanting be must she privilege, or plea, or solicitation,
the about and confidence, her forfeited had Emma her.--Before befriend
knight-errantry Elton’s Mrs. all heard she meeting, their of time third
subject.-- the on

rave quite Woodhouse.--I Miss charming, absolutely is Fairfax “Jane
and mild So creature. interesting sweet, Fairfax.--A Jane about
very has she think I you assure talents!--I such with ladylike--and
extremely plays she that say to scruple not do I talents. extraordinary
she Oh! point. that on decidedly speak to music of enough know I well.
word, my upon warmth--but, my at laugh will You charming! absolutely is
calculated so is situation her Fairfax.--And Jane but nothing of talk I
endeavour and ourselves exert must we Woodhouse, one!--Miss affect to
hers as talent Such forward. her bring must We her. for something do to
those heard have you say dare unknown.--I remain to suffered be not must
poet, the of lines charming

unseen, blush to born is flower a many ‘Full
air.’ desert the on fragrance its waste ‘And

Fairfax.” Jane sweet in verified be to them allow not must We

answer--“and calm Emma’s was it,” of danger any is there think cannot “I
and situation Fairfax’s Miss with acquainted better are you when
I Campbell, Mrs. and Colonel with been, has home her what understand
unknown.” be can talents her suppose will you that idea no have

such retirement, such in now is she Woodhouse, Miss dear but “Oh!
enjoyed have may she advantages away.--Whatever thrown so obscurity,
it. feels she think I And end! an at palpably so are Campbells the with
she that see can One silent. and timid very is She does. she sure am I
I it. for better the her like I encouragement. of want the feels
for advocate great a am I me. to recommendation a is it confess must
those in it.--But with meet often not does one sure am I timidity--and
assure I Oh! prepossessing. extremely is it inferior, all at are who
more me interests and character, delightful very a is Fairfax Jane you,
express.” can I than

of any or you how aware not am I deal--but great a feel to appear “You
longer her known have who those of any here, acquaintance Fairfax’s Miss
than”-- attention other any her shew can yourself, than

to dare who those by done be may deal vast a Woodhouse, Miss dear “My
will many example, the set _we_ If afraid. be not need I and You act.
_We_ situations. our not have all though can; they as far as it follow
style a in live _we_ and home, her convey and fetch to carriages have
the time, any at Fairfax, Jane of addition the make not could which
to were Wright if displeased extremely be should inconvenient.--I least
_more_ asked having regret me make could as dinner, a such up us send
of sort that of idea no have I it. of partake to Fairfax Jane than
been have I what considering _should_, I that likely not is It thing.
the quite be may housekeeping, in perhaps, danger, greatest My to. used
Maple expense. of careless too being and much, too doing in way, other
not do we be--for to ought it than more model my be probably will Grove
my income.--However, in Suckling, Mr. brother, my equal to affect all at
have certainly shall Fairfax.--I Jane noticing to as taken is resolution
shall can, I wherever her introduce shall house, my at often very her
constantly be shall and talents, her out draw to parties musical have
very so is acquaintance My situation. eligible an for watch the on
suit to something of hearing of doubt little have I that extensive,
my to particularly very course, of her, introduce shall shortly.--I her
her like will they sure am I us. to come they when sister and brother
fears her them, with acquainted little a gets she when and extremely;
manners the in nothing is really there for off, wear completely will
often very her have shall conciliating.--I highly is what but either of
a find sometimes shall we say dare I and me, with are they while indeed
parties.” exploring our of some in barouche-landau the in her for seat

You this. deserved not have Emma.--“You Fairfax!”--thought Jane “Poor
punishment a is this but Dixon, Mr. to regard with wrong done have may
Mrs. of protection and kindness merited!--The have can you what beyond
suppose not me Let Heavens! Fairfax.’ Jane and Fairfax Elton!--‘Jane
honour, my upon me!--But Woodhouse-ing Emma about, go dares she that
tongue!” woman’s that of licentiousness the to limits no seems there

exclusively so any again--to paradings such to listen to not had Emma
Miss “dear a with decorated disgustingly herself--so to addressed
appeared, afterwards soon side Elton’s Mrs. on change The Woodhouse.”
particular very the be to forced peace--neither in left was she and
active very the guidance, Elton’s Mrs. under nor, Elton, Mrs. of friend
general a in others with sharing only and Fairfax, Jane of patroness
done. was what meditated, was what felt, was what knowing in way,

for gratitude Bates’s amusement.--Miss some with on looked She
guileless of style first the in was Jane to attentions Elton’s Mrs.
worthies--the her of one quite was She warmth. and simplicity
and accomplished as woman--just delightful affable, amiable, most
surprize only Emma’s considered. be to meant Elton Mrs. as condescending
Mrs. tolerate and attentions those accept should Fairfax Jane that was
Eltons, the with walking her of heard She do. to seemed she as Elton
was This Eltons! the with day a spending Eltons, the with sitting
or taste the that possible it believed have not could astonishing!--She
as friendship and society such endure could Fairfax Miss of pride the
offer. to had Vicarage the

here remain to chuse she.--“To said riddle!” a quite riddle, a is “She
the chuse to now And sort! every of privations under month, after month
conversation, her of penury the and notice Elton’s Mrs. of mortification
her loved always have who companions superior the to return than rather
affection.” generous real, such with

Campbells the months; three for professedly Highbury to come had Jane
had Campbells the now but months; three for Ireland to gone were
fresh and Midsummer, till least at stay to daughter their promised
Miss to According there. them join to her for arrived had invitations
pressingly. most written had Dixon her--Mrs. from came all Bates--it
friends sent, servants found, be to were means go, but Jane Would
had she still but exist; to allowed difficulty travelling contrived--no
it! declined

refusing for appears, than powerful more motive, some have must “She
sort some under be must “She conclusion. Emma’s was invitation,” this
great is There herself. or Campbells the by either inflicted penance, of
be to _not_ is somewhere.--She resolution great caution, great fear,
she must why But somebody. by issued is decree The _Dixons_. the with
puzzle.” separate a quite is Eltons?--Here the with be to consent

before subject, the of part that on aloud wonder her speaking her Upon
this ventured Weston Mrs. Elton, Mrs. of opinion her knew who few the
Jane. for apology

Vicarage, the at enjoyment great any has she that suppose cannot “We
a is aunt Her home. at always being than better is it Emma--but dear my
We tiresome. very be must companion, constant a as but, creature, good
for taste her condemn we before quits, Fairfax Miss what consider must
to.” goes she what

Fairfax “Miss warmly, Knightley Mr. said Weston,” Mrs. right, are “You
Elton. Mrs. of opinion just a forming of us of any as capable as is
chosen have not would she associate, to whom with chosen have she Could
from attentions receives she Emma) at smile reproachful a (with But her.
her.” pays else nobody which Elton, Mrs.

she and glance; momentary a her giving was Weston Mrs. that felt Emma
presently she blush, faint a With warmth. his by struck herself was
replied,

rather would imagined, have should I Elton’s, Mrs. as attentions “Such
should I invitations Elton’s Mrs. Fairfax. Miss gratify than disgust
inviting.” but thing any imagined have

have to were Fairfax Miss “if Weston, Mrs. said wonder,” not should “I
in eagerness aunt’s her by inclination, own her beyond on drawn been
may Bates Miss Poor her. for civilities Elton’s Mrs. accepting
greater a into her hurried and niece her committed have likely very
in dictated, have would sense good own her than intimacy of appearance
change.” little a of wish natural very the of spite

few a after and again; speak him hear to anxious rather felt Both
said, he silence, minutes

does Elton too--Mrs. consideration into taken be must thing “Another
the know all We her. _of_ speaks she as Fairfax Miss _to_ talk not
spoken plainest the thou, and she or he pronouns the between difference
common beyond something a of influence the feel all we us; amongst
more something other--a each with intercourse personal our in civility
we that hints disagreeable the body any give cannot We implanted. early
differently. things feel We before. hour the of full very been have may
be may you principle, general a as this, of operation the besides And
mind of both superiority her by Elton Mrs. awes Fairfax Miss that sure
the all with her treats Elton Mrs. face, to face that, and manner; and
probably Fairfax Jane as woman a Such to. claim a has she which respect
can vanity of degree no before--and way Elton’s Mrs. in fell never
if action, in littleness comparative own her acknowledging her prevent
consciousness.” in not

Henry Little Emma. said Fairfax,” Jane of think you highly how know “I
her made delicacy and alarm of mixture a and thoughts, her in was
say. to else what irresolute

her.” of think I highly how know may body “any replied, he “Yes,”

soon but look, arch an with and hastily beginning Emma, said yet,” “And
hurried once--she at worst the know to however, better, was stopping--it
it highly how yourself aware be hardly may you perhaps, yet, on--“And
or day some surprize by you take may admiration your of extent The is.
other.”

thick his of buttons lower the upon work at hard was Knightley Mr.
or together, them getting of exertion the either and gaiters, leather
answered, he as face, his into colour the brought cause, other some

me gave Cole Mr. behindhand. miserably are you there?--But you are “Oh!
ago.” weeks six it of hint a

not did and Weston, Mrs. by pressed foot her felt stopped.--Emma He
on-- went he moment a In think. to what know herself

dare I Fairfax, Miss you. assure can I however, be, never will “That
shall I sure very am I her--and ask to were I if me have not would say,
her.” ask never

pleased was and interest; with pressure friend’s her returned Emma
exclaim, to enough

you.” for that say will I Knightley. Mr. vain, not are “You

which manner a in thoughtful--and was he her; hear to hardly seemed He
said, afterwards soon pleased, not him shewed

Fairfax?” Jane marry should I that settling been have you “So

match-making, for much too me scolded have You not. have I indeed “No
now, just said I What you. with liberty a such take to presume to me for
any without course, of things, of sort those says One nothing. meant
smallest the not have I word my upon no, Oh! meaning. serious a of idea
come not would You body. any Jane or Fairfax Jane marrying your for wish
married.” were you if way, comfortable this in us with sit and in

“No, was, reverie his of result The again. thoughtful was Knightley Mr.
take ever will her for admiration my of extent the think not do I Emma,
assure I way, that in her of thought a had never surprize.--I by me
young charming very a is Fairfax “Jane afterwards, soon And you.”
has She fault. a has She perfect. is Fairfax Jane even not woman--but
wife.” a in for wish would man a which temper open the not

said “Well,” fault. a had she that hear to rejoice but not could Emma
suppose?” I Cole, Mr. silenced soon you “and she,

mistaken; was he him told I hint; quiet a me gave He soon. very “Yes,
or wiser be to want not does Cole more. no said and pardon my asked he
neighbours.” his than wittier

and wiser be to wants who Elton, Mrs. dear unlike how respect that “In
Coles--what the of speaks she how wonder I world! the all than wittier
enough deep them, for appellation any find she can How them! calls she
for do she can Knightley--what you, calls She vulgarity? familiar in
accepts Fairfax Jane that surprized be to not am I so And Cole? Mr.
argument your Weston, Mrs. her. with be to consents and civilities her
temptation the into enter readily more much can I me. with most weighs
of triumph the in believe can I than Bates, Miss from away getting of
Elton’s Mrs. in faith no have I Elton. Mrs. over mind Fairfax’s Miss
her in or deed; or word, thought, in inferior the herself acknowledging
good-breeding. of rule scanty own her beyond restraint any under being
visitor her insulting continually be not will she that imagine cannot I
be not will she that service; of offers and encouragement, praise, with
her procuring the from intentions, magnificent her detailing continually
exploring delightful those in her including the to situation permanent a
barouche-landau.” the in place take to are which parties

her accuse not do Knightley--“I Mr. said feeling,” has Fairfax “Jane
her strong--and are suspect, I sensibilities, Her feeling. of want of
self-control; patience, forbearance, of power its in excellent temper
than think, I reserved, more reserved, is She openness. wants it but
my to alluded Cole No--till temper. open an love I be--And to used she
Fairfax Jane saw I head. my entered never had it attachment, supposed
no with always--but pleasure and admiration with her, with conversed and
beyond.” thought

do “what them, left he when triumphantly Emma said Weston,” Mrs. “Well,
Fairfax?” Jane marrying Knightley’s Mr. to now say you

the by occupied much very so is he that say I Emma, dear really, “Why,
it if wonder not should I that her, with love in being _not_ of idea
me.” beat not Do last. at so being his in end to were



XVI CHAPTER


was Elton, Mr. visited ever had who Highbury about and in body Every
and Dinner-parties marriage. his on attention him pay to disposed
flowed invitations and lady; his and him for made were evening-parties
were they apprehending of pleasure the soon had she that fast so in
day. disengaged a have to never

you. among lead to am I life a what see “I she. said is,” it how see “I
quite seem really We dissipated. absolutely be shall we word my Upon
very nothing is it country, the in living is this If fashion. the
a not have we you assure I Saturday, to next Monday From formidable.
have not need have, I than resources fewer with woman day!--A disengaged
loss.” a at been

evening-parties made habits Bath Her her. to amiss came invitation No
for taste a her given had Grove Maple and her, to natural perfectly
at rooms, drawing two of want the at shocked little a was She dinners.
Highbury the in ice no being there and rout-cakes, at attempt poor the
a were others, and Goddard Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Bates, Mrs. card-parties.
shew soon would she but world, the of knowledge in behind-hand deal good
spring the of course the In arranged. be to ought thing every how them
which party--in superior very one by civilities their return must she
and candles separate their with out set be should card-tables her
the for engaged waiters more style--and true the in packs unbroken
the round carry to furnish, could establishment own their than evening
order. proper the in and hour, proper the exactly at refreshments

at dinner a without satisfied be not could meanwhile, the in Emma,
she or others, than less do not must They Eltons. the for Hartfield
pitiful of capable imagined and suspicions, odious to exposed be should
for it about talked had Emma After be. must there dinner A resentment.
the made only and unwillingness, no felt Woodhouse Mr. minutes, ten
himself, table the of bottom the at sitting not of stipulation usual
him. for it do should who deciding of difficulty regular usual the with

the Besides thought. little required invited, be to persons The
of all was it far so Knightley; Mr. and Westons the be must it Eltons,
must Harriet little poor that inevitable less hardly was it course--and
with given not was invitation this eighth:--but the make to asked be
pleased particularly was Emma accounts many on and satisfaction, equal
not rather would “She it. decline to allowed be to begging Harriet’s by
quite yet not was She help. could she than more company his in be
feeling without together, wife happy charming his and him see to able
would she displeased, be not would Woodhouse Miss If uncomfortable.
had wished, have would Emma what precisely was It home.” at stay rather
the with delighted was She wishing. for enough possible it deemed she
to her in was it knew she fortitude friend--for little her of fortitude
the invite now could she and home; at stay and company in being up give
Fairfax.-- Jane eighth, the make to wanted really she whom person very
she Knightley, Mr. and Weston Mrs. with conversation last her Since
often had she than Fairfax Jane about conscience-stricken more was
Jane that said had He her. with dwelt words Knightley’s been.--Mr.
her. paid else nobody which Elton Mrs. from attentions received Fairfax

which me, to relates as far as least “at she, said true,” very is “This
age--and same the shameful.--Of very is it meant--and was that all was
will friend.--She her more been have to ought her--I knowing always
her shew will I But long. too her neglected have I now. me like never
done.” have I than attention greater

all and disengaged all were They successful. was invitation Every
yet not was however, dinner, this of interest preparatory happy.--The
little eldest two The occurred. unlucky rather circumstance A over.
some of visit a aunt and grandpapa their pay to engaged were Knightleys
and them, bringing proposed now papa their and spring, the in weeks
day very the be would day one Hartfield--which at day whole one staying
being his of allow not did engagements professional party.--His this of
happening its by disturbed were daughter and father both but off, put
the as together dinner at persons eight considered Woodhouse Mr. so.
Emma ninth--and a be would here bear--and could nerves his that utmost
not at humour of out much very ninth a be would it that apprehended
without hours forty-eight for Hartfield to even come to able being
dinner-party. a with in falling

by herself, comfort could she than better father her comforted She
yet nine, them make would certainly he though that representing
very be would noise of increase the that little, so said always he
to herself, for exchange sad a reality in it thought She immaterial.
her to opposed conversation reluctant and looks grave his with him have
brother. his of instead

John Emma. to than Woodhouse Mr. to favourable more was event The
and town to summoned unexpectedly was Weston Mr. but came; Knightley
the in them join to able be might He day. very the on absent be must
ease; at quite was Woodhouse Mr. dinner. to not certainly but evening,
the and boys little the of arrival the with so, him seeing the and
the removed fate, his hearing on brother her of composure philosophic
vexation. Emma’s even of chief

John Mr. and assembled, punctually were party the came, day The
being of business the to himself devote to early seemed Knightley
they while window a to off brother his drawing of Instead agreeable.
Elton, Mrs. Fairfax. Miss to talking was he dinner, for waited
in at looked he her, make could pearls and lace as elegant as
information--but Isabella’s for enough observe to only silence--wanting
talk could he and girl, quiet a and acquaintance old an was Fairfax Miss
walk a from returning was he as breakfast before her met had He her. to
was It rain. to beginning just been had it when boys, little his with
said, he and subject, the on hopes civil some have to natural

am I or morning, this Fairfax, Miss far, venture not did you hope “I
you hope I time. in home got scarcely wet.--We been have must you sure
directly.” turned

the before home reached “and she, said post-office,” the to only went “I
when letters the fetch always I errand. daily my is It much. was rain
walk A out. me get to something a is and trouble, saves It here. am I
good.” me does breakfast before

imagine.” should I rain, the in walk a “Not

out.” set I when rain absolutely not did it but “No,

replied, and smiled, Knightley John Mr.

yards six not were you for walk, your have to chose you say, to is “That
Henry and you; meeting of pleasure the had I when door own your from
The before. long count could they than drops more seen had John and
have you When lives. our of period one at charm great a has post-office
going worth never are letters think to begin will you age, my to lived
for.” rain the through

answer, this then and blush, little a was There

every of midst the in are, you as situated ever be to hope not must “I
growing simply that expect cannot I therefore and connexion, dearest
letters.” about indifferent me make should older

indifferent. become could you conceived never no--I Oh! “Indifferent!
very a generally are they indifference; of matter no are Letters
curse.” positive

of letters are mine business; of letters of speaking are “You
friendship.”

coolly. he replied two,” the of worst the them thought often have “I
does.” ever hardly friendship but money, bring may know, you “Business,

am well--I too Knightley John Mr. know I now. serious not are you “Ah!
I body. any as well as friendship of value the understands he sure very
than less much you, to little very are letters that believe easily can
which myself than older years ten being your not is it but me, to
every have You situation. but age, not is it difference, the makes
again; shall never probably, I, hand, at always you to dearest body
post-office, a affections, my all outlived have I till therefore and
than weather worse in out, me draw to power have always must think, I
to-day.”

years,” of progress the by time, by altered being your of talked I “When
which situation of change the imply to meant “I Knightley, John said
will Time other. the including as one consider I brings. usually time
daily the within not attachment every of interest the lessen generally
old an As you. for view in had I change the not is that circle--but
hence years ten that Fairfax, Miss hope, to me allow will you friend,
have.” I as objects concentrated many as have may you

“thank pleasant A offence. giving from far very and said, kindly was It
tear a lip, quivering a blush, a but off, it laugh to meant seemed you”
was attention Her laugh. a beyond felt was it that shewed eye, the in
such on custom his to according being, who Woodhouse, Mr. by claimed now
particular his paying and guests, his of circle the making occasions,
mildest his all with her--and with ending was ladies, the to compliments
said, urbanity,

morning this out being your of Fairfax, Miss hear, to sorry very am “I
ladies themselves.--Young of care take should ladies Young rain. the in
their and health their of care take should They plants. delicate are
stockings?” your change you did dear, My complexion.

kind your by obliged much very am I and indeed; did I sir, “Yes,
me.” about solicitude

for.--I cared be to sure very are ladies young Fairfax, Miss dear “My
very my of some are They well. are aunt and grand-mama good your hope
You neighbour. better a be to me allowed health my wish I friends. old
I and daughter My sure. am I to-day, honour of deal great a us do
greatest the have and goodness, your of sensible highly both are
Hartfield.” at you seeing in satisfaction

he that feel and down sit then might man old polite kind-hearted, The
easy. and welcome lady fair every made and duty, his done had

her and Elton, Mrs. reached had rain the in walk the time, this By
Jane. upon opened now remonstrances

the in post-office the to hear?--Going I this is what Jane, dear “My
do you could how girl, sad you.--You assure I be, not must rain!--This
you.” of care take to there not was I sign a is thing?--It a such

cold. any caught not had she that her assured patiently very Jane

know not do and girl, sad very a are really You _me_. tell not do “Oh!
Weston, Mrs. indeed! post-office the yourself.--To of care take to how
our exert positively must I and You like? the hear ever you did
authority.”

do certainly “I persuasively, and kindly Weston Mrs. said advice,” “My
risks.--Liable such run not must you Fairfax, Miss give. to tempted feel
particularly be to ought you indeed colds, severe to been have you as
think always I spring The year. of time this at especially careful,
even or two, or hour an wait Better care. common than more requires
cough your on bringing of risk the run than letters, your for day a half
too much are you sure am I Yes, had? you that feel you not do Now again.
again.” thing a such do not would you if as look You reasonable.

Mrs. rejoined eagerly again,” thing a such do _not_ _shall_ she “Oh!
nodding again:”--and thing a such do to her allow not will “We Elton.
indeed. must there made, arrangement some be must significantly--“there
morning every letters our fetches who man The E. Mr. to speak shall I
and too yours for inquire shall name) his forget I men, our of (one
from and know; you difficulties all obviate will That you. to them bring
accept to scruple no have can you Jane, dear my think, really I _us_
accommodation.” an such

early my up give cannot I “but Jane; said kind,” extremely are “You
walk must I can, I as much as doors of out be to advised am I walk.
have I word, my upon and object; an is post-office the and somewhere,
before.” morning bad a had ever scarcely

is that determined, is thing The it. about more no say Jane, dear “My
thing any determine to presume can I as far as affectedly) (laughing
Weston, Mrs. know, You master. and lord my of concurrence the without
flatter do I But ourselves. express we how cautious be must I and you
I If out. worn entirely not is influence my that Jane, dear my myself,
as point that consider therefore, difficulties insuperable no with meet
settled.”

such to consent means any by cannot “I earnestly, Jane said me,” “Excuse
errand the If servant. your to troublesome needlessly so arrangement, an
am I when is always it as done, be could it me, to pleasure a not were
grandmama’s.” my by here, not

to kindness a is it do!--And to has Patty as much so but dear; my “Oh!
men.” our employ

of instead but conquered; be to mean not did she if as looked Jane
Knightley. John Mr. to again speaking began she answering,

she.--“The said establishment!” wonderful a is post-office “The
do, to has it that all of thinks one If it! of despatch and regularity
astonishing!” really is it well, so does it that all and

regulated.” well very certainly is “It

that seldom So appears! blunder or negligence any that seldom “So
the about passing constantly are that thousands the among letter, a
suppose, I million, a in one not wrong--and carried even is kingdom,
bad of and hands, of variety the considers one when And lost! actually
wonder.” the increases it deciphered, be to are that too, hands

quickness some with begin must habit.--They from expert grow clerks “The
farther any want you If them. improves exercise and hand, and sight of
is That it. for paid are “they smiling, he, continued explanation,”
served be must and pays public The capacity. of deal great a to key the
well.”

usual the and of, talked farther were handwriting of varieties The
made. observations

sort same the “that Knightley, John said asserted,” it heard have “I
master same the where and family; a in prevails often handwriting of
imagine should I reason, that for But enough. natural is it teaches,
very have boys for females, the to confined chiefly be must likeness the
can they hand any into scramble and age, early an after teaching little
not have I alike. much very write do think, I Emma, and Isabella get.
apart.” writing their known always

what know I likeness. a is “there hesitatingly, brother his said “Yes,”
strongest.” the is hand Emma’s mean--but you

“and Woodhouse; Mr. said beautifully,” write both Emma and “Isabella
a half and sigh a half Weston”--with Mrs. poor does so And did. always
her. at smile

at also looking began, handwriting”--Emma gentleman’s any saw never “I
attending was Weston Mrs. that perceiving on stopped, but Weston; Mrs.
am how “Now, reflect, to time her gave pause the else--and one some to
once at name his speaking to unequal I him?--Am introduce to going I
roundabout any use to me for necessary it Is people? these all before
Yorkshire;--that in correspondent friend--your Yorkshire phrase?--Your
pronounce can I bad.--No, very were I if suppose, I way, the be would
and better get certainly I distress. smallest the without name his
it.” for better.--Now

Churchill Frank again--“Mr. began Emma and disengaged was Weston Mrs.
saw.” ever I hands gentleman’s best the of one writes

small--wants too is “It Knightley. Mr. said it,” admire not do “I
writing.” woman’s a like is It strength.

against him vindicated They lady. either by to submitted not was This
a not was strength--it wanted means no by it “No, aspersion. base the
any Weston Mrs. not Had strong. certainly and clear very but hand, large
lately, very him from heard had she No, produce?” to her about letter
away. it put had letter, the answered having but

I writing-desk, my had I “if Emma, said room,” other the in were we “If
you not his.--Do of note a have I specimen. a produce could I sure am
day?” one you for write to him employing Weston, Mrs. remember,

employed”-- was he say to chose “He

convince to dinner after it shew can and note; that have I well, “Well,
Knightley.” Mr.

Mr. said Churchill,” Frank Mr. like man, young gallant a when “Oh!
of will, he Woodhouse, Miss like lady fair a to “writes dryly, Knightley
best.” his forth put course,

was to, spoken be could she before Elton, table.--Mrs. on was Dinner
be to request his with her reached had Woodhouse Mr. before and ready;
saying-- was dining-parlour, the into her hand to allowed

way.” the leading always of ashamed am really I first? go I “Must

Emma. escaped not had letters own her fetching about solicitude Jane’s
whether know to curiosity some felt and all; it seen and heard had She
it that suspected She any. produced had morning this of walk wet the
full in but encountered resolutely so been have not would it that _had_;
been not had it that and dear, very one some from hearing of expectation
usual--a than happiness greater of air an was there thought She vain. in
spirits. and complexion of both glow

the and expedition the to as two, or inquiry an made have could She
she end--but tongue’s her at was mails;--it Irish the of expense
hurt should that word a utter to not determined quite was She abstained.
the of out ladies other the followed they and feelings; Fairfax’s Jane
the to becoming highly good-will of appearance an with arm, in arm room,
each. of grace and beauty



XVII CHAPTER


it found Emma dinner, after drawing-room the to returned ladies the When
so parties;--with distinct two making their prevent to possible hardly
engross Elton Mrs. did ill behaving and judging in perseverance much
to obliged were Weston Mrs. and She herself. slight and Fairfax Jane
Elton Mrs. together. silent or together talking either always almost be
she time, little a for her repressed Jane If choice. no them left
a in was them between passed that much though and again; began soon
avoiding no was there side, Elton’s Mrs. on especially half-whisper,
post-office--catching The subjects: principal their of knowledge a
discussion; under long were friendship, letters--and cold--fetching
unpleasant equally least at be must which one, succeeded them to and
to likely situation any of heard yet had she whether Jane--inquiries to
activity. meditated Elton’s Mrs. of professions and her, suit

June you. about anxious quite get “I she, said come!” April is “Here
here.” be soon will

looked month--merely other any or June on fixed never have I “But
general.” in summer the to forward

nothing?” of heard really you have “But

yet.” any make to wish not do I inquiry; any made even not have “I

the of aware not are you early; too begin cannot we dear, my “Oh!
thing.” desirable the exactly procuring of difficulty

can who Elton, Mrs. “dear head; her shaking Jane, said aware!” not “I
done?” have I as it of thought have

know not do You have. I as world the of much so seen not have you “But
saw I situations. _first_ the for are always there candidates many how
of cousin A Grove. Maple round neighbourhood the in that of deal vast a
every applications; of infinity an such had Bragge, Mrs. Suckling, Mr.
circle. first the in moves she for family, her in be to anxious was body
all Of desirable! how imagine may You schoolroom! the in Wax-candles
see to wish most would I one the is Bragge’s Mrs. kingdom the in houses
in.” you

midsummer,” by again town in be to are Campbell Mrs. and “Colonel
want will they sure am I them; with time some spend must “I Jane. said
would I But myself. of dispose to glad be probably may I it;--afterwards
present.” at inquiries any making of trouble the take to you wish not

me giving of afraid are You scruples. your know I aye, “Trouble!
be hardly can Campbells the Jane, dear my you, assure I but trouble;
in Partridge Mrs. to write shall I am. I than you about interested more
look-out the on be to charge strict a her give shall and two, or day a
eligible.” thing any for

to subject the mention not did you rather would I but you, “Thank
body any giving be to wish not do I nearer, draws time the till her;
trouble.”

June, and April, is here near; drawing is time the child, dear my “But,
before accomplish to business such with near, very is July, even say or
deserve, you as such situation A me! amuses really inexperience Your us.
occurrence, everyday no is you, for require would friends your and
begin must we indeed, indeed, notice; moment’s a at obtained not is
directly.” inquiring

no make I intention; my means no by is this but ma’am, me, “Excuse
When friends. my by made any have to sorry be should and myself, inquiry
being of afraid all at not am I time, the to as determined quite am I
inquiry where offices, town, in places are There unemployed. long
human of quite sale--not the for something--Offices produce soon would
intellect.” human of flesh--but

at fling a mean you if me; shock quite You flesh! human dear, my “Oh!
to friend a rather always was Suckling Mr. you assure I slave-trade, the
abolition.” the

Jane; replied slave-trade,” the of thinking not was I mean, not did “I
widely view; in had I that all was you, assure I “governess-trade,
to as but on; it carry who those of guilt the to as certainly different
But lies. it where know not do I victims, the of misery greater the
by that and offices, advertising are there that say to mean only I
with meeting soon very of doubt no have should I them to applying
do.” would that something

suit may _that_ “Aye, Elton. Mrs. repeated do!” would that “Something
are; you creature modest a what know yourself;--I of ideas humble your
any with up taking you have to friends your satisfy not will it but
family a in situation, commonplace inferior, any offer, may that thing
of elegancies the command to able or circle, certain a in moving not
life.”

indifferent; very am I that, all to as but obliging; very are “You
I mortifications, my rich; the with be to me to object no be would it
comparison. from more suffer should I greater; the be only would think,
for.” condition should I that all is family gentleman’s A

shall I but thing; any with up take would you you; know I you, know “I
quite be will Campbells good the sure am I and nice, more little a be
the in move to right a have you talents, superior your with side; my on
name to you entitle would alone knowledge musical Your circle. first
family the in mix and like, you as rooms many as have terms, own your
you harp, the knew you know--if not do is--I chose;--that you as much as
I play;--yes, as well as sing you but sure; very am I that, all do might
what for stipulate harp, the without even might, you believe really
and honourably delightfully, be shall and must you chose;--and you
rest.” any have I or Campbells the before settled comfortably

such of comfort the and honour, the delight, the class well may “You
equal; be to sure pretty are “they Jane, said together,” situation a
attempted be to thing any wishing not in serious very am I however,
am I Elton, Mrs. you, to obliged exceedingly am I me. for present at
wishing in serious quite am I but me, for feels who body any to obliged
I longer months three or two For summer. the till done be to nothing
am.” I as and am, I where remain shall

gaily, Elton Mrs. replied you,” assure I too, serious quite am I “And
to friends my employing and watch, the on always be to resolving “in
us.” pass may unexceptionable really nothing that also, watch

Mr. till thing any by stopped thoroughly never on; ran she style this In
object, of change a then had vanity her room; the into came Woodhouse
Jane, to half-whisper same the in saying her heard Emma and

his of think protest!--Only I mine, of beau old dear this comes “Here
creature dear a men!--what other the before away coming in gallantry
quaint, that all admire I excessively. him like I you assure is;--I he
ease; modern than taste my to more much is it politeness; old-fashioned
wish I Woodhouse, Mr. old good this But me. disgusts often ease modern
I you assure I Oh! dinner. at me to speeches gallant his heard had you
I fancy I jealous. absolutely be would sposo caro my think to began
like you do How gown. my of notice took he favourite; a rather am
it whether know not do I but think, I choice--handsome, it?--Selina’s
being of idea the to dislike greatest the have I over-trimmed; not is
ornaments few a on put must I finery. of horror a over-trimmed--quite
like appear must know, you bride, A me. of expected is it because now,
style simple a simplicity; for all is taste natural my but bride, a
the in quite am I But finery. to preferable infinitely so is dress of
dress,--show of simplicity value to seem people few believe; I minority,
a such putting of notion some have I thing. every are finery and
will it think you Do poplin. silver and white my to this as trimming
well?” look

Mr. when drawing-room the in reassembled just but were party whole The
dinner, late a to returned had He them. among appearance his made Weston
much too been had He over. was it as soon as Hartfield to walked and
Mr. joy. great was there surprize--but for judges, best the by expected
sorry been have would he as now, him see to glad as almost was Woodhouse
astonishment.--That mute in was only Knightley John before. him see to
day a after home at quietly evening his spent have might who man a
mile a half walk and again, off set should London, in business of
till company mixed in being of sake the for house, man’s another to
noise the and civility of efforts the in day his finishing of bed-time,
been had who man A deeply. him strike to circumstance a was numbers, of
been have now might and morning, the in o’clock eight since motion in
had who silent, been have might and talking, long been had who still,
to man, a alone!--Such been have might and crowd, one than more in been
the on and fireside, own his of independence and tranquillity the quit
world!--Could the into again out rush day April sleety cold a of evening
there wife, his back taken instantly have finger his of touch a by he
rather prolong probably would coming his but motive; a been have would
amazement, with him at looked Knightley John party. the up break than
it believed have not could “I said, and shoulders, his shrugged then
_him_.” of even

was he indignation the of unsuspicious perfectly meanwhile, Weston Mr.
being of right the all with and usual, as cheerful and happy exciting,
was confers, home from anywhere spent day a which talker, principal
the satisfied having and rest; the among agreeable himself making
all of none that her convincing dinner, his to as wife his of inquiries
spread and forgotten, been had servants the to directions careful her
family a to proceeding was heard, had he news public what abroad
he Weston, Mrs. to addressed principally though which, communication,
in body every to interesting highly being of doubt smallest the not had
he herself; to and Frank, from was it letter, a her gave He room. the
it. opening of liberty the taken had and way, his in it with met had

few a only pleasure; you give will “it he, said it,” read it, “Read
Emma.” to it read long; you take not lines--will

talking and smiling sat he and together; it over looked ladies two The
to audible very but subdued, little a voice a in time, whole the them to
body. every

say you do what Well, think. I news, good see; you coming, is he “Well,
I?--Anne, not did soon, again here be would he you told always it?--I to
me?--In believe not would you and so, you tell always I not did dear, my
as is _she_ for say; dare I latest, the see--at you week, next town
most done; be to is thing any when gentleman black the as impatient
all illness, her to As Saturday. or to-morrow there be will they likely
us among Frank have to thing excellent an is it But course. of nothing
come, do they when while good a stay will They town. as near so again,
wanted. I what precisely is This us. with time his half be will he and
read Emma Has it? finished you Have it? not is news, good pretty Well,
some it about talk good a have will we up; it put up, it Put all? it
the mention just only shall I now. do not will it but time, other
way.” common a in others the to circumstance

looks Her occasion. the on pleased comfortably most was Weston Mrs.
was she knew she happy, was She them. restrain to nothing had words and
and warm were congratulations Her happy. be to ought she knew and happy,
occupied little a was _She_ fluently. so speak not could Emma but open;
her of degree the understand to trying and feelings, own her weighing in
considerable. was thought rather she which agitation,

communicative too observant, very be to eager too however, Weston, Mr.
say, did she what with satisfied well very was talk, to others want to
partial a by happy friends his of rest the make to away moved soon and
already. overheard have must room whole the what of communication

might he or granted, for joy body’s every took he that well was It
particularly Knightley Mr. or Woodhouse Mr. either thought have not
to Emma, and Weston Mrs. after entitled, first the were They delighted.
but Fairfax, Miss to proceeded have would he them happy;--from made be
have would it that Knightley, John with conversation in deep so was she
Mrs. to close himself finding and interruption; an positive too been
subject the on began necessarily he disengaged, attention her and Elton,
her. with



XVIII CHAPTER


you,” to son my introducing of pleasure the have soon shall I hope “I
Weston. Mr. said

her intended compliment particular a suppose to willing very Elton, Mrs.
graciously. most smiled hope, a such by

he presume,” I Churchill, Frank certain a of heard have “You
name.” my bear not does he though son, my be to him know continued--“and

Mr. sure am I acquaintance. his in happy very be shall I and yes, “Oh!
great have both shall we and him; on calling in time no lose will Elton
Vicarage.” the at him seeing in pleasure

sure.-- am I happy, extremely be will obliging.--Frank very are “You
a in it of notice have We sooner. not if week, next town in be to is He
my seeing and morning, this way my in letters the met I to-day. letter
me--it to directed not was it it--though open to presumed hand, son’s
I you. assure I correspondent, principal his is She Weston. Mrs. to was
letter.” a get ever hardly

Mr. Oh! her! to directed was what opened absolutely you so “And
most that.--A against protest must I affectedly) Weston--(laughing
neighbours your let not will you beg indeed!--I precedent dangerous
we expect, to am I what is this if word, my example.--Upon your follow
could I Weston, Mr. ourselves!--Oh! exert to begin must women married
you!” of it believed have not

Mrs. yourself, of care take must You fellows. sad are men we “Aye,
hurry, a in letter--written short a is us--it tells letter Elton.--This
to up coming all are they that us tells notice--it us give to merely
the well been not has account--she Churchill’s Mrs. on directly, town
to all are they her--so for cold too Enscombe thinks and winter, whole
time.” of loss without southward move

Yorkshire?” in is Enscombe think. I Yorkshire, “Indeed!--from

a London, from miles ninety and hundred one about are they “Yes,
journey.” considerable

than farther miles Sixty-five considerable. very word, my upon “Yes,
people to Weston, Mr. distance, is what But London. to Grove Maple from
Mr. brother, my how hear to amazed be would fortune?--You large of
twice me--but believe hardly will You about. flies sometimes Suckling,
four with again back and London to went Bragge Mr. and he week one in
horses.”

that “is, Weston, Mr. said Enscombe,” from distance the of evil “The
the leave to able been not has _understand_, _we_ _as_ Churchill, Mrs.
he complained, she letter last Frank’s In together. week a for sofa
having without conservatory her into get to weak too being of said,
of degree great a speaks know, you This, uncle’s! his and arm his both
to means she that town, in be to impatient so is she now weakness--but
Certainly, word. writes Frank road.--So the on nights two only sleep
You Elton. Mrs. constitutions, extraordinary very have ladies delicate
that.” me grant must

my of part the take always I nothing. you grant shall I indeed, “No,
formidable a me find will notice--You you give I indeed. do I sex. own
you, assure I women--and for up stand always I point. that on antagonist
you inn, an at sleeping to respect with feels Selina how knew you if
to exertions incredible making Churchill’s Mrs. at wonder not would
have I believe I her--and to horror quite is it says Selina it. avoid
sheets; own her with travels always She nicety. her of little a caught
same?” the do Churchill Mrs. Does precaution. excellent an

fine other any that thing every does Churchill Mrs. it, upon “Depend
land the in lady any to second be not will Churchill Mrs. did. ever lady
for”--

with, interposed eagerly Elton Mrs.

assure I lady, fine no is Selina me. mistake not do Weston, Mr. “Oh!
idea.” an such with away run not Do you.

thorough as is who Churchill, Mrs. for rule no is she Then she? not “Is
beheld.” ever body any as lady fine a

warmly. so disclaiming in wrong been had she think to began Elton Mrs.
was sister her that believed it have to object her means no by was It
of pretence the in spirit of want was there perhaps lady; fine a _not_
Mr. when retract, best had she way what in considering was she it;--and
on. went Weston

suspect--but may you as graces, good my in much not is Churchill “Mrs.
and Frank, of fond very is She ourselves. between quite is this
health of out is she Besides, her. of ill speak not would I therefore
would I been. always has she account, own her by indeed, _that_ but now;
Mrs. in faith much not have I but Elton, Mrs. body, every to so say not
illness.” Churchill’s

to or Bath, Weston?--To Mr. Bath, to go not why ill, really is she “If
for cold too is Enscombe that head her into it taken has “She Clifton?”
now has She Enscombe. of tired is she that suppose, I is, fact The her.
she and before, was ever she than there, stationary time longer a been
very but place, fine A place. retired a is It change. want to begins
retired.”

from retired more stand can Nothing say. dare I Grove, Maple “Aye--like
You it! round all plantation immense an Such Grove. Maple than road the
retirement.--And complete most the thing--in every from out shut seem
enjoy to Selina like spirits or health not has probably Churchill Mrs.
in enough resources have not may she perhaps Or, seclusion. of sort that
cannot woman a say always I life. country a for qualified be to herself
many so have I that thankful very feel I resources--and many too have
society.” of independent quite be to as myself

fortnight.” a for February in here was “Frank

society the to _addition_ an find will He heard. have to remember I “So
call to presume may I if is, that again; comes he when Highbury of
being there of heard have never may he perhaps But addition. an myself
world.” the in creature a such

Mr. and by, passed be to compliment a for call a loud too was This
exclaimed, immediately grace, good very a with Weston,

possible. thing a such imagine could yourself but Nobody madam! dear “My
full been have lately letters Weston’s Mrs. believe you!--I of heard Not
Elton.” Mrs. than else little very of

son. his to return could and duty his done had He

we when uncertain quite was “it he, continued us,” left Frank “When
has It welcome. doubly news day’s this makes which again, him see might
persuasion strong a had always _I_ is, That unexpected. completely been
turn would favourable something sure was I soon, again here be would he
dreadfully both were Weston Mrs. and He me. believed nobody up--but
supposed be it could how And come? to contrive he could ‘How desponding.
always forth--I so and again?’ him spare would aunt and uncle his that
see. you has, it so and favour; our in happen would something that felt
things if that life, my of course the in Elton, Mrs. observed, have I
next.” the mend to sure are they month, one untowardly going are

to say to used I what just is It true. perfectly Weston, Mr. true, “Very
because when, courtship, of days the in company in gentleman certain a
rapidity the all with proceed not did right, quite go not did things
that exclaim and despair, in be to apt was he feelings, his suited which
robe saffron Hymen’s before _May_ be would it rate this at sure was he
those dispel to at been have I pains the Oh! us. for on put be would
had carriage--we The views! cheerfuller him give and ideas gloomy
to came he remember, I morning, carriage;--one the about disappointments
despair.” in quite me

instantly Weston Mr. and coughing, of fit slight a by stopped was She
on. going of opportunity the seized

Churchill Mrs. which month very the is May May. mentioning were “You
than place warmer some in spend to herself, ordered has or ordered, is
agreeable the have we that so London; in spend to short, Enscombe--in
the spring--precisely whole the Frank from visits frequent of prospect
at almost days it: for chosen have should one which year the of season
and out, one inviting always pleasant, and genial weather longest; the
best the made we before, here was he When exercise. for hot too never
weather; cheerless damp, wet, of deal good a was there but it; of
we that half do not could we and know, you February, in is always there
I and enjoyment; complete be will This time. the be will Now intended.
the meetings, our of uncertainty the whether Elton, Mrs. know, not do
or to-day in coming his of be will there expectation constant of sort
than happiness to friendly more be not may hour, any at and to-morrow,
the is it think I so. is it think I house. the in actually him having
be will you hope I delight. and spirit most gives which mind of state
generally is He prodigy. a expect not must you but son; my with pleased
Weston’s Mrs. prodigy. a expect not do but man, young fine a thought
most suppose, may you as and, great, very is him for partiality
him.” to equal nobody thinks She me. to gratifying

opinion my that doubt little very have I Weston, Mr. you, assure I “And
Mr. of praise in much so heard have I favour. his in decidedly be will
one am I that observe, to fair is it time same the Churchill.--At Frank
implicitly means no by are and themselves, for judge always who those of
shall I so son, your find I as that notice you give I others. by guided
flatterer.” no am him.--I of judge

musing. was Weston Mr.

Mrs. poor upon severe been not have “I presently, he said hope,” “I
but injustice; her do to sorry be should I ill is she If Churchill.
to me for difficult it make which character her in traits some are there
ignorant, be cannot You wish. could I forbearance the with her of speak
have I treatment the of nor family, the with connexion my of Elton, Mrs.
laid be to is it of blame whole the ourselves, between and, with; met
been have never would mother Frank’s instigator. the was She her. to
pride his but pride; has Churchill Mr. her. for but was she as slighted
sort gentlemanlike indolent, quiet, a is his wife’s: his to nothing is
helpless little a himself make only and nobody, harm would that pride of
what And insolence! and arrogance is pride her but tiresome; and
blood. or family of pretence fair no has she bear, to less one inclines
gentleman; a of daughter the barely her, married he when nobody was She
out-Churchill’d has she Churchill a into turned being her since ever but
is she you, assure I herself, in but claims: mighty and high in all them
upstart.” an

quite have I provoking! infinitely be must that well, think! “Only
to disgust thorough a me given has Grove Maple upstarts. of horror a
who neighbourhood that in family a is there for sort; that of people
give they airs the from sister and brother my to annoyance an such are
them of think me made Churchill Mrs. of description Your themselves!
and there, settled lately very Tupman, of name the of People directly.
airs, immense themselves giving but connexions, low many with encumbered
families. established old the with footing a on be to expecting and
West at lived have can they that utmost very the is half a and year A
from came They knows. nobody fortune their got they how and Hall;
Weston. Mr. know, you much, promise to place a not is which Birmingham,
something is there say always I Birmingham. from hopes great not has One
the of known positively is more nothing but sound: the in direful
and suspected; are you assure I things many good a though Tupmans,
to even equal themselves think evidently they manners their by yet
nearest their of one be to happens who Suckling, Mr. brother, my
eleven been has who Suckling, Mr. bad. too infinitely is It neighbours.
him--I before it had father whose and Grove, Maple at resident a years
completed had Suckling Mr. old that sure almost am least--I at believe,
death.” his before purchase the

having Weston, Mr. and round, carrying was Tea interrupted. were They
away. walking of opportunity the took soon wanted, he that all said

Mr. with down sat Elton Mr. and Weston, Mrs. and Mr. tea, After
powers, own their to left were five remaining The cards. to Woodhouse
seemed Knightley Mr. for well; very on getting their doubted Emma and
which notice, wanting was Elton Mrs. conversation; for disposed little
spirits of worry a in herself was she and pay, to inclination had nobody
silent. being prefer her made have would which

to was He brother. his than talkative more proved Knightley John Mr.
with-- began soon he and day; next the early them leave

the about say to more thing any have I believe not do I Emma, “Well,
full at down is thing every and letter, sister’s your have you but boys;
than concise more much be would charge My sure. be may we there length
to have I that all spirit; same the in much not probably and her’s,
physic not do and them, spoil not do in, comprised being recommend
them.”

all do shall I “for Emma, said both,” you satisfy to hope rather “I
and Isabella; for enough be will which happy, them make to power my in
physic.” and indulgence false preclude must happiness

again.” home them send must you troublesome, them find you if “And

you?” not do so, think You likely. very is “That

even father--or your for noisy too be may they that aware am I hope “I
to continue engagements visiting your if you, to encumbrance some be may
lately.” done have they as much as increase

“Increase!”

a made has half-year last the that sensible be must you “Certainly;
life.” of way your in difference great

not.” am I indeed No “Difference!

than company with engaged more much being your of doubt no be can “There
only for down come I am Here time. very this Witness be. to used you
happen it did dinner-party!--When a with engaged are you and day, one
you and increasing, is neighbourhood Your it? like thing any or before,
brought Isabella to letter every ago, while little A it. with more mix
the at balls or Cole’s, Mr. at dinners gaieties; fresh of account an
your in makes alone Randalls Randalls, which difference The Crown.
great.” very is goings-on,

all.” it does that Randalls is “it quickly, brother his said “Yes,”

less have to likely not is suppose, I Randalls, as well--and “Very
that Emma, thing, possible a as me strikes it heretofore, than influence
beg only I are, they if And way. the in sometimes be may John and Henry
home.” them send to you

them Let consequence. the be not need “that Knightley, Mr. cried “No,”
leisure.” at be certainly shall I Donwell. to sent be

how know to like should I me! amuse “you Emma, exclaimed word,” my “Upon
of being your without place take engagements numerous my all of many
to leisure wanting of danger in supposed be to am I why and party; the
have mine--what of engagements amazing These boys. little the to attend
of, talked ball a having Coles--and the with once Dining been? they
John Mr. at you--(nodding understand can I place. took never which
at friends your of many so with meeting in fortune good Knightley)--your
to (turning you, But unnoticed. pass to much too you delights here, once
from hours two ever am I seldom very very, how know who Knightley,) Mr.
I me, for dissipation of series a such foresee should you why Hartfield,
Aunt if that say, must I boys, little dear my to as And imagine. cannot
better much fare would they think not do I them, for time not has Emma
she where hours five about home from absent is who Knightley, Uncle with
himself to reading either is home, at is he when who, one--and absent is
accounts.” his settling or

without succeeded and smile; to not trying be to seemed Knightley Mr.
him. to talk to beginning Elton’s Mrs. upon difficulty,




III VOLUME



I CHAPTER


the to as Emma satisfy to enough was reflection quiet little very A
She Churchill. Frank of news this hearing on agitation her of nature
all at feeling was she herself for not was it that convinced soon was
had attachment own Her him. for was it embarrassed; or apprehensive
of;--but thinking worth not was it nothing; mere a into subsided really
the of love in most the much so always been undoubtedly had who he, if
had he which sentiment of warmth same the with returning be to were two,
two of separation a If distressing. very be would it away, taken
before evils and dangers were there him, cooled have not should months
did She necessary. be would herself for and him for her:--caution
be would it and again, entangled affections own her have to mean not
his. of encouragement any avoid to her on incumbent

declaration. absolute an from him keep to able be might she wished She
present their of conclusion a painful very so be would That
something anticipating rather help not could she yet, and acquaintance!
a bringing without pass not would spring the if as felt She decisive.
tranquil and composed present her alter to something a event, an crisis,
state.

foreseen, had Weston Mr. than longer rather though long, very not was It
Churchill’s Frank of opinion some forming of power the had she before
been had as soon so quite town in not were family Enscombe The feelings.
down rode He afterwards. soon very Highbury at was he but imagined,
from came he as but more; do yet not could he hours; of couple a for
quick her all exercise then could she Hartfield, to immediately Randalls
she how and influenced, was he how determine speedily and observation,
doubt no be could There friendliness. utmost the with met They act. must
doubt instant almost an had she But her. seeing in pleasure great his of
tenderness same the feeling his of done, had he as her for caring his of
was he thing clear a was It well. him watched She degree. same the in
probably conviction the with Absence, been. had he than love in less
desirable very and natural very this produced had indifference, her of
effect.

seemed and ever, as laugh and talk to ready as spirits; high in was He
he and stories: old to recur and visit, former his of speak to delighted
read she that calmness his in not was It agitation. without not was
evidently were spirits his calm; not was He difference. comparative his
seemed it was, he as Lively him. about restlessness was there fluttered;
belief her decided what but himself; satisfy not did that liveliness a
hurrying and hour, an of quarter a only staying his was subject, the on
old of group a seen had “He Highbury. in calls other make to away
would he stopped, not had passed--he he as street the in acquaintance
would they think to vanity the had he word--but a than more for stop not
longer stay to wished he as much and call, not did he if disappointed be
less being his to as doubt no had She off.” hurry must he Hartfield, at
seemed away, hurrying his nor spirits, agitated his neither love--but in
a implied it think to inclined rather was she and cure; perfect a like
trusting not of resolution discreet a and power, returning her of dread
long. her with himself

days. ten of course the in Churchill Frank from visit only the was This
His prevented. always was come--but to intending hoping, often was He
at account own his was Such her. leave him have to bear not could aunt
was it come, to tried really he if sincere, quite were he If Randall’s.
no of been had London to removal Churchill’s Mrs. that inferred be to
was she That disorder. her of part nervous or wilful the to service
at it, of convinced himself declared had he certain; very was ill really
looked he when doubt, not could he fancy, be might much Though Randalls.
a half been had she than health of state weaker a in was she that back,
care that thing any from proceed to it believe not did He ago. year
many have not might she that least at or remove, not might medicine and
all by on, prevailed be not could he but her; before existence of years
imaginary, merely were complaints her that say to doubts, father’s his
ever. as strong as was she that or

could She her. for place the not was London that appeared soon It
and irritation continual under were nerves Her noise. its endure not
Randalls to letter nephew’s her end, days’ ten the by and suffering;
to immediately remove to going were They plan. of change a communicated
of skill medical the to recommended been had Churchill Mrs. Richmond.
A place. the for fancy a otherwise had and there, person eminent an
benefit much and engaged, was spot favourite a in house ready-furnished
change. the from expected

arrangement, this of spirits highest the in wrote Frank that heard Emma
months two having of blessing the appreciate to fully most seemed and
the friends--for dear many to neighbourhood near such of him before
with wrote he now that told was She June. and May for taken was house
he as often as almost them, with often being of confidence greatest the
wish. even could

was He prospects. joyous these understood Weston Mr. how saw Emma
She offered. they happiness the all of source the as her considering
proof. the to it bring must months Two so. not was it hoped

delighted. quite was He indisputable. was happiness own Weston’s Mr.
be would it Now, for. wished have could he circumstance very the was It
to miles nine were What neighbourhood. their in Frank having really
The over. coming always be would He ride. hour’s man?--An young a
make to enough was London and Richmond of respect that in difference
Sixteen never. him seeing and always him seeing of difference whole the
Manchester-street--was to eighteen full be must eighteen--it miles--nay,
be would day the away, get to able ever he Were obstacle. serious a
in him having in comfort no was There returning. and coming in spent
very the was Richmond but Enscombe; at be well as might he London;
nearer! than Better intercourse. easy for distance

this by certainty a to brought immediately was thing good One
before, forgotten been not had It Crown. the at ball removal,--the
Now, day. a fix to attempt to vain acknowledged soon been had it but
and resumed, was preparation every be; to absolutely was it however,
from lines few a Richmond, to removed had Churchills the after soon very
and change, the for better much already felt aunt his that say to Frank,
at hours twenty-four for them join to able being of doubt no had he that
possible. as day a early as name to them induced time, given any

stood to-morrows few very A thing. real a be to was ball Weston’s Mr.
happiness. and Highbury of people young the between

him. to evil the lightened year of time The resigned. was Woodhouse Mr.
to engaged was Bates Mrs. February. than thing every for better was May
sanguinely he and notice, due had James Hartfield, at evening the spend
any have would John little dear nor Henry little dear neither that hoped
gone. were Emma dear while them, with matter the thing



II CHAPTER


approached, day The ball. the prevent to again occurred, misfortune No
Frank watching, anxious some of morning a after and arrived; day the
before Randalls reached self, own his of certainty the all in Churchill,
safe. was thing every and dinner,

room The Emma. and him between been yet there had meeting second No
a than better be would it it;--but witness to was Crown the at
his in earnest very so been had Weston Mr. crowd. a in meeting common
themselves, after possible as soon as there arriving her for entreaties
of comfort and propriety the to as opinion her taking of purpose the for
him, refuse not could she that came, persons other any before rooms the
company. man’s young the in interval quiet some spend therefore must and
the time, good in Crown the to drove they and Harriet, convey to was She
them. before sufficiently just party Randalls

not did he though and watch; the on been have to seemed Churchill Frank
evening. delightful a have to meant he that declared eyes his much, say
should it as was thing every that see to together, about walked all They
another of contents the by joined were minutes few a within and be;
great without first, at of sound the hear not could Emma which carriage,
she but exclaim; to going was she early!” unreasonably “So surprize.
coming, were who friends, old of family a was it that found presently
and judgment; Weston’s Mr. help to desire, particular by herself, like
cousins, of carriage another by followed closely very so were they
distinguishing same the with early come to entreated been had who
company the half if as seemed it that errand, same the on earnestness,
preparatory of purpose the for together collected be soon might
inspection.

Weston Mr. which on taste only the not was taste her that perceived Emma
man a of intimate and favourite the be to that felt, and depended,
first very the not was confidantes, and intimates many so had who
but manners, open his liked She vanity. of scale the in distinction
higher a him made have would open-heartedness of less little a
a made friendship, general not but benevolence, character.--General
party whole The man. a such fancy could be.--She to ought he what man
nothing having then, and again; praised and looked, and about, walked
observe to fire, the round half-circle of sort a formed do, to else
though that, started, were subjects other till modes, various their in
pleasant. very still was evening the in fire a _May_,

privy of number the that fault Weston’s Mr. not was it that found Emma
door Bates’s Mrs. at stopped had They larger. yet not was councillors
be to were niece and aunt the but carriage, their of use the offer to
Eltons. the by brought

restlessness, a was there steadily; not but her, by standing was Frank
to going was he about, looking was He ease. at not mind a shewed which
carriages,--impatient other of sound the for watching was he door, the
her. near always being of afraid or begin, to

“I he. said soon,” here be must she think “I of. spoken was Elton Mrs.
her. of much so heard have I Elton, Mrs. see to curiosity great a have
comes.” she before think, I long, be cannot It

back, coming but immediately; move the on was He heard. was carriage A
said,

seen never have I her. with acquainted not am I that forgetting am “I
forward.” myself put to business no have I Elton. Mrs. or Mr. either

proprieties the and smiles the all and appeared; Elton Mrs. and Mr.
passed.

“We about. looking Weston, Mr. said Fairfax!” Miss and Bates Miss “But
them.” bring to were you thought

Emma now. them for sent was carriage The slight. been had mistake The
how be; might Elton Mrs. of opinion first Frank’s what know to longed
of smiles her and dress, her of elegance studied the by affected was he
opinion, an form to himself qualifying immediately was He graciousness.
passed. had introduction the after attention, proper very her giving by

rain.--“I of talked returned.--Somebody carriage the minutes few a In
father: his to Frank said sir,” umbrellas, are there that see will
was Weston Mr. went. he away and forgotten:” be not must Bates “Miss
opinion her by him gratify to him, detained Elton Mrs. but following;
himself, man young the that begin, she did briskly so and son; his of
hearing. of out be hardly could slowly, moving means no by though

you told candidly I know You Weston. Mr. indeed, man young fine very “A
extremely am I that say to happy am I and opinion; own my form should I
him think I compliment. never I me. believe may him.--You with pleased
and like I what precisely are manners his and man, young handsome very a
puppyism. or conceit least the without gentleman, the truly approve--so
them. of horror a puppies--quite to dislike vast a have I know must You
nor Suckling Mr. Neither Grove. Maple at tolerated never were They
very say to sometimes used we and them; with patience any ever had me
them with bore fault, a to almost mild is who Selina, things! cutting
better.” much

but chained; was attention Weston’s Mr. son, his of talked she While
ladies were there that recollect could he Grove, Maple to got she when
away. hurry must smiles happy with and to, attended be to arriving just

our being its of doubt no have “I Weston. Mrs. to turned Elton Mrs.
so are horses and coachman Our Jane. and Bates Miss with carriage
body.--What any than faster drive we believe expeditious!--I extremely
you understand friend!--I a for carriage one’s send to is it pleasure a
unnecessary. quite be will it time another but offer, to as kind so were
_them_.” of care take always shall I sure very be may You

into walked gentlemen, two the by escorted Fairfax, Miss and Bates Miss
Mrs. as duty her much as it think to seemed Elton Mrs. and room; the
understood be might movements and gestures Her them. receive to Weston’s
words, body’s every words, her but Emma; like on looked who one any by
in came who Bates, Miss of flow incessant the under lost soon were
her after minutes many under speech her finished not had and talking,
was she opened door the As fire. the at circle the into admitted being
heard,

not do I signify. to Nothing all. at rain you!--No of obliging very “So
soon declares--Well!--(as Jane And shoes. thick Quite myself. for care
is indeed!--This brilliant is This Well! door) the within was she as
Could wanting. Nothing word. my upon contrived, admirable!--Excellently
you look!--did Jane, up!--Jane, lighted well it.--So imagined have not
Aladdin’s had have really must you Weston, Mr. Oh! thing? any see ever
as her saw I again. room own her know not would Stokes Mrs. Good lamp.
said Stokes,’ Mrs. ‘Oh! entrance. the in standing was she in; came I
Weston.--“Very Mrs. by met now was She more.” for time not had I I--but
hear to happy Very well. quite are you hope I ma’am. you, thank I well,
often, so by pass you headache!--seeing a have might you afraid So it.
indeed. it hear to Delighted have. must you trouble much how knowing and
carriage!--excellent the for you to obliged so Elton, Mrs. dear Ah!
Most moment. a horses the keep not Did ready. quite I and Jane time.
you, to due are thanks our sure am I and carriage.--Oh! comfortable
note, a Jane sent kindly most had Elton Mrs. score. that on Weston, Mrs.
were day!--Never one in offers such two been.--But have should we or
Thank ma’am--.’ word, my ‘Upon mother, my to said I neighbours. such
her made I Woodhouse’s. Mr. to Gone well. remarkably is mother my you,
shawl-- new large warm--her not are evenings the shawl--for her take
mother! my of think to her of kind wedding-present.--So Dixon’s Mrs.
three were There choice. Dixon’s know--Mr. you Weymouth, at Bought
Colonel time. some about hesitated they which says, Jane others,
did you sure you are Jane, dear My olive. an preferred rather Campbell
afraid:--but so am I but two, or drop a but was feet?--It your wet not
step to mat a was there extremely--and so was Churchill Frank Mr.
Frank Mr. politeness.--Oh! extreme his forget never shall upon--I
in been never have spectacles mother’s my you tell must I Churchill,
of talks often mother My again. out came never rivet the since; fault
Frank Mr. of talk often we not Jane?--Do she, not Does good-nature. your
do how Woodhouse, Miss Woodhouse.--Dear Miss here’s Churchill?--Ah!
quite meeting is This well. quite you, thank I well do?--Very you
know I compliment, not transformation!--Must a fairy-land!--Such in
word, my upon rude--but be would complacently)--that most Emma (eyeing
are hair?--You Jane’s like you do look--how do you Woodhouse, Miss
her does she how wonderful Quite herself. all it did judge.--She a
I Hughes Dr. could.--Ah! think I London from hairdresser hair!--No
a for Hughes Mrs. and Dr. to speak and go Must Hughes. Mrs. declare--and
This you. thank I well, do?--Very you do How do? you do moment.--How
is. he there Richard?--Oh! Mr. dear it?--Where’s not is delightful, is
How ladies. young the to talking employed better Much him. disturb Don’t
through rode you as day other the you saw Richard?--I Mr. do, you do
Otway Miss and Otway, Mr. good protest!--and I Otway, town--Mrs. the
Mr. and George Mr. friends!--and of host a Caroline.--Such Miss and
much am I well, do?--Quite all you do How do? you do Arthur!--How
can carriage?--Who another hear I better.--Don’t Never you. to obliged
charming is this word, my Coles.--Upon worthy the likely be?--very this
am fire!--I noble a such And friends! such among about standing be to
coffee.--A take me--never for you, thank I coffee, No roasted. quite
comes. it here hurry--Oh! bye,--no and by sir, please, you if tea little
good!” so thing Every

Miss as soon as and Emma; by station his to returned Churchill Frank
discourse the overhearing necessarily herself found she quiet, was Bates
behind way little a standing were who Fairfax, Miss and Elton Mrs. of
not could she too, overhearing were he Whether thoughtful. was her.--He
look, and dress her on Jane to compliments many good a After determine.
evidently was Elton Mrs. taken, properly and quietly very compliments
like you do “How was, it herself--and complimented be to wanting
my done Wright has trimming?--How my like you do gown?--How my
patient with answered all questions, relative other many hair?”--with
in dress of less think can “Nobody said, then Elton Mrs. politeness.
body’s every when this, as occasion an such upon do--but I than general
have I Westons--who the to compliment in and me, upon much so are eyes
wish not would honour--I me do to chiefly ball this giving are doubt no
except room the in pearls few very see I And others. to inferior be to
shall understand.--We I dancer, capital a is Churchill Frank mine.--So
Churchill. Frank is certainly man young fine suit.--A styles our if see
well.” very him like I

not could Emma that vigorously, so talking began Frank moment this At
hear to want not did and praises, own his overheard had he imagine but
till while, a for drowned were ladies the of voices the more;--and
distinctly again tones Elton’s Mrs. brought suspension another
exclaiming, was wife his and them, joined just had Elton forward.--Mr.

was seclusion?--I our in you, have last, at out us found have you “Oh!
for impatient be to begin would you thought I Jane, telling moment this
us.” of tidings

and surprize of look a with Churchill, Frank “Jane!”--repeated
I it, disapprove not does Fairfax Miss easy--but is displeasure.--“That
suppose.”

whisper. a in Emma said Elton?” Mrs. like you do “How

all.” at “Not

ungrateful.” are “You

a to frown a from changing Then mean?” you do “Ungrateful!--What
mean.--Where you what know to want not do me--I tell not do smile--“No,
dancing?” begin to we are father?--When my is

walked He humour. odd an in seemed he him; understand hardly could Emma
and Mr. both with again back quickly was but father, his find to off
be must which perplexity, little a in them with met had He Weston. Mrs.
Elton Mrs. that Weston Mrs. to occurred just had It Emma. before laid
which it; expect would she that ball; the begin to asked be must
distinction.--Emma that Emma giving of wishes their all with interfered
fortitude. with truth sad the heard

Weston. Mr. said her?” for partner proper a for do to we are what “And
her.” ask to ought Frank think will “She

and promise; former her claim to Emma, to instantly turned Frank
perfect most his looked father his which man, engaged an himself boasted
_him_ wanting was Weston Mrs. that appeared then it of--and approbation
to help to was business their that and himself, Elton Mrs. with dance to
Mrs. and Weston soon.--Mr. pretty done was which it, into him persuade
followed. Woodhouse Miss and Churchill Frank Mr. way, the led Elton
always had she though Elton, Mrs. to second stand to submit must Emma
make to enough almost was It her. for peculiarly as ball the considered
this at advantage, the undoubtedly had Elton Mrs. marrying. of think her
to intended had she though for gratified; completely vanity in time,
Weston Mr. change. the by lose not could she Churchill, Frank with begin
however, rub, little this of spite superior.--In son’s his be might
length respectable the see to delighted enjoyment, with smiling was Emma
hours many so had she that feel to and forming, was it as set the of
Mr. by disturbed more was her.--She before festivity unusual of
among was, he else.--There thing any by than dancing not Knightley’s
dancing,--not be to ought he be; to not ought he where standers-by, the
who whist-players, and fathers, and husbands, the with himself classing
were rubbers their till dance the in interest an feel to pretending were
greater to appeared have not could looked!--He he as young up,--so made
tall, His himself. placed had he where than anywhere, perhaps advantage
of shoulders stooping and forms bulky the among figure, upright firm,
eyes; body’s every draw must felt Emma as such was men, elderly the
of row whole the among one not was there partner, own her excepting and,
nearer, steps few a moved him.--He with compared be could who men young
manner, a gentlemanlike how in prove to enough were steps few those and
the take but he would danced, have must he grace, natural what with
but smile; to him forced she eye, his caught she trouble.--Whenever
ballroom a love could he wished She grave. looking was he general in
often seemed better.--He Churchill Frank like could and better,
her of thought he that herself flatter not must She her. observing
feel not did she behaviour, her criticising were he if but dancing,
partner. her and her between flirtation like nothing was There afraid.
Frank That lovers. than friends, easy cheerful, like more seemed They
indubitable. was done, had he than her of less thought Churchill

incessant the cares, anxious The pleasantly. proceeded ball The
seemed body Every away. thrown not were Weston, Mrs. of attentions
seldom is which ball, delightful a being of praise the and happy;
in given repeatedly was be, to ceased has ball a after till bestowed
very important, very Of this. of existence the of beginning very the
usually meetings such than productive more not was it events, recordable
two of.--The something thought Emma which however, one, was There are.
partner;--the no had Harriet and begun, were supper before dances last
the hitherto been had equal so down;--and sitting lady young only
the was disengaged one any be could there how that dancers, of number
Elton Mr. seeing on afterwards, soon lessened wonder Emma’s wonder!--But
possible were it if dance to Harriet ask not would He about. sauntering
him expecting was she not--and would he sure was she avoided: be to
card-room. the into escape to moment every

where room the of part the to came He plan. his not was however, Escape,
front in about walked and some, to spoke collected, were sitters-by the
maintaining of resolution his and liberty, his shew to if as them, of
or Smith, Miss before directly sometimes being omit not did He it.
yet not was She it. saw her.--Emma to close were who those to speaking
therefore had and bottom, the from up way her working was she dancing;
saw she little a head her turning only by and around, look to leisure
exactly were group whole the set, the up half-way was she When all. it
Mr. but watch; to eyes her allow longer no would she and her, behind
which dialogue a of syllable every heard she that near, so was Elton
that perceived she and Weston; Mrs. and him between place took then just
only not was her, above immediately standing was who wife, his
glances.--The significant by him encouraging even but also, listening
say, and him join to seat her left had Weston Mrs. gentle kind-hearted,
“Most was, reply prompt his which to Elton?” Mr. dance, you not “Do
me.” with dance will you if Weston, Mrs. readily,

no am I myself. than partner better a you get would no--I “Me!--oh!
dancer.”

great have shall “I he, said dance,” to wishes Gilbert Mrs. “If
old an rather myself feel to beginning though sure--for, am I pleasure,
very me give would it over, are days dancing my that and man, married
Mrs. like friend old an with up stand to time any at pleasure great
Gilbert.”

lady young a is there but dance, to mean not does Gilbert “Mrs.
“Miss Smith.” dancing--Miss see to glad very be should I whom disengaged
I if obliging--and extremely are observed.--You not had Smith!--oh!--I
Weston. Mrs. over, are days dancing my man.--But married old an not were
your at do, to happy most be should I else thing Any me. excuse will You
over.” are days dancing my command--but

and surprize what with imagine could Emma and more; no said Weston Mrs.
the Elton! Mr. was This seat. her to returning be must she mortification
he moment; a for round looked Elton.--She Mr. gentle obliging, amiable,
himself arranging was and distance, little a at Knightley Mr. joined had
him between passed glee high of smiles while conversation, settled for
wife. his and

her feared she and glow, a in was heart Her again. look not would She
hot. as be might face

leading Knightley her;--Mr. caught sight happier a moment another In
more seldom surprized, more been she had set!--Never the to Harriet
gratitude, and pleasure all was She instant. that at than delighted,
though and him; thanking be to longed and herself, and Harriet for both
could she as soon as much, said countenance her speech, for distant too
again. eye his catch

good; extremely it, believed had she what just be to proved dancing His
for been not had it if lucky, too almost seemed have would Harriet and
enjoyment complete very the for and before, things of state cruel the
features happy her which distinction the of sense high very and
ever, than higher bounded she her, on away thrown not was It announced.
smiles. of course continual a in was and middle, the down farther flew

very trusted) (Emma looking card-room, the into retreated had Elton Mr.
though wife, his as hardened so quite was he think not did She foolish.
observing by feelings, her of some spoke her;--_she_ like very growing
partner, her to audibly

good-natured, Smith!--Very Miss little poor on pity taken has “Knightley
declare.” I

from heard be might Bates Miss and began; move The announced. was Supper
and table at seated being her till interruption, without moment, that
spoon. her up taking

Mrs. tippet. your is you?--Here are where Jane, dear my Jane, “Jane,
will there afraid is she says She tippet. your on put to you begs Weston
door done--One been has thing every though passage, the in draughts be
must. you indeed Jane, dear matting--My of up--Quantities nailed
on!--so it put you well How obliging! too are you oh! Churchill, Mr.
I as home, ran I dear, my indeed!--Yes, dancing Excellent gratified!
and again, back got and bed, to grandmama help to should, I said
you. told I as just word, a saying without off set me.--I missed nobody
a Woodhouse, Mr. with evening charming a had well, quite was Grandmama
biscuits downstairs, made was backgammon.--Tea and chat, of deal vast
some in luck amazing away: came she before wine and apples baked and
were you how you, about deal great a inquired she and throws: her of
forestall not shall ‘I I, said ‘Oh!’ partners. your were who and amused,
tell to love will she Otway; George Mr. with dancing her left I Jane;
Elton, Mr. was partner first her to-morrow: herself it about all you
dear My Cox.’ William Mr. perhaps next, her ask will who know not do I
am rather?--I not would you nobody there obliging.--Is too are you sir,
and arm, one on Jane word, my Upon kind. most are you Sir, helpless. not
is Elton Mrs. back, little a stand us let stop, other!--Stop, the on me
we lace!--Now looks!--Beautiful she elegant how Elton, Mrs. dear going;
we here evening!--Well, the of queen the Quite train. her in follow all
no, Oh! steps. two the of care take Jane, steps, Two passage. the at are
odd! very How two. were there persuaded was I Well, one. but is there
any saw never I one. but is there and two, were there convinced was I
telling was everywhere.--I style--Candles and comfort the to equal thing
disappointment.--The little a was Jane,--There grandmama, your of you
there but know; you way, their in excellent biscuits, and apples baked
at in brought asparagus some and sweetbread of fricassee delicate a was
boiled quite asparagus the thinking not Woodhouse, Mr. good and first,
loves grandmama nothing is there Now again. out all it sent enough,
disappointed, rather was she asparagus--so and sweetbread than better
of fear for body, any to it of speak not would we agreed we but
much very so be would who Woodhouse, Miss dear to round getting its
have not could amazement! all am I brilliant! is this concerned!--Well,
nothing seen have profusion!--I and elegance thing!--Such any supposed
Anywhere, sit? we shall where sit? we shall where since--Well, it like
consequence. no of is sit _I_ Where draught. a in not is Jane that so
Churchill--only Mr. sure, am I side?--Well, this recommend you do Oh!
house this in direct you What please. you as just good--but too seems it
dishes the half recollect ever we shall how Jane, Dear wrong. be cannot
but soon, so helped be not should I me! Bless too! Soup grandmama? for
beginning.” help cannot I and excellent, most smells it

supper; after till Knightley Mr. to speaking of opportunity no had Emma
invited eyes her again, ballroom the in all were they when but,
his in warm was He thanked. be and her to come to irresistibly him
rudeness; unpardonable been had it conduct; Elton’s Mr. of reprobation
censure. of share due the received also looks Elton’s Mrs. and

it is why “Emma, he. said Harriet,” than more wounding at aimed “They
enemies?” your are they that

added, answer, no receiving on and, penetration; smiling with looked He
may he whatever suspect, I you, with angry be to not ought “_She_
Emma, confess, but course; of nothing, say you surmise, that be.--To
Harriet.” marry to him want did you that

me.” forgive cannot they “and Emma, replied did,” “I

he and it, with indulgence of smile a was there but head; his shook He
said, only

reflections.” own your to you leave I you. scold not shall “I

tell ever spirit vain my flatterers?--Does such with me trust you “Can
wrong?” am I me

wrong, you leads one spirit.--If serious your but spirit, vain your “Not
it.” of you tells other the sure am I

is There Elton. Mr. in mistaken completely been have to myself own do “I
I and not: did I which and discovered, you which him about littleness a
a through was It Harriet. with love in being his of convinced fully was
blunders!” strange of series

the you do will I much, so acknowledging your for return in “And,
has he than better him for chosen have would you that say, to justice
which qualities, first-rate some has Smith himself.--Harriet for chosen
artless single-minded, unpretending, An without. totally is Elton Mrs.
a such to taste and sense of man any by preferred be to girl--infinitely
expected.” I than conversable more Harriet found I Elton. Mrs. as woman

of bustle the by interrupted were gratified.--They extremely was Emma
again. dancing begin to body every on calling Weston Mr.

all you are what Fairfax, Miss Otway, Miss Woodhouse, Miss “Come
lazy! is body Every example. the companions your set Emma, doing?--Come
asleep!” is body Every

wanted.” am I “whenever Emma, said ready,” am “I

Knightley. Mr. asked with?” dance to going you are “Whom

ask will you if you, “With replied, then and moment, a hesitated She
me.”

hand. his offering he, said you?” “Will

are we know you and dance, can you that shewn have You will. I “Indeed
improper.” all at it make to as sister and brother much so really not

indeed.” no, sister! and “Brother



III CHAPTER


considerable Emma gave Knightley Mr. with explanation little This
which ball, the of recollections agreeable the of one was It pleasure.
extremely was enjoy.--She to morning next the lawn the about walked she
the respecting understanding an good so to come had they that glad
much so were wife and husband both of opinions their that and Eltons,
was favour, her in concession his Harriet, of praise his and alike;
few a for which Eltons, the of impertinence The gratifying. peculiarly
the been had evening, her of rest the ruin to threatened had minutes
forward looked she and satisfactions; highest its of some of occasion
infatuation.--From Harriet’s of cure result--the happy another to
the quitted they before circumstance the of speaking of manner Harriet’s
suddenly were eyes her if as seemed It hopes. strong had she ballroom,
superior the not was Elton Mr. that see to enabled were she and opened,
could Emma and over, was fever The him. believed had she creature
injurious by again quickened being pulse the of fear little harbour
for Eltons the of feelings evil the on depended She courtesy.
farther be could that neglect pointed of discipline the all supplying
and love, in much too not Churchill Frank rational, requisite.--Harriet
summer a happy very how her, with quarrel to wanting not Knightley Mr.
her! before be must

he that her told had He morning. this Churchill Frank see to not was She
was he as Hartfield, at stopping of pleasure the himself allow not could
it. regret not did She day. the of middle the by home at be to

all them put and through, them looked matters, these all arranged Having
up freshened spirits with house the to turning just was she rights, to
grandpapa, their of as well as boys, little two the of demands the for
she whom entered persons two and opened, sweep-gate iron great the when
Harriet with Churchill, together--Frank see to expected less never had
convince to sufficed moment Harriet!--A arm--actually his on leaning
white looked Harriet happened. had extraordinary something that her
the and gates iron her.--The cheer to trying was he and frightened, and
in soon three all were asunder;--they yards twenty not were front-door
away. fainted chair a into sinking immediately Harriet and hall, the

answered, be must questions recovered; be must faints, who lady young A
the but interesting, very are events Such explained. be surprizes and
acquainted Emma made minutes few A long. last cannot them of suspense
whole. the with

Mrs. at boarder parlour another Bickerton, Miss and Smith, Miss
and together, out walked had ball, the at also been had who Goddard’s,
enough public apparently though which, road, Richmond the road, a taken
Highbury, beyond mile a half alarm.--About into them led had safety, for
became it side, each on elms by shaded deeply and turn, sudden a making
ladies young the when and retired; very stretch considerable a for
small a at perceived suddenly had they it, into way some advanced had
a side, the by greensward of patch broader a on them, before distance
and beg; to them towards came watch, the on child A gipsies. of party
calling and scream, great a gave frightened, excessively Bickerton, Miss
at hedge slight a cleared bank, steep a up ran her, follow to Harriet on
Highbury. to back cut short a by way her of best the made and top, the
cramp from much very suffered had She follow. not could Harriet poor But
such on brought bank the mount to attempt first her and dancing, after
and state, this in powerless--and absolutely her made as it of return a
remain. to obliged been had she terrified, exceedingly

more been ladies young the had behaved, have might trampers the How
could attack for invitation an such but doubtful; be must courageous,
children, dozen a half by assailed soon was Harriet and resisted; be not
impertinent and clamorous, all boy, great a and woman stout a by headed
she frightened, more and word.--More in absolutely not though look, in
a them gave purse, her out taking and money, them promised immediately
ill.--She her use to or more, want to not them begged and shilling,
her away--but moving was and slowly, but though walk, to able then was
rather or followed, was she and tempting, too were purse her and terror
more. demanding gang, whole the by surrounded,

and trembling she her, found had Churchill Frank state this In
his chance fortunate most a By insolent. and loud they conditioning,
assistance her to him bring to as so delayed been had Highbury leaving
induced had morning the of pleasantness The moment. critical this at
road, another by him meet to horses his leave and forward, walk to him
pair a borrowed have to happening Highbury--and beyond two or mile a
to forgotten have to and Bates, Miss of before night the scissors of
a for in go and door, her at stop to obliged been had he them, restore
being and intended; had he than later therefore was he minutes: few
The them. to close almost till party whole the by unseen was foot, on
then was Harriet in creating been had boy and woman the which terror
Harriet and frightened; completely them left had He portion. own their
strength just had speak, to able hardly and him, to clinging eagerly
overcome. quite were spirits her before Hartfield, reach to enough
other no of thought had he Hartfield: to her bring to idea his was It
place.

of and communication his story,--of whole the of amount the was This
dared speech.--He and senses her recovered had she as soon as Harriet’s
him left delays several these well; her see to than longer stay not
her of assurance give to engaging Emma and lose; to minute another not
people of set a such being there of notice and Goddard, Mrs. to safety
grateful the all with off, set he Knightley, Mr. to neighbourhood the in
herself. and friend her for utter could she that blessings

woman young lovely a and man young fine this,--a as adventure an Such
certain suggesting of fail hardly could way, a such in together thrown
at thought, Emma So brain. steadiest the and heart coldest the to ideas
mathematician a even could grammarian, a could linguist, a Could least.
and together, appearance their witnessed have did, she what seen have
been had circumstances that feeling without it, of history their heard
much other?--How each to interesting peculiarly them make to work at
and speculation with fire on be herself, like imaginist, an must more
her as anticipation of groundwork a such with foresight!--especially
made. already had mind

ever had sort the of Nothing thing! extraordinary very a was It
no memory; her within place, the in ladies young any to before occurred
very the to happened had it now kind;--and the of alarm no rencontre,
chancing was person very other the when hour, very the at and person,
extraordinary!--And very was certainly her!--It rescue to by pass to
this at each of mind of state favourable the did, she as knowing,
his of better the get to wishing was He more. the her struck it period,
Elton. Mr. for mania her from recovering just she herself, to attachment
interesting most the promise to united thing every if as seemed It
be not should occurrence the that possible not was It consequences.
other. the to each recommending strongly

while him, with had yet had she which conversation minutes’ few the In
terror, her of spoken had he insensible, partially been had Harriet
a with arm, his to clung and seized she as fervour her naivete, her
Harriet’s after last, at just and delighted; and amused sensibility
the at indignation his expressed had he given, been had account own
was thing Every terms. warmest the in Bickerton Miss of folly abominable
assisted. nor impelled neither however, course, natural its take to
of enough had had she No, hint. a drop nor step, a stir not would She
scheme. passive mere a scheme, a in harm no be could There interference.
proceed. account no on would she it Beyond wish. a than more no was It

of knowledge the from father her keep to was resolution first Emma’s
but occasion: would it alarm and anxiety the of passed,--aware had what
hour an half Within impossible. be must concealment that felt soon she
those engage to event very the was It Highbury. over all known was it
in servants and youth the all and low; the and young the most, talk who
night’s last The news. frightful of happiness the in soon were place the
sat, he as trembled Woodhouse Mr. Poor gipsies. the in lost seemed ball
their without satisfied be scarcely would foreseen, had Emma as and,
comfort some was It again. shrubbery the beyond go to never promising
his (for Woodhouse Miss and himself after inquiries many that him to
Miss as well as after), inquired be to loved he that knew neighbours
had he and day; the of rest the during in coming were Smith,
very all were they that answer, for returning of pleasure the
well, perfectly was she for true, exactly not though indifferent--which,
had She with. interfere not would Emma otherwise, much not Harriet and
man, a such of child the for general in health of state unhappy an
invent not did he if and was; indisposition what knew hardly she for
message. a in figure no make could she her, for illnesses

took they justice; of operations the for wait not did gipsies The
have might Highbury of ladies young The hurry. a in off themselves
history whole the and began, panic their before safety in again walked
her and Emma to but importance little of matter a into soon dwindled
and Henry and ground, its maintained it imagination her nephews:--in
the and Harriet of story the for day every asking still were John
the in varied she if right her setting tenaciously still and gipsies,
recital. original the from particular slightest



IV CHAPTER


one came Harriet when adventure, this after passed had days few very A
down sitting after and hand, her in parcel small a with Emma to morning
began: thus hesitating, and

should I that something have leisure--I at are you Woodhouse--if “Miss
it know, you then, make--and to confession of sort you--a tell to like
over.” be will

a was There speak. to her begged but surprized; deal good a was Emma
her as much as quite her, prepared which manner Harriet’s in seriousness
ordinary. than more something for words,

have “to continued, she wish,” my is it sure am I and duty, my is “It
altered an quite happily am I As subject. this on you with reserves no
have should you that fit very is it _respect_, _one_ in creature
is than more say to want not do I it. knowing of satisfaction the
and done, have I as way given having of ashamed much too am necessary--I
me.” understand you say dare I

do.” I hope “I Emma, said “Yes,”

Harriet, cried myself!...” fancying be time a long so could I “How
extraordinary all at nothing see can I madness! like seems “It warmly.
the of that not--except or him meet I whether care not do now.--I him in
round distance any go would I indeed him--and see not rather had I two
admire neither I least; the in wife his envy not do I him--but avoid to
and say, dare I charming, very is she done: have I as her, envy nor her
shall disagreeable--I and ill-tempered very her think I but that, all
Miss you, assure I night!--However, other the look her forget never
together, happy so ever be them let evil.--No, no her wish I Woodhouse,
I that you convince to and pang: moment’s another me give not will it
to ought I destroy--what to going now am I truth, speaking been have
that know kept--I have to never ought I ago--what long destroyed have
it destroy will I now spoke).--However, she as (blushing well very
you that presence, your in it do to wish particular my is it all--and
parcel this what guess you Cannot grown. am I rational how see may
look. conscious a with she, said holds?”

thing?” any you give ever he world.--Did the in least the “Not

valued have I that things are they but gifts; them call cannot “No--I
much.” very

_Most_ words the read Emma and her, towards parcel the held She
excited. greatly was curiosity Her top. the on _treasures_ _precious_
Within impatience. with on looked she and parcel, the unfolded Harriet
box, Tunbridge-ware little pretty a was paper silver of abundance
but, cotton; softest the with lined well was it opened: Harriet which
court-plaister. of piece small a only saw Emma cotton, the excepting

recollect.” _must_ “you Harriet, said “Now,”

not.” do I indeed “No,

what forget could you possible it thought have not should I me! “Dear
last very the of one court-plaister, about room very this in passed
my had I before days few very a but was it!--It in met ever we times
the think came--I Knightley John Mrs. and Mr. before throat--just sore
new your with finger his cutting his remember you not evening.--Do very
none had you as court-plaister?--But, recommending your and penknife,
took I so and him; supply to me desired you had, I knew and you, about
he and large, too deal great a was it but piece; a him cut and out mine
he before left, was what with time some playing kept and smaller, it cut
making help not could I nonsense, my in then, so And me. to back it gave
now it at looked and used, be to never by it put I it--so of treasure a
treat.” great a as then and

face, her before hand her putting Emma, cried Harriet!” dearest “My
bear. can I than myself of ashamed more me make “you up, jumping and
this saving your except all, now; all it remember I Aye, it? Remember
the cutting the moment--but this till that of nothing knew relic--I
none had I saying and court-plaister, recommending my and finger,
my in while the all plenty had I sins!--And my sins, my me!--Oh! about
continual a under be to deserve tricks!--I senseless my of pocket!--One
on--what again)--go down life.--Well--(sitting my of rest the all blush
else?”

suspected never I sure am I yourself? hand at some really you had “And
naturally.” so it did you it,

sake!” his for by court-plaister of piece this put actually you so “And
divided feeling and shame of state her from recovering Emma, said
“Lord herself, to added she secretly And amusement. and wonder between
a cotton in by putting of thought have ever I should when me! bless
I about! pulling been had Churchill Frank that court-plaister of piece
this.” to equal was never

something is “here again, box her to turning Harriet, resumed “Here,”
because valuable, more _been_ _has_ that mean I valuable, more still
court-plaister the which him, to belong once really did what is this
did.” never

an of end the was It treasure. superior this see to eager quite was Emma
lead. any without part pencil,--the old

one remember you not Harriet.--“Do said his,” really was “This
exactly forget morning--I one But not. do you say dare I morning?--no,
_that_ before Wednesday or Tuesday the was it perhaps day--but the
was it pocket-book; his in memorandum a make to wanted he _evening_,
about something him telling been had Knightley Mr. spruce-beer. about
out took he when but down; it put to wanted he and spruce-beer, brewing
and away, all it cut soon he that lead little so was there pencil, his
the upon left was this and another, him lent you so do, not would it
I as soon as and, it; on eye my kept I But nothing. for good as table
moment.” that from again it with parted never and up, it caught dared,

it.--Talking remember perfectly “I Emma; cried it,” remember do “I
we saying both I and Knightley yes--Mr. spruce-beer.--Oh! about
I too. it like to learn to resolved seeming Elton’s Mr. and it, liked
was here, just standing was Knightley Mr. it.--Stop; remember perfectly
here.” just standing was he idea an have I he? not

cannot I but odd, very is recollect.--It cannot I know. not do I “Ah!
I where about much remember, I here, sitting was Elton recollect.--Mr.
now.”-- am

on.” go “Well,

that say--except to or you, shew to more nothing have I all. that’s “Oh!
see to you wish I and fire, the behind both them throw to going now am I
it.” do me

in happiness found actually you have and Harriet! dear poor “My
things?” these up treasuring

I wish and now, it of ashamed quite am I was!--but I as simpleton “Yes,
you me, of wrong very was It them. burn can I as easily as forget could
was--but it knew I married. was he after remembrances, any keep to know,
them.” with part to enough resolution not had

not have court-plaister?--I the burn to necessary it is Harriet, “But,
be might court-plaister the but pencil, old of bit the for say to word a
useful.”

disagreeable a has “It Harriet. replied it,” burn to happier be shall “I
is there and goes, it thing.--There every of rid get must I me. to look
Elton.” Mr. of Heaven! thank end, an

Churchill?” Mr. of beginning a be there “will Emma, thought when,” “And

already was beginning the that believe to reason afterwards soon had She
no _told_ had she though gipsy, the that hope but not could and made,
fortnight a Harriet’s.--About made have to proved be might fortune,
quite and explanation, sufficient a to came they alarm, the after
the made which moment, the at it of thinking not was Emma undesignedly.
course the in said, merely She valuable. more received she information
advise would I marry you whenever Harriet, “Well, chat, trivial some of
minute’s a after till it, of more no thought so”--and and so do to you
never shall “I tone, serious very a in say Harriet heard she silence
marry.”

a after and was; it how saw immediately and up, looked then Emma
replied, not, or unnoticed pass should it whether to as debate, moment’s

resolution.” new a is marry!--This “Never

however.” change, never shall I that one is “It

hope from--I proceed not does it hope “I hesitation, short another After
Elton?” Mr. to compliment in not is it

could Emma no”--and indignantly.--“Oh! Harriet cried indeed!” Elton “Mr.
Elton!” Mr. to superior “so words, the catch just

no proceed she Should consideration. for time longer a took then She
nothing?--Perhaps suspect to seem and pass, it let she farther?--should
were she if perhaps or did; she if angry or cold her think might Harriet
too hear to her asking into Harriet drive only might it silent, totally
such been, had as unreserve an such like thing any against and much;
perfectly was she chances, and hopes of discussion frequent and open an
at know and say to her for wiser be would it believed resolved.--She
always was dealing Plain know. and say to meant she that all once,
any on proceed, would she far how determined previously had She best.
the have to both, for safer be would it and sort; the of application
decided, was speed.--She with down laid brain own her of law judicious
spoke-- thus and

Your meaning. your of doubt in be to affect not will I “Harriet,
from results marrying, never of expectation your rather or resolution,
your greatly too be would prefer, might you whom person the that idea an
so?” it not Is you. of think to situation in superior

suppose-- to presumption the not have I me believe Woodhouse, Miss “Oh!
a at him admire to me to pleasure a is it mad.--But so not am I Indeed
of rest the all to superiority infinite his of think to distance--and
so are which veneration, and wonder, gratitude, the with world, the
especially.” me in proper,

you rendered he service The Harriet. you, at surprized all at not am “I
heart.” your warm to enough was

very obligation!--The inexpressible an such was it oh! “Service!
him saw I time--when the at felt I that all and it, of recollection
In change! a Such before. wretchedness my look--and noble coming--his
happiness!” perfect to misery perfect From change! a such moment one

honourable.--Yes, is it and natural, is It natural. very is “It
that gratefully.--But so and well so chuse to think, I honourable,
not do I promise. can I than more is preference fortunate a be will it
engage means any by not do I Harriet. it, to way give to you advise
be will it Perhaps about. are you what Consider returned. being its for
not do rate any at can: you while feelings your check to you in wisest
Be you. liking his of persuaded are you unless far, you carry them let
I sensations. your of guide the be behaviour his Let him. of observant
on again you to speak never shall I because now, caution this you give
I Henceforward interference. all against determined am I subject. the
very were We lips. our pass ever name no Let matter. the of nothing know
doubt, no superior, your is now.--He cautious be will we before; wrong
but nature; serious very a of obstacles and objections seem do there and
been have there place, taken have things wonderful more Harriet, yet,
not would I yourself. of care take But disparity. greater of matches
your assured be end, may it however though, sanguine; too you have
shall I which taste good of mark a is _him_, to thoughts your raising
value.” to how know always

was Emma gratitude. submissive and silent in hand her kissed Harriet
friend. her for thing bad no attachment an such thinking in decided very
be must it mind--and her refine and raise to be would tendency Its
degradation. of danger the from her saving



V CHAPTER


upon opened June connivance, and hopes, and schemes, of state this In
The change. material no brought it general in Highbury To Hartfield.
use the of and Sucklings, the from visit a of talking still were Eltons
her at still was Fairfax Jane and barouche-landau; their of made be to
again was Ireland from Campbells the of return the as and grandmother’s;
likely was she it, for fixed Midsummer, of instead August, and delayed,
able were she least at provided longer, months two full there remain to
from herself save and service, her in activity Elton’s Mrs. defeat to
will. her against situation delightful a into hurried being

certainly had himself, to known best reason some for who, Knightley, Mr.
dislike to growing only was Churchill, Frank to dislike early an taken
pursuit his in dealing double some of him suspect to began He more. him
thing Every indisputable. appeared object his was Emma That Emma. of
mother-in-law’s his hints, father’s his attentions, own his it; declared
and discretion, conduct, words, unison; in all was it silence; guarded
him devoting were many so while But story. same the told indiscretion,
Knightley Mr. Harriet, to over him making herself Emma and Emma, to
He Fairfax. Jane with trifle to inclination some of him suspect to began
between intelligence of symptoms were there but it; understand not could
which, side, his on admiration of least--symptoms at so thought them--he
entirely think to himself persuade not could he observed, once having
errors Emma’s of any escape to wish might he however meaning, of void
arose. first suspicion the when present not was _She_ imagination. of
he and Eltons’; the at Jane, and family, Randalls the with dining was He
from which, Fairfax, Miss at look, single a than more look, a seen had
was he When place. of out somewhat seemed Woodhouse, Miss of admirer the
seen; had he what remembering help not could he company, their in again
and Cowper like were it unless which, observations avoid he could nor
twilight, at fire his

saw,” I what creating “Myself

private of something a being there of suspicion stronger yet him brought
Jane. and Churchill Frank between even, understanding private of liking,

spend to did, often very he as dinner, after day one up walked had He
joined he walk; to going were Harriet and Emma Hartfield. at evening his
like who, party, larger a with in fell they returning, on and, them;
the as early, exercise their take to wisest it judged themselves,
Bates Miss son, their and Weston Mrs. and Mr. rain; threatened weather
on and, united; all They met. accidentally had who niece, her and
of sort the exactly was it knew who Emma, gates, Hartfield reaching
in go to all them pressed father, her to welcome be would that visiting
and immediately; it to agreed party Randalls The him. with tea drink and
listened persons few which Bates, Miss from speech long pretty a after
most Woodhouse’s Miss dear accept to possible it found also she to,
invitation. obliging

horseback. on by passed Perry Mr. grounds, the into turning were they As
horse. his of spoke gentlemen The

“what presently, Weston Mrs. to Churchill Frank said bye,” the “By
carriage?” his up setting of plan Perry’s Mr. of became

had ever he that know not did “I said, and surprized, looked Weston Mrs.
plan.” such any

ago.” months three it of word me wrote You you. from it had I “Nay,

impossible!” “Me!

what as it mentioned You perfectly. it remember I did. you “Indeed
was and somebody, told had Perry Mrs. soon. very be to certainly was
she as persuasion, _her_ to owing was It it. about happy extremely
You harm. of deal great a him did weather bad in out being his thought
now?” it remember must

moment.” this till it of heard never I word my “Upon

have must I be?--Then it could how me! never!--Bless really, “Never!
if as walk you Smith, persuaded--Miss completely was I it--but dreamt
home.” at yourself find to sorry be not will You tired. were you

a and Perry “about Weston, Mr. cried this?” is this?--What is “What
can he glad am I Frank? carriage, his up set to going Perry Is carriage?
you?” had himself, from it had You it. afford

from it had have to seem “I laughing, son, his replied sir,” “No,
having Weston’s Mrs. of persuaded was really odd!--I nobody.--Very
all with ago, weeks many Enscombe, to letters her of one in it mentioned
of syllable a heard never she declares she as particulars--but these
dreamer. great a am I dream. a been have must it course of before, it
gone have I when away--and am I when Highbury at body every of dream I
Mrs. and Mr. of dreaming begin I then friends, particular my through
Perry.”

such had have should you “that father, his observed though,” odd is “It
you likely very not was it whom people about dream connected regular a
and carriage! his up setting Perry’s Enscombe. at of thinking be should
health--just his for care of out it, to him persuading wife’s his
little a only other; or time some doubt, no have I happen, will what
dream! a through runs sometimes probability of air an What premature.
dream your Frank, Well, is! it absurdities of heap a what others, at And
absent. are you when thoughts your in is Highbury that shews certainly
think?” I dreamer, great a are you Emma,

to guests her before on hurried had She hearing. of out was Emma
Mr. of reach the beyond was and appearance, their for father her prepare
hint. Weston’s

vain in trying been had who Bates, Miss cried truth,” the own to “Why,
subject, this on speak must I “if minutes, two last the heard be to
mean not do have--I might Churchill Frank Mr. that denying no is there
oddest the sometimes have I sure am it--I dream not did he that say to
acknowledge must I it, about questioned am I if world--but the in dreams
herself Perry Mrs. for spring; last idea an such was there that
as well as it of knew Coles the and mother, my to it mentioned
only and else, nobody to known secret, a quite was it ourselves--but
should he that anxious very was Perry Mrs. days. three about of thought
morning one spirits great in mother my to came and carriage, a have
remember you don’t Jane, prevailed. had she thought she because
we where forget I home? got we when it of us telling grandmama’s
to was it think I yes, Randalls; to likely to--very walking been had
mother--indeed my of fond particularly always was Perry Mrs. Randalls.
confidence; in her to it mentioned had she not--and is who know not do I
go to not was it but course, of us, telling her to objection no had she
that soul a to it mentioned never I this, to day that from and, beyond:
having my for answer positively not will I time, same the At of. know I
before thing a out pop sometimes do I know I because hint, a dropt never
and now and talker; a rather am I know; you talker, a am I aware. am I
like not am I not. should I which me escape thing a let have I then
least the betrayed never _she_ it for answer will I were. I wish I Jane;
remember Perfectly behind. just she?--Oh! is Where world. the in thing
indeed!” dream, coming.--Extraordinary Perry’s Mrs.

Miss preceded had eyes Knightley’s Mr. hall. the entering were They
where face, Churchill’s Frank From Jane. at glance a in Bates’s
had he away, laughed or suppressed confusion saw he thought he
busy too and behind, indeed was she but hers; to turned involuntarily
waited gentlemen other two The in. walked had Weston Mr. shawl. her with
Frank in suspected Knightley Mr. pass. her let to door the at
her watching seemed eye--he her catching of determination the Churchill
them between passed so--Jane were it if however, vain, intently--in
neither. at looked and hall, the into

be must dream The explanation. or remark farther for time no was There
the round rest the with seat his take must Knightley Mr. and with, borne
and Hartfield, at introduced had Emma which table circular modern large
her persuade and there place to power had have could Emma but none which
his of two which on Pembroke, small-sized the of instead use, to father
pleasantly, passed Tea crowded. been years forty for had, meals daily
move. to hurry a in seemed nobody and

behind table a examining after Churchill, Frank said Woodhouse,” “Miss
their away taken nephews your “have sat, he as reach could he which him,
it? is Where here. stand to used It letters? of box alphabets--their
rather treated be to ought that evening, dull-looking of sort a is This
one letters those with amusement great had We summer. than winter as
again.” you puzzle to want I morning.

table the box, the producing and thought; the with pleased was Emma
much so seemed one no which alphabets, with over scattered quickly was
words forming rapidly were They selves. two their as employ to disposed
quietness The puzzled. be would who else body any for or other, each for
had who Woodhouse, Mr. for eligible particularly it made game the of
had Weston Mr. which sort, animated more the by distressed been often
lamenting, in occupied happily sat now who and introduced, occasionally
boys,” little “poor the of departure the over melancholy, tender with
how him, near letter stray any up took he as out, pointing fondly in or
it. written had Emma beautifully

slight a gave She Fairfax. Miss before word a placed Churchill Frank
to next was Frank it. to herself applied and table, the round glance
them see to as placed so Knightley Mr. them--and to opposite Jane Emma,
little as with could, he as much as see to object his was it and all;
smile faint a with and discovered, was word The observation. apparent
and others, the with mixed immediately be to meant If away. pushed
of instead table the on looked have should she sight, from buried
after eager Harriet, and mixed; not was it for across, just looking
to fell and up, it took directly none, out finding and word, fresh every
The help. for him to turned and Knightley, Mr. by sitting was She work.
a was there it, proclaimed exultingly Harriet as and _blunder_; was word
ostensible. otherwise not meaning a it gave which cheek Jane’s on blush
be, all could it how but dream; the with it connected Knightley Mr.
his of discretion the delicacy, the How comprehension. his beyond was
some be must there feared He asleep! lain so been have could favourite
meet to seemed dealing double and Disingenuousness involvement. decided
and gallantry for vehicle the but were letters These turn. every at him
Frank on game deeper a conceal to chosen play, child’s a was It trick.
part. Churchill’s

alarm great with him; observe to continue he did indignation great With
short a saw He companions. blinded two his also observe to distrust, and
He demure. and sly look a with her to given and Emma, for prepared word
entertaining, highly it found and out, it made soon had Emma that saw
censure; to appear to proper it judged she which something was it though
say, next Churchill Frank heard He shame!” for “Nonsense! said, she for
as I?”--and her--shall to it give will “I Jane, towards glance a with
you no, “No, warmth. laughing eager with it opposing Emma heard clearly
indeed.” not, shall you not; must

without love to seemed who man, young gallant This however. done was It
handed directly complaisance, without himself recommend to and feeling,
sedate of degree particular a with and Fairfax, Miss to word the over
curiosity excessive Knightley’s Mr. it. study to her entreated civility
moment possible every seize him made be, might word this what know to
it saw he before long not was it and it, towards eye his darting for
his; accompany to seemed perception Fairfax’s Jane _Dixon_. be to
meaning, covert the to equal more certainly was comprehension her
was She arranged. so letters five those of intelligence, superior the
blushed watched, herself seeing and up, looked displeased; evidently
not did “I only, saying and her, perceived ever had he than deeply more
even with letters the away pushed allowed,” were names proper that know
word other no by engaged be to resolved looked and spirit, angry an
the made had who those from averted was face Her offered. be could that
aunt. her towards turned and attack,

spoken not had Jane though latter, the cried dear,” my true, very “Aye,
be to us for time is It thing. same the say to going just was word--“I a
looking be will grandmama and in, closing is evening The indeed. going
good you wish must really We obliging. too are you sir, dear My us. for
night.”

had aunt her as ready as her proved moving, in alertness Jane’s
but table; the quit to wanting and up, immediately was She preconceived.
Knightley Mr. and away; get not could she that moving, also were many so
towards pushed anxiously letters of collection another saw he thought
afterwards was She unexamined. her by away swept resolutely and her,
growing was also--it looking was Churchill shawl--Frank her for looking
Knightley Mr. parted, they how and confusion; in was room the and dusk,
tell. not could

of full thoughts his rest, the all after Hartfield at remained He
his assist to came candles the when that full, so seen; had he what
anxious friend--an a as must, certainly he must--yes, he observations,
her see not could He question. some her ask hint, some Emma friend--give
was It her. preserve to trying without danger, such of situation a in
duty. his

the amusement, great the lay what in ask I “may he, said Emma,” “Pray,
the saw I Fairfax? Miss and you to given word last the of sting poignant
the to entertaining very so be could it how know to curious am and word,
other.” the to distressing very so and one,

true the him give to endure not could She confused. extremely was Emma
was she removed, means no by were suspicions her though for explanation;
them. imparted ever having of ashamed really

mere a nothing; meant all “it embarrassment, evident in cried she “Oh!”
ourselves.” among joke

Mr. and you to confined “seemed gravely, replied he joke,” “The
Churchill.”

rather would She not. did she but again, speak would she hoped had He
in while little a sat He speak. than thing any about herself busy
Interference--fruitless mind. his crossed evils of variety A doubt.
to seemed intimacy, acknowledged the and confusion, Emma’s interference.
her, to it owed He speak. would he Yet engaged. affection her declare
interference, unwelcome an in involved be might that thing any risk to
the than rather thing, any encounter to welfare; her than rather
cause. a such in neglect of remembrance

you “do kindness, earnest with last, at he said Emma,” dear “My
the between acquaintance of degree the understand perfectly you think
of?” speaking been have we lady and gentleman

perfectly.--Why yes, Oh! Fairfax? Miss and Churchill Frank Mr. “Between
it?” of doubt a make you do

or her, admired he that think to reason had time any at never you “Have
him?” admired she that

the for eagerness--“Never, open most a with cried she never!” “Never,
could how And me. to occur idea an such did moment, a of part twentieth
head?” your into come possibly it

between attachment of symptoms saw I that imagined lately have “I
be to meant believe not did I which looks, expressive them--certain
public.”

can you that find to delighted am I excessively. me amuse you “Oh!
sorry do--very not will it wander--but imagination your let to vouchsafe
no is There do. not will it indeed essay--but first your in you check to
which appearances the and you; assure do I them, between admiration
circumstances--feelings peculiar some from arisen have you, caught have
to exactly impossible is nature--it different totally a of rather
is which part the it--but in nonsense of deal good a is explain:--there
far as are they that is, sense, is which communicated, being of capable
in beings two any as another, one for admiration or attachment any from
I and side, her on so be to it _presume_ I is, That be. can world the
gentleman’s the for answer will I his. on so being its for _answer_ can
indifference.”

satisfaction a with staggered, which confidence a with spoke She
have would and spirits, gay in was She Knightley. Mr. silenced, which
his of particulars the hear to wanting conversation, the prolonged
a of hows and wheres the all and described, look every suspicions,
meet not did gaiety his but her: entertained highly which circumstance
much too were feelings his and useful, be not could he found He hers.
absolute an into irritated be not might he That talking. for irritated
almost required habits tender Woodhouse’s Mr. which fire the by fever,
hasty a took afterwards soon he year, the throughout evening every
Abbey. Donwell of solitude and coolness the to home walked and leave,



VI CHAPTER


Mrs. and Mr. from visit speedy a of hopes with fed long being After
mortification the endure to obliged were world Highbury the Suckling,
such No autumn. the till come possibly not could they that hearing of
at stores intellectual their enrich could novelties of importation
restricted again be must they news, of interchange daily the In present.
had coming Sucklings’ the while a for which with topics other the to
health whose Churchill, Mrs. of accounts last the as such united, been
Mrs. of situation the and report, different a supply to day every seemed
much as be eventually might hoped be to was it happiness whose Weston,
was neighbours her all of that as child, a of arrival the by increased
it. of approach the by

deal great a of delay the was It disappointed. much very was Elton Mrs.
all must recommendations and introductions Her parade. and pleasure of
thought she So of. talked only still be party projected every and wait,
thing every that her convinced consideration little a first;--but at
though Hill Box to explore they not should Why off. put be not need
the in them with again there go could They come? not did Sucklings the
was there That Hill. Box to go should they that settled was It autumn.
the given even had it known: generally long been had party a such be to
what see to wished she Hill; Box to been never had Emma another. of idea
agreed had Weston Mr. and she and seeing, worth well so found body every
the of more three or Two thither. drive and morning fine some chuse to
a in done be to was it and them, join to admitted be to were only chosen
and bustle the to superior infinitely way, elegant unpretending, quiet,
the of parade picnic and drinking, and eating regular the preparation,
Sucklings. the and Eltons

but not could Emma that them, between understood well very so was This
Weston Mr. from hearing on displeasure, little a and surprise, some feel
had sister and brother her as Elton, Mrs. to proposing been had he that
that and together; go and unite, should parties two the that her, failed
she if be, to was it so it, to acceded readily very had Elton Mrs. as
great very her but nothing was objection her as Now, objection. no had
perfectly be already must Weston Mr. which of Elton, Mrs. of dislike
done be not could again:--it forward bringing worth not was it aware,
and wife; his to pain giving be would which him, to reproof a without
which arrangement an to consent to obliged therefore herself found she
would which arrangement an avoid; to deal great a done have would she
Mrs. of be to said being of degradation the to even her expose probably
her of forbearance the and offended; was feeling Every party! Elton’s
her in severity secret of due arrear heavy a left submission outward
temper. Weston’s Mr. of goodwill unmanageable the on reflections

comfortably. very he said done,” have I what of approve you glad am “I
without nothing are these as schemes Such would. you thought I “But
its secures party large A party. a large too have cannot One numbers.
not could One all. after woman good-natured a is she And amusement. own
out.” her leave

private. in it of none to agreed and aloud, it of none denied Emma

Elton Mrs. and fine; weather the and June, of middle the now was It
to as Weston Mr. with settle and day, the name to impatient growing was
thing every threw carriage-horse lame a when lamb, cold and pigeon-pies
days, few a only be might it weeks, be might It uncertainty. sad into
ventured be could preparations no but useable; were horse the before
were resources Elton’s Mrs. stagnation. melancholy all was it and on,
attack. an such to inadequate

weather such cried.--“And she Knightley?” vexatious, most this not “Is
What odious. quite are disappointments and delays exploring!--These for
nothing and rate, this at away wear will year do?--The to we are
delightful a had had we you assure I year last time this Before done.
Weston.” Kings to Grove Maple from party exploring

may “That Knightley. Mr. replied Donwell,” to explore better had “You
ripening are They strawberries. my eat and Come, horses. without done be
fast.”

so, proceed to obliged was he seriously, begin not did Knightley Mr. If
like should I “Oh! the and delight; with at caught was proposal his for
was Donwell manner. than words in plainer not was things,” all of it
invitation: the for plea a seemed which strawberry-beds, its for famous
tempt to enough been have would cabbage-beds necessary; was plea no but
again him promised She somewhere. going be to wanted only who lady, the
extremely was doubted--and he than oftener come--much to again and
compliment distinguishing a such intimacy, of proof a such by gratified
it. consider to chose she as

your Name come. will certainly “I she. said me,” upon depend may “You
Fairfax?” Jane bring to me allow will You come. will I and day,

whom others some to spoken have I “till he, said day,” a name cannot “I
you.” meet to wish would I

Lady am carte-blanche.--I a me give Only me. to that all leave “Oh!
me.” with friends bring will I party. my is It know. you Patroness,

to you trouble not will I “but he: said Elton,” bring will you hope “I
invitations.” other any give

afraid be not need consider--you But sly. very looking are you now “Oh!
preferment. her on lady young no am I _me_. to power delegating of
Leave party. my is It authorised. safely be may know, you women, Married
guests.” your invite will I me. to all it

world the in woman married one but is replied,--“there calmly “No,”--he
and Donwell, to pleases she guests what invite to allow ever can I whom
is--” one that

mortified. rather Elton, Mrs. interrupted suppose,” I Weston, “--Mrs.

such manage will I being, in is she till Knightley;--and “No--Mrs.
myself.” matters

one no have to satisfied cried, she creature!” odd an are you “Ah!
you what say may and humourist, a are herself.--“You to preferred
her and me--Jane with Jane bring shall I Well, humourist. a Quite like.
meeting to all at objections no have I you. to leave I rest aunt.--The
them.” to attached are you know I scruple. Don’t family. Hartfield the

Miss on call shall I and prevail; can I if them meet will certainly “You
home.” way my in Bates

It like. you as day:--but every Jane see I unnecessary; quite “That’s
I thing. simple a quite Knightley; know, you scheme, morning a be to is
hanging baskets little my of one bring and bonnet, large a wear shall
be can Nothing ribbon. pink with basket this Here,--probably arm. my on
be to is There another. such have will Jane And see. you simple, more
about walk to are We party. gipsy of sort parade--a or form no
under sit and ourselves, strawberries the gather and gardens, your
out all be to is it provide, to like may you else whatever trees;--and
natural as thing Every know. you shade, the in spread table doors--a of
idea?” your that not Is possible. as simple and

have to be will natural the and simple the of idea My quite. “Not
of simplicity the and nature The dining-room. the in spread table the
is think I furniture, and servants their with ladies, and gentlemen
eating of tired are you When doors. within meals by observed best
house.” the in meat cold be shall there garden, the in strawberries

bye, the by And, out. set great a have don’t only please; you “Well--as
be opinion?--Pray our with you to use any of be housekeeper my or I can
inspect to or Hodges, Mrs. to talk to me wish you If Knightley. sincere,
anything--”

you.” thank I it, for wish least the not have “I

extremely is housekeeper my arise, should difficulties any if “Well--but
clever.”

and clever, as full herself thinks mine that it, for answer will “I
assistance.” body’s any spurn would

on come to all us for be would thing The donkey. a had we wish “I
I by. walking sposo caro my me--and and Bates, Miss Jane, donkeys,
life country a In donkey. a purchasing about him to talk must really
ever have woman a let for, necessary; of sort a be to it conceive I
at up shut always be to her for possible not is it resources, many so
in and dust, is there summer know--in you walks, long very home;--and
dirt.” is there winter

is Lane Donwell Highbury. and Donwell between either, find not will “You
if however, donkey, a on Come dry. perfectly is it now and dusty, never
to thing every wish would I Cole’s. Mrs. borrow can You it. prefer you
possible.” as taste your to much as be

friend. good my justice, you do I Indeed would. you sure am I “That
the have you know I manner, blunt dry, of sort peculiar that Under
humourist.--Yes, thorough a are you E., Mr. tell I As heart. warmest
in me to attention your of sensible fully am I Knightley, me, believe
please to thing very the upon hit have You scheme. this of whole the
me.”

He shade. the in table a avoiding for reason another had Knightley Mr.
party; the join to Emma, as well as Woodhouse, Mr. persuade to wished
to doors of out down sitting them of any have to that knew he and
the under not, must Woodhouse Mr. ill. him make inevitably would eat
at spent two or hour an and drive, morning a of pretence specious
misery. his to away tempted be Donwell,

for him upbraid to were horrors lurking No faith. good on invited was He
two for Donwell at been not had He consent. did He credulity. easy his
go could Harriet, and Emma, and he, morning, fine very “Some years.
girls dear the while Weston, Mrs. with still sit could he and well; very
now, damp be could they suppose not did He gardens. the about walked
again house old the see to like should He day. the of middle the in
and Elton, Mrs. and Mr. meet to happy very be should and exceedingly,
to all at objection any see not could neighbours.--He his of other any
He morning. fine very some there going Harriet’s and Emma’s, and his,
kind them--very invite to Knightley Mr. of done well very it thought
dining of fond not was out.--He dining than cleverer sensible--much and
out.”

The concurrence. ready most body’s every in fortunate was Knightley Mr.
like if, as seemed it that received, well so everywhere was invitation
compliment particular a as scheme the taking all were they Elton, Mrs.
of expectations high very professed Harriet and themselves.--Emma to
to over Frank get to promised unasked, Weston, Mr. and it; from pleasure
could which gratitude and approbation of proof a possible; if them, join
that say to obliged then was Knightley with.--Mr. dispensed been have
in time no lose to engaged Weston Mr. and him; see to glad be should he
come. to him induce to arguments no spare and writing,

to party the that fast, so recovered horse lame the meanwhile the In
was Donwell last at and consideration; happy under again was Hill Box
appearing weather next,--the the for Hill Box and day, one for settled
right. exactly

was Woodhouse Mr. Midsummer, almost at sun, mid-day bright a Under
of partake to down, window one with carriage, his in conveyed safely
the in rooms comfortable most the of one in and party; al-fresco this
was he morning, the all fire a by him for prepared especially Abbey,
what of pleasure with talk to ready ease, his at quite placed, happily
not and down, sit and come to body every advise and achieved, been had
on there walked have to seemed who Weston, themselves.--Mrs. heat to
when remained, him, with time the all sit and tired, be to purpose
and listener patient his out, persuaded or invited were others the all
sympathiser.

was she as soon as that Abbey, the at been had Emma since long so was It
look and him, leave to glad was she comfort, father’s her of satisfied
particular more with memory her correct and refresh to eager her; around
must which grounds and house a of understanding exact more observation,
family. her all and her to interesting so be ever

with alliance her which complacency and pride honest the all felt She
viewed she as warrant, fairly could proprietor future and present the
becoming, suitable, its building, the of style and size respectable the
gardens ample sheltered--its and low situation, characteristic
with Abbey, the which of stream, a by washed meadows to down stretching
abundance its sight--and a scarcely had prospect, of neglect old the all
extravagance nor fashion neither which avenues, and rows in timber of
unlike totally and Hartfield, than larger was house up.--The rooted had
many with irregular, and rambling ground, of deal good a covering it,
ought it what just was rooms.--It handsome two or one and comfortable,
respect increasing an felt Emma was--and it what looked it and be, to
untainted gentility, true such of family a of residence the as it, for
had; Knightley John temper of faults understanding.--Some and blood in
them given had She unexceptionably. herself connected had Isabella but
were These blush. a raise could that places, nor names, nor men, neither
it till them indulged and about walked she and feelings, pleasant
the round collect and did, others the as do to necessary was
Frank excepting assembled, were party whole strawberry-beds.--The
Elton, Mrs. and Richmond; from moment every expected was who Churchill,
basket, her and bonnet large her happiness, of apparatus her all in
or accepting, gathering, in way the lead to ready very was
or thought be now could strawberries, only and talking--strawberries,
favourite--always body’s England--every in fruit best of.--“The spoken
to sorts.--Delightful finest and beds finest the wholesome.--These
them.--Morning enjoying really of way only self--the one’s for gather
good--hautboy sort tired--every time--never best the decidedly
eatable--hautboys hardly others comparison--the superior--no infinitely
all--price of flavour finest wood preferred--white scarce--Chili very
Bristol--Maple about London--abundance in strawberries of
exactly thinking renewed--gardeners be to when Grove--cultivation--beds
their of out put be to never rule--gardeners general different--no
of--inferior much eaten be to rich too fruit--only way--delicious
gathering to objection refreshing--only more cherries--currants to
no it bear death--could to sun--tired stooping--glaring the strawberries
shade.” the in sit and go longer--must

by once only conversation--interrupted the was hour, an half for Such,
to son-in-law, her after solicitude her in out, came who Weston, Mrs.
some had uneasy.--She little a was she come--and were he if inquire
horse. his of fears

obliged was Emma now and found; were shade the in tolerably Seats
of.--A talking were Fairfax Jane and Elton Mrs. what overhear to
had Elton Mrs. question. in was situation, desirable most a situation,
not was It raptures. in was and morning, that it of notice received
and felicity in but Bragge, Mrs. with not was it Suckling, Mrs. with
Mrs. of cousin a with was it them: of only short fell it splendour
Grove. Maple at known lady a Suckling, Mrs. of acquaintance an Bragge,
ranks, lines, spheres, circles, first superior, charming, Delightful,
with closed offer the have to wild was Elton Mrs. thing--and every
she triumph--and and energy, warmth, was all side, her immediately.--On
Fairfax Miss though negative, friend’s her take to refused positively
any in engage present at not would she that her assure to continued
urge to heard been had she which motives same the repeating thing,
an write to authorised being on insisted Elton Mrs. before.--Still
was all, at it bear could Jane post.--How morrow’s the by acquiescence
pointedly--and speak did she vexed, look did Emma.--She to astonishing
a proposed her, to unusual action of decision a with last, at
the them shew Knightley Mr. not Would walk? they not removal.--“Should
extent.”--The whole the see to wished gardens?--She the gardens--all
bear. could she than more seemed friend her of pertinacity

scattered, a in gardens the over time some walking after and hot; was It
one followed insensibly they together, three any scarcely way, dispersed
which limes, of avenue short broad a of shade delicious the to another
seemed river, the from distance equal an at garden the beyond stretching
a but nothing nothing; to led grounds.--It pleasure the of finish the
seemed which pillars, high with wall stone low a over end the at view
to approach an of appearance the give to erection, their in intended,
be might as however, Disputable, there. been had never which house, the
and walk, charming a itself in was it termination, a such of taste the
at slope, considerable pretty.--The extremely it closed which view the
steeper a acquired gradually stood, Abbey the which of foot the nearly
of bank a was distant mile a half at and grounds; its beyond form
at wood;--and with clothed well grandeur, and abruptness considerable
the rose sheltered, and placed favourably bank, this of bottom the
and close a making river the and front, in meadows with Farm, Mill Abbey
it. around curve handsome

verdure, English mind. the and eye the to view--sweet sweet a was It
being without bright, sun a under seen comfort, English culture, English
oppressive.

and assembled; others the all found Weston Mr. and Emma walk this In
Harriet and Knightley Mr. perceived immediately she view this towards
and Knightley Mr. way. the leading quietly rest, the from distinct
it.--There see to glad was she but tete-a-tete; odd an was Harriet!--It
and companion, a as her scorned have would he when time a been had
pleasant in seemed they Now ceremony. little with her from turned
sorry been have would Emma when also time a been had There conversation.
now but Farm; Mill Abbey the for favourable so spot a in Harriet see to
of appendages its all with viewed safely be might It not. it feared she
in orchard flocks, spreading pastures, rich its beauty, and prosperity
the at them joined ascending.--She smoke of column light and blossom,
He around. looking in than talking in engaged more them found and wall,
Emma and etc. agriculture, of modes to as information Harriet giving was
have I concerns. own my are “These say, to seemed which smile a received
of suspected being without subjects, such on talk to right a
old too was It him. suspect not did Martin.”--She Robert introducing
Harriet.--They of think to ceased probably had Martin story.--Robert a
most was shade walk.--The the along together turns few a took
day. the of part pleasantest the it found Emma and refreshing,

they eat;--and and in go all must they house; the to was remove next The
Mrs. come. not did Churchill Frank still and busy, and seated all were
himself own not would father His vain. in looked and looked, Weston
wishing of cured be not could she but fears; her at laughed and uneasy,
to as himself expressed had He mare. black his with part would he that
better, much so was aunt “His certainty. common than more with coming,
Churchill’s them.”--Mrs. to over getting of doubt a not had he that
such to liable was her, remind to ready were many as however, state,
reasonable most the in nephew her disappoint might as variation sudden
say, to or believe, to persuaded last at was Weston Mrs. dependence--and
was he that Churchill Mrs. of attack some by be must it that
under was point the while Harriet at looked coming.--Emma prevented
emotion. no betrayed and well, very behaved she consideration;

see to more once out go to were party the and over, was repast cold The
far as get perhaps fish-ponds; Abbey old the seen, been yet not had what
at or, morrow, the on cutting begun be to was which clover, the as
again.--Mr. cool growing and hot, being of pleasure the have rate, any
part highest the in round little his taken already had who Woodhouse,
him, by even imagined were river the from damps no where gardens, the of
that him, with remain to resolved daughter his and more; no stirred
and exercise the to husband her by away persuaded be might Weston Mrs.
need. to seemed spirits her which variety

Woodhouse’s Mr. for power his in all done had Knightley Mr.
corals, cameos, medals, of drawers engravings, of Books entertainment.
been had cabinets, his within collection family other every and shells,
kindness the and morning; the away while to friend, old his for prepared
amused. well exceedingly been had Woodhouse Mr. answered. perfectly had
them shew would he now and him, to all them shewing been had Weston Mrs.
than child, a to resemblance other no having in Emma;--fortunate to all
and constant, slow, was he for saw, he what for taste of want total a in
Emma however, begun, was over looking second this methodical.--Before
of observation free moments’ few a of sake the for hall the into walked
when there, hardly was house--and the of ground-plot and entrance the
a with and garden, the from in quickly coming appeared, Fairfax Jane
there soon, so Woodhouse Miss meet to expecting escape.--Little of look
in was she person very the was Woodhouse Miss but first; at start a was
of. quest

am I that say to as missed, am I “when she, said kind,” so be you “Will
it late how aware not is aunt moment.--My this going am home?--I gone
wanted, be shall we sure am I absent--but been have we long how nor is,
any to it about nothing said have directly.--I go to determined am I and
the to gone are Some distress. and trouble giving be only would It body.
be not shall I in come all they Till walk. lime the to some and ponds,
am I that say to goodness the have you will do, they when and missed;
gone?”

Highbury to walk to going not are you it;--but wish you if “Certainly,
alone?”

twenty in home at be shall I fast. walk me?--I hurt should “Yes--what
minutes.”

my Let alone. quite walking be to is, it indeed far, too is it “But
be can It carriage. the order me you.--Let with go servant father’s
minutes.” five in round

walk.--And rather would account.--I no on you--but thank you, “Thank
to have soon so may who alone!--I, walking of afraid be to _me_ for
others!” guard

“That replied, feelingly very Emma and agitation; great with spoke She
the order must I now. danger to exposed being your for reason no be can
already.” fatigued are danger.--You be would even heat The carriage.

of sort the not is it but fatigued; am answered--“I am,”--she “I
know all we Woodhouse, me.--Miss refresh will walking fatigue--quick
are confess, I Mine, spirits. in wearied be to is it what times at
have me let to be will me, shew can you kindness greatest The exhausted.
necessary.” is it when gone am I that say only and way, own my

into entering and all; it saw She oppose. to word another not had Emma
and immediately, house the quitting her promoted feelings, her
was look parting Her friend. a of zeal the with off safely her watched
of comfort the Woodhouse, Miss “Oh! words, parting her grateful--and
and heart, overcharged an from burst to alone!”--seemed sometimes being
her, by practised be to endurance continual the of somewhat describe to
best. her loved who those of some towards even

into back turned she as Emma, said aunt!” an such indeed! home, a “Such
of betray you sensibility more the And you. pity do “I again. hall the
you.” like shall I more the horrors, just their

only had they and hour, an of quarter a gone been not had Jane
Frank when Venice, Place, Mark’s St. of views some accomplished
had she him, of thinking been not had Emma room. the entered Churchill
Weston Mrs. him. see to glad very was she him--but of think to forgotten
right were _they_ blameless; was mare black The ease. at be would
by detained been had He cause. the as Churchill Mrs. named had who
had which seizure, nervous a her; in illness of increase temporary a
coming, of thought every up given quite had he hours--and some lasted
and have, should he ride a hot how known he had late;--and very till
have not should he believed he be, must he hurry, his all with late, how
thing any suffered never had he excessive; was heat The all. at come
him killed home--nothing at staid had he wished it--almost like
was heat but etc., cold, of degree any bear could heat--he like
the from distance possible greatest the at down, sat he intolerable--and
deplorable. very looking fire, Woodhouse’s Mr. of remains slight

Emma. said still,” sit you if cooler, be soon will “You

be ill very could I again. back go shall I cooler am I as soon “As
be all will You coming! my of made been had point a such spared--but
I as _one_ met I up. breaking party whole the suppose; I soon going
madness!” weather!--absolute such in came--Madness

Churchill’s Frank that perceived soon and looked, and listened, Emma
of out being of phrase expressive the by defined best be might state
be might Such hot. were they when cross always were people Some humour.
often were drinking and eating that knew she as and constitution; his
taking his recommended she complaints, incidental such of cure the
the in thing every of abundance find would he refreshment; some
door. the out pointed humanely she dining-room--and

him make only would it hungry; not was He eat. not should “No--he
and favour; own his in relented he however, minutes, two In hotter.”
her all returned Emma off. walked spruce-beer, about something muttering
secret-- in saying father, her to attention

man a like not should I him. with love in being done have I glad am “I
temper easy sweet Harriet’s morning. hot a by discomposed soon so is who
it.” mind not will

came and meal, comfortable very a had have to enough long gone was He
like manners, good with cool--and, quite better--grown the all back
their in interest an take them, to close chair a draw to himself--able
late. so be should he that way, reasonable a in regret, and employment;
and, them; improve to trying seemed but spirits, best his in not was He
looking were They agreeably. very nonsense talk himself made last, at
Swisserland. in views over

shall “I he. said abroad,” go shall I well, gets aunt my as soon “As
my have will You places. these of some seen have I till easy be never
my read--or to tour my at--or look to other, or time some sketches,
myself.” expose to something do shall I poem.

to go never will You Swisserland. in sketches by not be--but may “That
England.” leave to you allow never will aunt and uncle Your Swisserland.

for prescribed be may climate warm A too. go to induced be may “They
I abroad. going all our of expectation an half than more have I her.
I that morning, this persuasion, strong a feel I have. I you assure
I nothing. doing of tired am I travel. to ought I abroad. be soon shall
penetrating your whatever Woodhouse, Miss serious, am I change. a want
if to-morrow, it leave would England--and of sick am fancy--I may eyes
could.” I

few a invent you Cannot indulgence. and prosperity of sick are “You
stay?” to contented be and yourself, for hardships

do I mistaken. quite are You indulgence! and prosperity of sick “_I_
thwarted am I indulged. or prosperous either as myself upon look not
fortunate a all at myself consider not do I material. thing every in
person.”

and Go came. first you when as though, miserable, so quite not are “You
of slice Another well. very do will you and more, little a drink and eat
on nearly you make will water, and Madeira of draught another meat, cold
us.” of rest the with par a

cure.” best my are You you. by sit shall I stir. not shall “No--I

not is It us. join will to-morrow;--you Hill Box to going are “We
of want in much so man young a for something be will it but Swisserland,
us?” with go and stay, will You change. a

evening.” the of cool the in home go shall I not; certainly “No,

morning.” to-morrow of cool the in again come may you “But

cross.” be shall I come, I If while. worth be not will “No--It

Richmond.” at stay pray “Then

you of think to bear never can I still. crosser be shall I do, I if “But
me.” without there all

your Chuse yourself. for settle must you which difficulties are “These
more.” no you press shall I crossness. of degree own

collected. soon were all and returning, now were party the of rest The
others Churchill; Frank of sight the at joy great was there some With
and distress general very a was there but composedly; very it took
was it That explained. being disappearance Fairfax’s Miss on disturbance
final short a with and subject; the concluded go, to body every for time
Churchill’s Frank parted. they scheme, day’s next the for arrangement
last his that much, so increased himself exclude to inclination little
were, Emma to words

will.” I party, the join and stay to me wish _you_ “Well;--if

Richmond from summons a than less nothing and acceptance; her smiled She
evening. following the before back him take to was



VII CHAPTER


outward other the all and Hill; Box for day fine very a had They
in were punctuality, and accommodation, arrangement, of circumstances
officiating whole, the directed Weston Mr. party. pleasant a of favour
good in was body every and Vicarage, the and Hartfield between safely
with niece, her and Bates Miss together; went Harriet and Emma time.
Mr. with remained Weston Mrs. horseback. on gentlemen the Eltons; the
there. got they when happy be to but wanting was Nothing Woodhouse.
body every and enjoyment, of expectation in travelled were miles Seven
amount general the in but arriving; first on admiration of burst a had
spirits, of want a languor, a was There deficiency. was there day the of
much too separated They over. got be not could which union, of want a
of charge took Knightley Mr. together; walked Eltons The parties. into
Churchill. Frank to belonged Harriet and Emma and Jane; and Bates Miss
seemed It better. harmonise them make to vain, in tried, Weston Mr. And
and Mr. varied. materially never it but division, accidental an first at
agreeable as be and mix, to unwillingness no shewed indeed, Elton, Mrs.
the on spent were that hours whole two the during but could; they as
parties, other the between separation, of principle a seemed there hill,
any or collation, cold any or prospects, fine any for strong too
remove. to Weston, Mr. cheerful

Frank seen never had She Emma. to dulness downright was it first At
hearing--looked worth nothing said He stupid. and silent so Churchill
knowing without intelligence--listened without seeing--admired without
Harriet that wonder no was it dull, so was he While said. she what
insufferable. both were they and likewise; dull be should

better, deal great a taste her to better; was it down sat all they When
object. first his her making gay, and talkative grew Churchill Frank for
her. to paid was paid, be could that attention distinguishing Every
cared he that all seemed eyes, her in agreeable be and her, amuse To
gay was flattered, be to sorry not enlivened, be to glad Emma, for--and
admission the encouragement, friendly the all him gave and too, easy and
animating most and first the in given ever had she which gallant, be to
estimation, own her in now, which but acquaintance; their of period
must it on looking people most of judgment the in though nothing, meant
very could flirtation but word English no as appearance an such had have
together flirted Woodhouse Miss and Churchill Frank “Mr. describe. well
phrase--and very that to open themselves laying were They excessively.”
to lady, one by Grove Maple to letter a in off sent it having to
any from thoughtless and gay was Emma that Not another. by Ireland
had she than happy less felt she because rather was it felicity; real
liked she though and disappointed; was she because laughed She expected.
friendship, in whether all, them thought and attentions, his for him
winning not were they judicious, extremely playfulness, or admiration,
friend. her for him intended still She heart. her back

come to me telling “for he, said you,” to obliged am I much “How
all lost have certainly should I you, for been not had it to-day!--If
again.” away go to determined quite had I party. this of happiness the

you that except about, what know not do I and cross; very were you “Yes,
you than friend kinder a was I strawberries. best the for late too were
come.” to commanded be to hard begged You humble. were you But deserved.

me.” overcame heat The fatigued. was I cross. was I say “Don’t

to-day.” hotter is “It

to-day.” comfortable perfectly am I feelings. my to “Not

command.” under are you because comfortable are “You

command?--Yes.” “Your

had, You self-command. meant I but so, say to you intended I “Perhaps
own your from away run and yesterday, bounds broken other, or somehow
always be cannot I as again--and back got are you to-day but management;
command own your under temper your believe to best is it you, with
mine.” than rather

a without self-command no have can I thing. same the to comes “It
always be can you And not. or speak you whether me, order You motive.
me.” with always are You me. with

not could influence perpetual My yesterday. o’clock three from “Dating
before.” humour of out much so been have not would you or earlier, begin

you seen had I thought I date. your is That yesterday! o’clock “Three
February.” in first

voice)--nobody her (lowering But unanswerable. really is gallantry “Your
talking be to much too rather is it and ourselves, except speaks
people.” silent seven of entertainment the for nonsense

lively with he, replied ashamed,” am I which of nothing say “I
Hill the on body every Let February. in first you saw “I impudence.
side, one on Mickleham to swell accents my Let can. they if me hear
then And February.” in first you saw I other. the on Dorking and
do we shall What stupid. excessively are companions whispering--“Our
Ladies talk. _shall_ They serve. will nonsense Any them? rouse to
is, she wherever (who, Woodhouse Miss by ordered am I gentlemen, and
thinking all are you what know to desires she that say, to presides)
of?”

great a said Bates Miss good-humouredly. answered and laughed, Some
Mr. presiding; Woodhouse’s Miss of idea the at swelled Elton Mrs. deal;
distinct. most the was answer Knightley’s

all are we what hear to like would she that sure Woodhouse Miss “Is
of?” thinking

no could--“Upon she as carelessly as laughing Emma, no”--cried no, “Oh!
brunt the stand would I thing last very the is It world. the in account
thinking all are you what than rather thing any hear me Let now. just of
(glancing perhaps, two, or one are There all. quite say not will I of.
of afraid be not might I thoughts whose Harriet,) and Weston Mr. at
knowing.”

_I_ “which emphatically, Elton Mrs. cried thing,” of sort a is “It
Though, into. inquire to privileged myself thought have not should
any in was never party--_I_ the of _Chaperon_ the as perhaps,
women--” ladies--married parties--young circle--exploring

reply, in murmured, he and husband; her to chiefly were mutterings Her

unheard indeed--quite so, Exactly true. very love, my true, “Very
Every joke. a as off it pass Better thing. any say ladies some of--but
_you_.” to due is what knows body

them of most are “they Emma; to Frank whispered do,” not will “It
gentlemen--I and Ladies address. more with them attack will I affronted.
of right her waives she that say, to Woodhouse Miss by ordered am
requires only and of, thinking be all may you what exactly knowing
Here way. general a in you, of each from entertaining very something
very am say, to pleased is she (who, myself, besides you, of seven are
one either you of each from demands only she and already,) entertaining
two repeated--or or original verse, or prose it be clever, very thing
she and indeed, dull very things three clever--or moderately things
all.” them at heartily laugh to engages

uneasy. be not need I “then Bates, Miss exclaimed well,” very “Oh!
I know. you me, for do just will That indeed.’ dull very things ‘Three
mouth, my open I ever as soon as things dull three say to sure be shall
every on dependence good-humoured most the with round (looking I? shan’t
shall?” I think all you not assent)--Do body’s

resist. not could Emma

be will you me--but Pardon difficulty. a be may there but ma’am, “Ah!
once.” at three number--only to as limited

not did manner, her of ceremony mock the by deceived Bates, Miss
not could it her, on burst it when but, meaning; her catch immediately
her. pain could it that shewed blush slight a though anger,

Mr. to (turning means, she what see I Yes, sure. be “Ah!--well--to
very myself make must I tongue. my hold to try will I and Knightley,)
friend.” old an to thing a such said have not would she or disagreeable,

my do will I agreed. “Agreed, Weston. Mr. cried plan,” your like “I
reckon?” conundrum a will How conundrum. a making am I best.

be shall we son;--“but his answered low,” very sir, afraid, am I “Low,
way.” the leads who one any to indulgent--especially

Mr. of conundrum A low. reckon not will “it Emma, said no,” “No,
me let pray sir, Come, neighbour. next his and him clear shall Weston’s
it.” hear

much too is “It Weston. Mr. said myself,” clever very being its doubt “I
are alphabet the of letters two is.--What it here but fact, of matter a
perfection?” express that there,

know.” not do I sure am I perfection! letters!--express two “What

never will certain, am I Emma), (to You, guess. never will you “Ah!
understand?” you A.--Em-ma.--Do and you.--M. tell will guess.--I

very a be might It together. came gratification and Understanding
and at laugh to deal great a found Emma but wit, of piece indifferent
touch to seem not did Harriet.--It and Frank did so it--and in enjoy
Mr. and it, about stupid very looked some equally; party the of rest the
said, gravely Knightley

Weston Mr. and wanted, is that thing clever of sort the explains “This
body every up knocked have must he but himself; for well very done has
soon.” so quite come have not should _Perfection_ else.

“_I_ Elton; Mrs. said excused,” be must I protest I myself, for “Oh!
had I thing. of sort the of fond all at not am attempt--I cannot really
all at not was I which name, own my upon me to sent once acrostic an
know puppy!--You abominable An from. came it who knew I with. pleased
very are things of kind These husband). her to (nodding mean I who
of out quite but fire; the round sitting is one when Christmas, at well
summer. in country the about exploring is one when opinion, my in place,
witty have who those of one not am I me. excuse must Woodhouse Miss
a have I wit. a be to pretend not do I service. body’s every at things
to allowed be must really I but way, own my in vivacity of deal great
please, you if us, Pass tongue. my hold to when and speak to when judge
nothing have We myself. and Jane, Knightley, E., Mr. Pass Churchill. Mr.
us. of one say--not to clever

sneering of sort a with husband, her added _me_,” pass pray yes, “Yes,
Miss entertain can that say to nothing have “_I_ consciousness;
for good man--quite married old An lady. young other any or Woodhouse,
Augusta?” walk, we Shall nothing.

spot. one on long so exploring of tired really am I heart. my all “With
arm.” other my take Jane, Come,

off. walked wife and husband the and however, it, declined Jane
of out were they as soon as Churchill, Frank said couple!” “Happy
they as lucky--marrying another!--Very one suit they well hearing:--“How
knew only place!--They public a in only formed acquaintance an upon did,
to as lucky!--for Peculiarly Bath! in weeks few a think, I other, each
public any or Bath, that disposition person’s a of knowledge real any
is It knowledge. no be can there nothing; all is give--it can place,
as just set, own their among homes, own their in women seeing by only
it that, of Short judgment. just any form can you that are, always they
man a many How ill-luck. be generally will luck--and and guess all is
rest the all it rued and acquaintance, short a on himself committed has
life!” his of

own her among except before, spoken seldom had who Fairfax, Miss
now. spoke confederates,

Frank cough. a by stopped was undoubtedly.”--She occur, do things “Such
listen. to her towards turned Churchill

voice. her recovered She gravely. he, said speaking,” were “You

circumstances unfortunate such though that observe, to going only was “I
be to them imagine cannot I women, and men to both occur sometimes do
is there arise--but may attachment imprudent and hasty A frequent. very
to understood be would I afterwards. it from recover to time generally
happiness (whose characters, irresolute weak, only be can it that mean,
unfortunate an suffer will who chance,) of mercy the at always be must
ever.” for oppression an inconvenience, an be to acquaintance

soon and submission; in bowed and looked, merely answer; no made He
tone, lively a in said, afterwards

I whenever that judgment, own my in confidence little so have I “Well,
to (turning you? Will me. for wife my chuse will body some hope I marry,
body any like should I sure am me?--I for wife a chuse you Will Emma.)
at smile a (with know, you family, the for provide You you. by on fixed
educate her, Adopt hurry. no in am I me. for body some Find father). his
her.”

myself.” like her make “And

can.” you if means, all “By

wife.” charming a have shall You commission. the undertake I well. “Very

else. nothing for care I eyes. hazle have and lively, very be must “She
come shall I return, I when years--and of couple a for abroad go shall I
Remember.” wife. my for you to

every touch to commission a was It forgetting. of danger no in was Emma
described? creature very the be Harriet not Would feeling. favourite
wished. he that all her make might more years two excepted, eyes Hazle
say? could who moment; the at thoughts his in Harriet have even might He
it. imply to seemed her to education the Referring

Elton?” Mrs. join we “shall aunt, her to Jane said ma’am,” “Now,

was I ready. quite am I heart. my all With dear. my please, you “If
shall We well. as just do will this but her, with gone have to ready
one That’s else. somebody that’s is--no, she There her. overtake soon
I her.--Well, like all at not party, car Irish the in ladies the of
declare--”

Weston, Mr. Knightley. Mr. by minute a half in followed off, walked They
spirits man’s young the and remained; only Harriet, and Emma, son, his
of last at tired grew Emma Even unpleasant. almost pitch a to rose now
about quietly walking rather herself wished and merriment, and flattery
unattended quite and alone, almost sitting or others, the of any with
The her. beneath views beautiful the of observation tranquil in to,
the of notice give to them for out looking servants the of appearance
and collecting of bustle the even and sight; joyful a was carriages
_her_ have to Elton Mrs. of solicitude the and depart, to preparing
drive quiet the of prospect the in endured, gladly were first, carriage
of day this of enjoyments questionable very the close to was which home
people, ill-assorted many so of composed scheme, another Such pleasure.
again. into betrayed be to never hoped she

He side. her by Knightley Mr. found she carriage, the for waiting While
said, then and near, were one no that see to if as around, looked

a do: to used been have I as you to speak more once must I “Emma,
it. use still must I but perhaps, allowed, than endured rather privilege
be you could How remonstrance. a without wrong, acting you see cannot I
to wit your in insolent so be you could How Bates? Miss to unfeeling so
thought not had I situation?--Emma, and age, character, her of woman a
possible.” it

off. it laugh to tried but sorry, was blushed, recollected, Emma

it. helped have could did?--Nobody I what saying help I could how “Nay,
me.” understand not did she say dare I bad. very so not was It

of talked has She meaning. full your felt She did. she you assure “I
what it--with of talked she how heard have could you wish I since. it
your honouring her heard have could you wish I generosity. and candour
for was she as attentions, such her pay to able being in forbearance,
be must society her when father, your and yourself from receiving ever
irksome.” so

world: the in creature better a not is there know “I Emma, cried “Oh!”
most are ridiculous is what and good is what that allow, must you but
her.” in blended unfortunately

prosperous, she were and, acknowledge; “I he, said blended,” are “They
over ridiculous the of prevalence occasional the for much allow could I
harmless every leave would I fortune, of woman a she Were good. the
any for you with quarrel not would I chance, its take to absurdity
Emma, situation--but, in equal your she Were manner. of liberties
sunk has she poor; is She case. the being from is this far how consider
must age, old to live she if and, to; born was she comforts the from
was It compassion. your secure should situation Her more. sink probably
had she whom infant, an from known had she whom You, indeed! done, badly
you have to honour, an was notice her when period a from up grow seen
her, at laugh moment, the of pride the and spirits, thoughtless in now,
whom of many others, before too--and niece, her before her--and humble
treatment _your_ by guided entirely be would _some_,) (certainly
from far very is it Emma--and you, to pleasant not is her.--This of
can; I while truths you tell will will,--I I must, I but me; to pleasant
and counsel, faithful very by friend your myself proving with satisfied
you than justice greater me do other or time some will you that trusting
now.” do can

was it carriage; the towards advancing were they talked, they While
had He in. her handed had he again, speak could she before and, ready;
her and averted, face her kept had which feelings the misinterpreted
herself, against anger of only combined were They motionless. tongue
on and, speak; to able been not had She concern. deep and mortification,
reproaching overcome--then moment a for back sunk carriage, the entering
in parting acknowledgment, no making leave, no taken having for herself
a shew to eager hand and voice with out looked she sullenness, apparent
horses the and away, turned had He late. too just was it but difference;
with soon, and vain; in but back, look to continued She motion. in were
and hill, the down way half were they speed, unusual appeared what
been have could what beyond vexed was She behind. far left thing every
so felt she had Never conceal. could she what beyond expressed--almost
was She life. her in circumstance any at grieved, mortified, agitated,
no was there representation this of truth The struck. forcibly most
brutal, so been have she could How heart. her at it felt She denying.
ill such to herself exposed have she could How Bates! Miss to cruel so
without her leave to him suffer how And valued! she one any in opinion
kindness! common of concurrence, of gratitude, of word one saying

feel to but seemed she more, reflected she As her. compose not did Time
necessary not was it Happily depressed. so been had never She more. it
herself, spirits in not seemed who Harriet, only was There speak. to
running tears the felt Emma and silent; be to willing very and fagged,
to trouble any at being without home, way the all almost cheeks her down
were. they as extraordinary them, check



VIII CHAPTER


the all thoughts Emma’s in was Hill Box to scheme a of wretchedness The
could she party, the of rest the by considered be might it How evening.
ways, different their and homes, different their in They, tell. not
was it view her in but pleasure; with it on back looking be might
rational of bare totally more misspent, completely more morning a
than recollection, in abhorred be to more and time, the at satisfaction
father, her with back-gammon of evening whole A passed. ever had she any
she there for pleasure, real lay indeed, _There_, it. to felicity was
and comfort; his to twenty-four the of hours sweetest the up giving was
and affection fond his of degree the be might as unmerited that, feeling
any to open be conduct, general her in not, could she esteem, confiding
heart. a without not was she hoped she daughter, a As reproach. severe
unfeeling so be you could “How her, to said have could one no hoped She
Miss can.” I while truths you tell will I must, father?--I your to
do could future, in attention, If never! again--no, never should Bates
remiss, often been had She forgiven. be to hope might she past, the away
fact; than thought in more perhaps, remiss, so; her told conscience her
true of warmth the In more. no so be should it But ungracious. scornful,
should it and morning, next very the her upon call would she contrition,
intercourse. kindly equal, regular, a of side, her on beginning, the be

that early, went and came, morrow the when determined as just was She
she that thought, she unlikely, not was It her. prevent might nothing
in come might he perhaps, or, way; her in Knightley Mr. see might
be not would She objection. no had She visit. her paying were she while
hers. truly and justly so penitence, the of appearance the of ashamed
not. him saw she but walked, she as Donwell towards were eyes Her

sound the at rejoiced never had She home.” at all were ladies “The
stairs, the up walked nor passage, the entered before ever nor before,
of or obligation, conferring in but pleasure, giving of wish any with
ridicule. subsequent in except it, deriving

talking. and moving of deal good a approach; her on bustle a was There
the hurry; a in done be to was something voice, Bates’s Miss heard She
a wait to pleased be would she hoped awkward; and frightened looked maid
both seemed niece and aunt The soon. too in her ushered then and moment,
of, glimpse distinct a had she Jane room. adjoining the into escaping
heard she out, them shut had door the before and, ill; extremely looking
upon down laid are you _say_ shall I dear, my “Well, saying, Bates Miss
enough.” ill are you sure am I and bed, the

not did she if as looked usual, as humble and civil Bates, Mrs. old Poor
on. going was what understand quite

they know; not do I “but she, said well,” very not is Jane afraid am “I
presently, here be will daughter my say dare I well. is she me _tell_
am I gone. not had Hetty wish I chair. a find you hope I Woodhouse. Miss
I like? you where sit you Do ma’am? chair, a you able--Have little very
presently.” here be will she sure am

Bates Miss of fear moment’s a had She would. she hoped seriously Emma
and happy came--“Very soon Bates Miss But her. from away keeping
same the not was there that her told conscience Emma’s obliged”--but
very A manner. and look of ease before--less as volubility cheerful
a to way the lead might hoped, she Fairfax, Miss after inquiry friendly
immediate. seemed touch The feelings. old of return

heard--and have you suppose are!--I you kind how Woodhouse, Miss “Ah!
in indeed, joy, like much seem not does This joy. us give to come are
us for trying very be will it two)--but or tear a away me--(twinkling
dreadful a has she and long, so her had having after her, with part to
you letters, long morning:--such the all writing now, just headache
said dear,’ ‘My Dixon. Mrs. and Campbell, Colonel to written be to know,
perpetually. eyes her in were tears yourself’--for blind will ‘you I,
though and change; great a is It wonder. cannot one wonder, cannot One
no as suppose, I situation, a fortunate--such amazingly is she
us think not out--do going first on with met ever before woman young
fortune--(again good surprising such for Woodhouse, Miss ungrateful,
a what see to were you if soul! dear poor tears)--but, her dispersing
feel cannot one know you pain, great in is one When has. she headache
To possible. as low as is She deserve. may it as quite blessing any
have to is she happy and delighted how think would nobody her, at look
is you--she to coming not her excuse will You situation. a such secured
the upon down lie to her want room--I own her into gone is able--she not
bed:’ the upon down laid are you say shall ‘I I, said dear,’ ‘My bed.
that now But, room. the about walking is she not; is she however, but,
will She well. be soon shall she says she letters, her written has she
your but Woodhouse, Miss you, seeing miss to sorry extremely be
quite was door--I the at waiting kept were You her. excuse will kindness
that happened so it bustle--for little a was there somehow ashamed--but
not did we stairs, the on were you till and knock, the heard not had we
upon ‘depend I, said Cole,’ Mrs. only is ‘It coming. was body any know
be must ‘it she, said ‘Well,’ early.’ so come would else Nobody it.
Patty then But now.’ be well as may it and other, or time some borne
am I Woodhouse: Miss is ‘it I, said ‘Oh!’ you. was it said and in, came
and she; said nobody,’ see can her.’--‘I see to like will you sure
you keep us made what was that and away; go would and got, she up
my go, must you ‘If were. we ashamed and sorry extremely waiting--and
the upon down laid are you say will I and must, ‘you I, said dear,’
bed.’”

growing long been had heart Her interested. sincerely most was Emma
acted sufferings present her of picture this and Jane; towards kinder
but nothing her left and suspicion, ungenerous former every of cure a as
of sensations gentle less and just less the of remembrance the and pity;
on resolve naturally very might Jane that admit to her obliged past, the
bear not might she when friend, steady other any or Cole Mrs. seeing
and regret earnest with felt, she as spoke She herself. see to
collected she which circumstances the that wishing solicitude--sincerely
for much as be might on, determined actually now be to Bates Miss from
severe a be must “It possible. as comfort and advantage Fairfax’s Miss
Colonel till delayed be to was it understood had She all. them to trial
return.” Campbell’s

kind.” always are you “But Bates. Miss replied kind!” very “So

dreadful her through break to and “always;” an such bearing no was There
of-- inquiry direct the made Emma gratitude,

going?” Fairfax Miss ask?--is I “Where--may

charge the have superior--to woman--most Smallridge--charming Mrs. a “To
any that Impossible children. girls--delightful little three her of
perhaps, except, we if comfort; with replete more be could situation
is Smallridge Mrs. but Bragge’s; Mrs. and family, own Suckling’s Mrs.
four only neighbourhood:--lives same very the in and both, with intimate
Grove.” Maple from miles four only be will Jane Grove. Maple from miles

owes--” Fairfax Miss whom to person the been has suppose, I Elton, “Mrs.

She friend. true indefatigable, most The Elton. Mrs. good our “Yes,
Jane when for ‘No;’ say, Jane let not would She denial. a take not would
morning very the yesterday, before day the was (it it, of heard first
decided quite was she it, of heard first Jane when Donwell,) at were we
exactly mention; you reasons the for and offer, the accepting against
Colonel till nothing with close to mind her up made had she say, you as
any into enter to her induce should nothing and return, Campbell’s
over and over Elton Mrs. told she so present--and at engagement
her change would she that idea more no had I sure am I again--and
saw her, fails never judgment whose Elton, Mrs. good that mind!--but
in out stood have would that body every not is It did. I than farther
she but answer; Jane’s take to refuse and did, she as way kind a such
as yesterday, denial such any write _not_ would she declared positively
it evening yesterday enough, sure wait--and, would she her; wished Jane
not had I me! to surprize a Quite go. should Jane that settled all was
that once, at her told and aside, Elton Mrs. took idea!--Jane least the
she situation, Smallridge’s Mrs. of advantages the over thinking upon
it of word a know not did it.--I accepting of resolution the to come had
settled.” all was it till

Elton?” Mrs. with evening the spent “You

upon so, settled was It come. us have would Elton Mrs. us; of all “Yes,
_must_ ‘You Knightley. Mr. with about walking were we while hill, the
you have must positively she--‘I said us,’ with evening your spend _all_
come.’” _all_

he?” was too, there was Knightley “Mr.

I though and first; the from it declined he Knightley; Mr. not “No,
him let not would she declared Elton Mrs. because come, would he thought
and there, all were I, and Jane, and mother, my not;--but did he off,
Miss know, you friends, kind Such had. we evening agreeable very a
seemed body every though agreeable, find always must one Woodhouse,
is know, you pleasure, Even party. morning’s the after fagged rather
have to much very seemed them of any that say cannot I fatiguing--and
party, pleasant very a it think always shall _I_ However, it. enjoyed
it.” in me included who friends kind the to obliged extremely feel and

been had it, of aware not were you though suppose, I Fairfax, “Miss
day?” whole the mind her up making

had.” she say dare “I

her all and her to unwelcome be must it come, may time the “Whenever
is that alleviation every have will engagement her hope I friends--but
family.” the of manners and character the to as mean, possible--I

thing every is there indeed, Yes, Woodhouse. Miss dear you, “Thank
and Sucklings the Except it. in happy her make can that world the in
liberal so establishment, nursery another such not is there Bragges,
most a Smallridge, Mrs. acquaintance. Elton’s Mrs. all in elegant, and
as Grove--and Maple to equal almost living of style woman!--A delightful
there Bragges, little and Sucklings little the except children, the to
with treated be will Jane anywhere. children sweet elegant such not are
of life a pleasure, but nothing be will kindness!--It and regard such
salary her name to venture cannot really salary!--I her pleasure.--And
would sums, great to are you as used you, Even Woodhouse. Miss you, to
Jane.” like person young a to given be could much so that believe hardly

I what like all at are children other “if Emma, cried madam,” “Ah!
of amount the times five think should I myself, been have to remember
dearly occasions, such on salary a as named heard yet ever have I what
earned.”

ideas!” your in noble so are “You

you?” leave to Fairfax Miss is when “And

a Within it. of worst the that’s indeed; soon, very soon, “Very
not does mother poor My hurry. great a in is Smallridge Mrs. fortnight.
and thoughts, her of out it put to try I then, So it. bear to how know
more.” any it about think us let not do ma’am, Come say,

and Colonel not will and her; lose to sorry be all must friends “Her
their before herself engaged has she that find to sorry be Campbell Mrs.
return?”

situation a such is this yet, but will; they sure is she says Jane “Yes;
astonished so was I declining. in justified herself feel cannot she as
when and Elton, Mrs. to saying been had she what me told first she when
was It it! upon me congratulating came moment same the at Elton Mrs.
were we because tea, before be not could it tea--stay--no, before
remember I because tea, before was it yet cards--and to going just
happened something it; have I now recollect, I now no, thinking--Oh!
before room the of out called was Elton Mr. that. not but tea, before
I John, old Poor him. with speak to wanted son Abdy’s John old tea,
twenty-seven father poor my to clerk was he him; for regard great a have
the with poorly very and bed-ridden, is he man, old poor now, and years;
will so and to-day; him see and go must joints--I his in gout rheumatic
to came son John’s poor And all. at out gets she if sure, am I Jane,
do to well very is he parish; the from relief about Elton Mr. to talk
thing every and ostler, Crown, the at man head being know, you himself,
help; some without father his keep cannot he still but sort, that of
been had ostler John what us told he back, came Elton Mr. when so, and
to sent been having chaise the about out came it then and him, telling
happened what was That Richmond. to Churchill Frank Mr. take to Randalls
Elton.” Mrs. to spoke Jane that tea after was It tea. before

this new perfectly how say to time Emma give hardly would Bates Miss
she that possible it supposing without as but her; to was circumstance
Churchill’s Frank Mr. of particulars the of any of ignorant be could
consequence. no of was it all, them give to proceeded she going,

the being subject, the on ostler the from learned had Elton Mr. What
the of knowledge the and knowledge, own ostler’s the of accumulation
Richmond from over come had messenger a that was, Randalls, at servants
messenger, Hill--which Box from party the of return the after soon
had Churchill Mr. that and expected; was than more no been had however,
tolerable a whole, the upon containing, lines, few a nephew his sent
coming delay to not him wishing only and Churchill, Mrs. of account
having Churchill Frank Mr. that but early; morning next the beyond back
horse his and all, at waiting without directly, home go to resolved
the for immediately off sent been had Tom cold, a got have to seeming
boy the by, pass it seen and out stood had ostler the and chaise, Crown
steady. very driving and pace, good a going

it and interest, or astonish to either this all in nothing was There
already which subject the with united it as only attention Emma’s caught
in importance Churchill’s Mrs. between contrast The mind. her engaged
the thing, every was one her; struck Fairfax’s, Jane and world, the
destiny, woman’s of difference the on musing sat she nothing--and other
Miss by roused till fixed, were eyes her what on unconscious quite and
saying, Bates’s

become to is What pianoforte. the of, thinking are you what see I “Aye,
now.--‘You just it of talking was Jane dear Poor true. that?--Very of
business no have will You part. must I and ‘You she. said go,’ must
Colonel till houseroom it ‘give she; said however,’ stay, it here.--Let
for settle will he him; to it about talk shall I back. comes Campbell
do I day, this to difficulties.’--And my all of out me help will he me;
daughter’s.” his or present his was it whether not knows she believe,

of remembrance the and pianoforte; the of think to obliged was Emma Now
pleasing, little so was conjectures unfair and fanciful former her all
enough; long been had visit her believe to herself allowed soon she that
of say to venture could she that thing every of repetition a with and,
leave. took felt, really she which wishes good the



IX CHAPTER


interrupted; not were home, walked she as meditations, pensive Emma’s
Mr. her. rouse must who those found she parlour, the entering on but
sitting were and absence, her during arrived had Harriet and Knightley
manner a in and up, got immediately Knightley father.--Mr. her with
said, usual, than graver decidedly

spare, to time no have I but you, seeing without away go not would “I
spend to London, to going am I directly. gone be now must therefore and
say, or send to thing any you Have Isabella. and John with days few a
carries?” nobody which ‘love,’ the besides

scheme?” sudden a this not is But all. at “Nothing

time.” little some it of thinking been have “Yes--rather--I

Time, himself. unlike looked he her; forgiven not had he sure was Emma
friends be to ought they that him tell would thought, she however,
father going--her not but go, to meaning if as stood, he While again.
inquiries. his began

my find you did how safely?--And there get you did and dear, my “Well,
very been have must they say dare daughter?--I her and friend old worthy
Mrs. on call to been has Emma Dear coming. for you to obliged much
so always is She before. you told I as Knightley, Mr. Bates, Miss and
them!” to attentive

a with and praise; unjust this by heightened was colour Emma’s
Mr. at looked she much, spoke which head, the of shake and smile,
in impression instantaneous an were there if as seemed Knightley.--It
that all and hers, from truth the received eyes his if as favour, her
honoured.-- and caught once at were feelings her in good of passed had
in gratified--and warmly was She regard. of glow a with her at looked He
common than more of movement little a by so, more still moment another
not had she hand;--whether her took part.--He his on friendliness
perhaps, might, say--she not could she motion, first the made herself
certainly and it, pressed hand, her took he it--but offered rather have
or fancy some from lips--when, his to it carrying of point the on was
why scruple, a such feel should he go.--Why it let suddenly he other,
not could she done, but all was it when mind his change should he
not had he if thought, she better, judged have would perceive.--He
was it whether and indubitable; was however, intention, stopped.--The
it else however or gallantry, little so general in had manners his that
him, with was more.--It him became nothing thought she but happened,
the recall but not could nature.--She a dignified so yet simple, so of
left amity.--He perfect such spoke It satisfaction. great with attempt
the with moved always He moment. a in afterwards--gone immediately them
but dilatory, nor undecided be neither could which mind a of alertness
disappearance. his in usual than sudden more seemed he now

she wished she but Bates, Miss to gone having her regret not could Emma
pleasure great a been have would earlier;--it minutes ten her left had
Knightley.--Neither Mr. with situation Fairfax’s Jane over talk to
she for Square, Brunswick to going be should he that regret she would
happened have might it enjoyed--but be would visit his much how knew
been have would it, of notice longer had have to time--and better a at
not could she however; friends, thorough parted pleasanter.--They
unfinished his and countenance, his of meaning the to as deceived be
recovered fully had she that her assure to done all was gallantry;--it
she hour, an half them with sitting been had opinion.--He good his
earlier! back come not had she that pity a was It found.

disagreeableness the from thoughts father’s her diverting of hope the In
on going and suddenly; so going and London; to going Knightley’s Mr. of
her communicated Emma bad; very all be would knew she which horseback,
justified; was effect the on dependence her and Fairfax, Jane of news
He him. disturbing without check,--interested, useful very a supplied it
and governess, as out going Fairfax’s Jane to mind his up made long had
had London to going Knightley’s Mr. but cheerfully, it of talk could
blow. unexpected an been

comfortably so be to is she hear to dear, my indeed, glad, very am “I
say dare I and agreeable, and good-natured very is Elton Mrs. settled.
dry a is it hope I be. to ought they what just are acquaintance her
to ought It of. care good taken be will health her that and situation,
me. with was always Taylor’s Miss poor sure am I as object, first a be
Taylor Miss what lady new this to be to going is she dear, my know, You
be not and respect, one in off better be will she hope I And us. to was
long.” so home her been has it after away go to induced

else thing every throw to Richmond from news brought day following The
the announce to Randalls at arrived express An background. the into
reason particular no had had nephew her Though Churchill! Mrs. of death
six-and-thirty above lived not had she account, her on back hasten to
any from nature different a of seizure sudden A return. his after hours
short a after off her carried had state, general her by foreboded thing
more. no was Churchill Mrs. great The struggle.

of degree a had body Every felt. be must things such as felt was It
the for solicitude departed, the towards tenderness sorrow; and gravity
where know to curiosity time, reasonable a in and, friends; surviving
stoops woman lovely when that us, tells Goldsmith buried. be would she
be to stoops she when and die; to but do to nothing has she folly, to
ill-fame. of clearer a as recommended be to equally is it disagreeable,
was years, twenty-five least at disliked being after Churchill, Mrs.
fully was she point one In allowances. compassionate with of spoken now
The ill. seriously be to before admitted been never had She justified.
of selfishness the all and fancifulness, the all of her acquitted event
complaints. imaginary

deal: great a suffering been had she doubt no Churchill! Mrs. “Poor
the try would pain continual supposed--and ever had body any than more
what faults, her all shock--with great event--a sad a was It temper.
be would loss Churchill’s Mr. her? without do Churchill Mr. would
Mr. it.”--Even over get never would Churchill Mr. indeed. dreadful
woman, poor “Ah! said, and solemn, looked and head, his shook Weston
as be should mourning his that resolved, and it!” thought have would who
her over moralising and sighing sat wife his and possible; as handsome
it How steady. and true sense, good and commiseration a with hems broad
also was It both. of thoughts earliest the among was Frank affect would
Churchill, Mrs. of character The Emma. with speculation early very a
and awe with both them over glanced mind husband--her her of grief the
might Frank how on feelings lightened with rested then compassion--and
moment a in saw She freed. how benefited, how event, the by affected be
have would Smith Harriet to attachment an Now, good. possible the all
feared was wife, his of independent Churchill, Mr. encounter. to nothing
his by thing any into persuaded be to man, guidable easy, an nobody; by
form should nephew the that was, wished be to remained that All nephew.
feel could Emma cause, the in goodwill her all with as, attachment, the
formed. already being its of certainty no

self-command. great with occasion, the on well extremely behaved Harriet
Emma nothing. betrayed she hope, brighter of feel might she ever What
character, strengthened of her in proof a such observe to gratified, was
maintenance. its endanger might that allusion any from refrained and
mutual with death Churchill’s Mrs. of therefore, spoke, They
forbearance.

all communicating Randalls, at received were Frank from letters Short
Churchill Mr. plans. and state their of important immediately was that
the on removal, first their and expected; be could than better was
very a of house the to be to was Yorkshire, for funeral the of departure
a promising been had Churchill Mr. whom to Windsor, in friend old
for done be to nothing was there present, At years. ten last the visit
possible be yet could that all were future the for wishes good Harriet;
side. Emma’s on

whose Fairfax, Jane to attention shew to concern pressing more a was It
engagements whose and opened, Harriet’s while closing, were prospects
her shew to wished who Highbury, at one any in delay no of allowed now
scarcely had She wish. first a into grown was it Emma with kindness--and
she whom person, the and coldness; past her for than regret stronger a
she whom on one very the now was neglecting, months many so been had
wanted She sympathy. or regard of distinction every lavished have would
testify and society, her for value a shew to wanted her; to use of be to
day a spend to her on prevail to resolved She consideration. and respect
refused, was invitation The it. urge to written was note A Hartfield. at
write;” to enough well not was Fairfax “Miss message. verbal a by and
appeared it morning, same the Hartfield, at called Perry Mr. when and
against though visited, been have to as indisposed much so was she that
severe under suffering was she that and himself, by consent, own her
the doubt him made which degree, a to fever nervous a and headaches,
proposed. time the at Smallridge’s Mrs. to going her of possibility
quite deranged--appetite completely moment the for seemed health Her
nothing symptoms, alarming absolutely no were there though gone--and
apprehension standing the was which complaint, pulmonary the touching
had she thought He her. about uneasy was Perry Mr. family, the of
herself, so it felt she that and to, equal was she than more undertaken
Her overcome. seemed spirits Her it. own not would she though
nervous a to unfavourable was observe, but not could he home, present
it wished have could room;--he one to always disorder:--confined
must he friend, old very his though aunt, good her otherwise--and
that of invalid an for companion best the not be to acknowledge
were, they questioned; be not could attention and care Her description.
derived Fairfax Miss that feared much very He great. too only fact, in
concern; warmest the with listened Emma them. from good than evil more
some discover to eager around looked and more, and more her for grieved
two--from or hour an only it her--be take To useful. being of way
rational quiet and scene, and air of change her give to aunt, her
the and good; her do might two, or hour an for even conversation,
language feeling most the in say, to again wrote she morning following
any at carriage the in her for call would she that command, could she
decided Perry’s Mr. had she that name--mentioning would Jane that hour
only was answer The patient. his for exercise such of favour in opinion,
note: short this in

any to unequal quite is but thanks, and compliments Fairfax’s “Miss
exercise.”

was it but better; something deserved had note own her that felt Emma
shewed inequality tremulous whose words, with quarrel to impossible
best might she how of only thought she and plainly, so indisposition
the of spite In assisted. or seen be to unwillingness this counteract
Bates’s, Mrs. to drove and carriage, the ordered she therefore, answer,
not would it her--but join to induced be would Jane that hope the in
agreeing and gratitude, all door, carriage the to came Bates do;--Miss
greatest the of be might airing an thinking in earnestly most her with
in all tried--but was do could message that thing every service--and
was Jane success; without return to obliged was Bates Miss vain.
her make to seemed out going of proposal mere the unpersuadable; quite
powers; own her tried and her, seen have could she wished worse.--Emma
appear it made Bates Miss wish, the hint could she before almost but,
in. Woodhouse Miss let to account no on niece her promised had she that
any see to bear not could Jane dear poor that was, truth the “Indeed,
denied--and be not could indeed, Elton, all--Mrs. at body body--any
much--but, so said had Perry Mrs. point--and a such made had Cole Mrs.
nobody.” see really would Jane them, except

Perrys, Mrs. the Eltons, Mrs. the with classed be to want not did Emma
could neither anywhere; themselves force would who Coles, Mrs. the and
and therefore, submitted, herself--she preference of right any feel she
diet, and appetite niece’s her to as farther Bates Miss questioned only
Bates Miss poor subject that On assist. to able be to longed she which
any eat hardly would Jane communicative; very and unhappy, very was
thing every but food; nourishing recommended Perry thing:--Mr.
was neighbours) good such body any had never (and command could they
distasteful.

an to directly, housekeeper the called home, reaching on Emma,
quality superior very of arrowroot some and stores; her of examination
half In note. friendly most a with Bates Miss to despatched speedily was
Miss from thanks thousand a with returned, was arrowroot the hour an
sent being its without satisfied be not would Jane “dear but Bates,
on insisted she moreover, take--and, not could she thing a was it back;
thing.” any of want in all at not was she that saying, her

wandering seen been had Fairfax Jane that heard afterwards Emma When
of afternoon the on Highbury, from distance some at meadows, the about
any to unequal being of plea the under had, she which on day very the
carriage, the in her with out go to refused peremptorily so exercise,
was Jane together--that thing every doubt--putting no have could she
sorry. very sorry, was She _her_. from kindness no receive to resolved
pitiable more the but seemed which state a for grieved was heart Her
and action, of inconsistency spirits, of irritation of sort this from
little so given was she that her mortified it and powers; of inequality
but friend: a as worthy little so esteemed or feeling, proper for credit
of and good, were intentions her that knowing of consolation the had she
privy been have Knightley Mr. could that herself, to say to able being
seen have even he could Fairfax, Jane assisting of attempts her all to
to thing any found have occasion, this on not, would he heart, her into
reprove.



X CHAPTER


was Emma decease, Churchill’s Mrs. after days ten about morning, One
minutes, five stay not “could who Weston, Mr. to downstairs called
the at her met her.”--He with speak to particularly wanted and
of key natural the in did, she how her asking hardly and parlour-door,
father, her by unheard say, to immediately, it sunk voice, his

be it if morning?--Do, this time any at Randalls to come you “Can
you.” see must She you. see to wants Weston Mrs. possible.

unwell?” she “Is

the ordered have would She agitated. little a all--only at not no, “No,
you that and _alone_, you see must she but you, to come and carriage,
come?” you father)--Humph!--Can her towards know--(nodding

what refuse to impossible is It please. you if moment, This “Certainly.
not really she matter?--Is the be can what But way. a such in ask you
ill?”

in all it know will You questions. more no ask me--but upon “Depend
hush!” hush, But business! unaccountable most The time.

Something Emma. for even impossible was meant, this all what guess To
was friend her as but, looks; his by announced seemed important really
father, her with it settling and uneasy, be to not endeavoured she well,
of out soon were Weston Mr. and she now, walk her take would she that
Randalls. for pace quick a at way their on and together house the

gates,--“now sweep the beyond fairly were they when Emma, “Now,”--said
happened.” has what know me let do Weston, Mr.

to wife my promised I me. ask replied.--“Don’t gravely no,”--he “No,
not Do can. I than better you to it break will She her. to all it leave
soon.” too out come all will it Emma; impatient, be

terror.--“Good with still standing Emma, cried me,” to it “Break
Brunswick in happened has once.--Something at me tell Weston, God!--Mr.
it what moment this me tell you charge I me, Tell has. it know I Square.
is.”

mistaken.”-- are you indeed “No,

dearest my of many how me.--Consider with trifle not do Weston “Mr.
you charge it?--I is them of Which Square. Brunswick in now are friends
concealment.” attempt to not sacred, is that all by

Emma.”-- word, my “Upon

that honour, your upon say not honour!--why your not word!--why “Your
be to be can Heavens!--What Good them? of any with do to nothing has it
family?” that of one to relate not does that me, to _broke_

in not is It not. does “it seriously, very he said honour,” my “Upon
of name the of being human any with connected degree smallest the
Knightley.”

on. walked she and returned, courage Emma’s

you. to _broke_ being its of talking “in continued, he wrong,” was “I
concern not does it fact, In expression. the used have not should I
my short, hope.--Humph!--In we is, myself,--that only concerns you--it
don’t I it. about uneasy so be to occasion no is there Emma, dear
much be might things business--but disagreeable a not is it that say
Randalls.” at be soon shall we fast, walk we worse.--If

She effort. little required it now and wait; must she that found Emma
and fancy, own her employed merely therefore, questions more no asked
money some being its of probability the her to out pointed soon that
the in nature disagreeable a of light, to come just concern--something
Richmond at event late the which family,--something the of circumstances
natural dozen a Half active. very was fancy Her forward. brought had
very though off!--This, cut Frank poor perhaps--and children,
more little inspired It her. to agony of matter no be would undesirable,
curiosity. animating an than

they as she, said horseback?” on gentleman that is “Who
secret, his keeping in Weston Mr. assist to more proceeded--speaking
view. other any with than

I Frank, not is Frank;--it Otways.--Not the of know.--One not do “I
this by Windsor to way half is He him. see not will You you. assure
time.”

then?” you, with been son your “Has

mind.” never well, know?--Well, you not yes--did “Oh!

guarded more much tone a in added, then and silent; was he moment a For
demure, and

did.” we how us ask to just morning, this over came Frank “Yes,

said dear,” my Randalls.--“Well, at speedily were and on, hurried They
you hope I now and her, brought have room--“I the entered they as he,
in use no is There together. you leave shall I better. be soon will
distinctly Emma me.”--And want you if off, far be not shall I delay.
have room,--“I the quitted he before tone, lower a in add, him heard
idea.” least the not has She word. my as good as been

perturbation, much so of air an had and ill, so looking was Weston Mrs.
she alone, were they moment the and increased; uneasiness Emma’s that
said, eagerly

I nature, unpleasant very a of Something friend? dear my it is “What
been have I is. it what directly know me let occurred;--do has find,
suspense. abhor both We suspense. complete in way this all walking
your of speak to good you do will It longer. continue mine let not Do
be.” may it whatever distress,

voice. trembling a in Weston Mrs. said idea?” no indeed you “Have
to are you what to as guess a form you Emma--cannot dear my you, “Cannot
hear?”

guess.” do I Churchill, Frank Mr. to relates it that as far “So

directly;” you tell will I and him, to relate does It right. are “You
has “He up.) looking against resolved seeming and work, her (resuming
is It errand. extraordinary most a on morning, very this here been
a on father his to speak to came He surprize. our express to impossible
attachment--” an announce subject,--to

of then and herself, of first thought Emma breathe. to stopped She
Harriet.

“an Weston; Mrs. resumed indeed,” attachment, an than “More
will Emma--what say, you will engagement.--What positive engagement--a
are Fairfax Miss and Churchill Frank that known is it when say, body any
engaged!” long been have they that engaged;--nay,

exclaimed, horror-struck, surprize;--and, with jumped even Emma

it?” mean not do You serious? not are You God! Fairfax!--Good “Jane

eyes, her averting still Weston, Mrs. returned amazed,” be well may “You
recover-- to time have might Emma that eagerness, with on talking and
solemn a been has There so. even is it But amazed. be well may “You
and Weymouth, at October--formed since ever them between engagement
but it knowing creature a Not body. every from secret a kept
so is his.--It nor family, her nor Campbells, the themselves--neither
almost yet is it fact, the of convinced perfectly though that wonderful,
him.” knew I thought it.--I believe hardly can I myself. to incredible

two between divided was mind said.--Her was what heard scarcely Emma
and Fairfax; Miss about him with conversations former own ideas--her
require and exclaim, only could she time some for Harriet;--and poor
confirmation. repeated confirmation,

a is “this herself; recover to trying last, at she said “Well,”
at can I before day, a half least at of think must I which circumstance
either winter--before the all her to What!--engaged it. comprehend all
Highbury?” to came them of

very Emma, me, hurt has engaged.--It October,--secretly since “Engaged
we conduct his of _part_ _Some_ equally. father his hurt has It much.
excuse.” cannot

to _not_ pretend not will “I replied, then and moment, a pondered Emma
assured be power, my in relief the all you give to and you; understand
are you as me, to attentions his followed has effect such no that
of.” apprehensive

as was countenance Emma’s but believe; to afraid up, looked Weston Mrs.
words. her as steady

my of boast, this believing in difficulty less have may you “That
you, tell farther will “I continued, she indifference,” perfect present
I when acquaintance, our of part early the in period a was there that
him--nay, to attached be to disposed much very was I when him, like did
wonder. the perhaps is cease, to came it how attached--and was
past, time some for really have I cease. did it however, Fortunately,
may You him. about nothing cared months, three these least at for
truth.” simple the is This Weston. Mrs. me, believe

find could she when and joy; of tears with her kissed Weston Mrs.
good more her done had protestation this that her, assured utterance,
do. could world the in else thing any than

“On she. said myself,” as relieved much as almost be will Weston “Mr.
you that wish darling our was It wretched. been have we point this
so.-- was it that persuaded were we other--and each to attached be might
account.” your on feeling been have we what Imagine

grateful of matter a be may escape, should I that and escaped; have “I
Weston; Mrs. _him_, acquit not does this But myself. and you to wonder
he had right What blame. to greatly him think I that say, must I and
manners with and engaged, faith and affection with us among come to
as please, to endeavour to he had right What disengaged? _very_ so
persevering with woman young one any distinguish did--to certainly he
to belonged really he did--while certainly he as attention,
could doing?--How be might he mischief what tell he could another?--How
wrong, him?--very with love in me making be not might he that tell he
indeed.” wrong very

imagine--” rather I Emma, dear my said, he that something “From

witness! a with Composure behaviour! such bear _she_ could how “And
woman, another to offering were attentions repeated while on, look to
placidity, of degree a is it.--That resent not and face, her before
respect.” nor comprehend neither can I which

expressly. so said he Emma; them, between misunderstandings were “There
a only here was He explanation. much into enter to time not had He
allow not did which agitation of state a in and hour, an of quarter
been had there that stay--but could he time the of even use full the
indeed, crisis, present The said. decidedly he misunderstandings
very might misunderstandings those and them; by on brought be to seemed
conduct.” his of impropriety the from arise possibly

much Much, censure. a calm too is Weston--it Mrs. Oh! “Impropriety!
him sunk has it how say cannot I him, sunk has impropriety!--It beyond
upright that of be!--None should man a what unlike So opinion. my in
of disdain that principle, and truth to adherence strict that integrity,
of transaction every in display should man a which littleness, and trick
life.” his

wrong been has he though for part; his take must I now Emma, dear “Nay,
having his for answer to enough long him known have I instance, this in
and--” qualities; good many, very many,

too! Smallridge, her.--“Mrs. to attending not Emma, cried God!” “Good
by mean he could What governess! as going of point the on actually Jane
her suffer herself--to engage to her suffer To indelicacy? horrible such
measure!” a such of think to even

acquit fully can I article this On Emma. it, about nothing knew “He
at him--or to communicated not hers, of resolution private a was It him.
I yesterday, conviction.--Till carry to way a in communicated not least
do I him, on burst They plans. her to as dark the in was he said he know
of discovery the was it message--and or letter some by but how, know not
him determined which hers, of project very this of doing, was she what
on himself throw uncle, his to all it own once, at forward come to
of state miserable the to end an put short, in and, kindness, his
long.” so on carrying been had that concealment

better. listen to began Emma

at me told “He Weston. Mrs. continued soon,” him from hear to am “I
which manner a in spoke he and write; soon should he that parting,
Let now. given be not could that particulars many me promise to seemed
It extenuations. many bring may It letter. this for therefore, wait, us
to not are now which excusable and intelligible things many make may
to hurry a in be us let don’t severe, be us let Don’t understood. be
am I that now and him; love must I patience. have us Let him. condemn
anxious sincerely am I point, material one the point, one on satisfied
must They may. it that hope to ready and well, out turning all its for
and secresy of system a such under deal great a suffered have both
concealment.”

him done have to appear not “do dryly, Emma replied sufferings,” “_His_
it?” take Churchill Mr. did how and Well, harm. much

a scarcely with consent his nephew--gave his for favourably “Most
family! that in done have week a of events the what Conceive difficulty.
a been have not could there suppose I lived, Churchill Mrs. poor While
in rest at remains her are scarcely possibility;--but a chance, a hope,
opposite exactly act to persuaded is husband her than vault, family the
undue when is, it blessing a What required. have would she what to
very with consent his gave grave!--He the survive not does influence
persuasion.” little

Harriet.” for much as done have would “he Emma, thought “Ah!”

this light the with off was Frank and night, last settled was “This
time--and some fancy, I Bates’s, the at Highbury, at stopped He morning.
uncle, his to back get to hurry a such in was but hither; on came then
you, tell I as that, ever, than necessary more now just is he whom to
much very was hour.--He an of quarter a but us with stay could he
quite appear him made that degree a indeed--to much, agitated--very
before.--In him seen ever had I thing any from creature different a
so her finding of shock the been had there rest, the all to addition
was there of--and suspicion previous no had had he which unwell, very
deal.” great a feeling been having his of appearance every

such with on carrying been have to affair the believe really you do “And
of know them of none did Dixons, the Campbells, secresy?--The perfect
engagement?” the

blush. little a without Dixon of name the speak not could Emma

in being no to known been had it that said positively He one. not “None;
selves.” two their but world the

the to reconciled grow gradually shall we suppose “I Emma, said “Well,”
a it think always shall I But happy. very them wish I and idea,
of system a but been it has What proceeding. of sort abominable very
with us among come treachery?--To and deceit,--espionage, and hypocrisy
secret in league a such and simplicity; and openness of professions
spring, and winter whole the been, we have all!--Here us judge to
truth of footing equal an on all ourselves fancying duped, completely
been have may who us of midst the in people two with honour, and
and sentiments on judgment in sitting and comparing round, carrying
the take must hear.--They to both for meant never were that words
not way a in of spoken other each heard have they if consequence,
agreeable!” perfectly

sure very am “I Weston. Mrs. replied head,” that on easy quite am “I
not might both which other, the to either of thing any said never I that
heard.” have

you when ear, my to confined was blunder only luck.--Your in are “You
lady.” the with love in ours of friend certain a imagined

Miss of opinion good thoroughly a had always have I as But “True.
and her; of ill spoken have blunder, any under could, never I Fairfax,
safe.” been have must I there him, of ill speaking to as

window, the from distance little a at appeared Weston Mr. moment this At
him invited which look a him gave wife His watch. the on evidently
me let Emma, dearest “Now, added, round, coming was he while and, in;
ease, at heart his set may that thing every look and say to you intreat
of best the make us Let match. the with satisfied be to him incline and
It favour. her in said fairly be may thing every almost indeed, it--and,
that, feel not does Churchill Mr. if but gratify; to connexion a not is
for him, for circumstance fortunate very a be may it and we? should why
such of girl a to himself attached have should he that mean, I Frank,
her given always have I as judgment good and character of steadiness
of spite in for, credit her give to disposed am still for--and credit
may much how And right. of rule strict the from deviation great one this
error!” that even for situation her in said be

be ever can woman a “If feelingly. Emma cried indeed!” “Much,
Jane like situation a in is it herself, of only thinking for excused
their’s, not is world ‘the that say, almost may one such, Fairfax’s.--Of
law.’” world’s the nor

countenance, smiling a with entrance, his on Weston Mr. met She
exclaiming,

a was This word! my upon me, playing been have you trick pretty very “A
of talent my exercise and curiosity, my with sport to suppose, I device,
half lost had you thought I me. frightened really you But guessing.
of matter a being its of instead here, And least. at property, your
congratulate congratulation.--I of one be to out turns it condolence,
the of one having of prospect the on heart, my all with Weston, Mr. you,
daughter.” your for England in women young accomplished and lovely most

as was all that him convinced wife, his and him between two or glance A
was spirits his on effect happy its and proclaimed; speech this as right
shook he briskness: usual their recovered voice and air His immediate.
in subject the on entered and hand, the by gratefully and heartily her
think to persuasion and time wanted only now he that prove, to manner a
what only suggested companions His thing. bad very no engagement the
they time the by and objections; smooth or imprudence, palliate could
again over all it talked had he and together, over all it talked had
perfectly become was he Hartfield, to back walk their in Emma, with
Frank that thing best very the it thinking from far not and reconciled,
done. have possibly could



XI CHAPTER


the lay them in words; the were Harriet!”--Those poor “Harriet,
constituted which and of, rid get not could Emma which ideas tormenting
very behaved had Churchill Frank her. to business the of misery real the
_his_ much so not was it ways,--but many in ill herself--very by ill
the was It him. with angry so her made which _own_, her as behaviour
the gave that account, Harriet’s on into her drawn had he which scrape
the time second a be to Harriet! offence.--Poor his to hue deepest
spoken had Knightley Mr. flattery. and misconceptions her of dupe
friend no been have you “Emma, said, once he when prophetically,
but nothing her done had she afraid was Smith.”--She Harriet to
this in herself, charge to not had she that true was disservice.--It
of author original and sole the being with former, the in as instance
otherwise might as feelings such suggested having with mischief; the
acknowledged had Harriet for imagination; Harriet’s entered have never
ever had she before Churchill Frank of preference and admiration her
guilty completely felt she but subject; the on hint a her given
have might She repressed. have might she what encouraged having of
influence Her sentiments. such of increase and indulgence the prevented
ought she that conscious very was she now And enough. been have would
friend’s her risking been had she that felt them.--She prevented have to
directed have would sense Common grounds. insufficient most on happiness
him, of think to herself allow not must she that Harriet, tell to her
caring ever his against one to chances hundred five were there that and
had have I afraid am “I added, she sense,” common with her.--“But, for
do.” to little

angry been have not could she If herself. with angry extremely was She
Jane for dreadful.--As been have would it too, Churchill Frank with
present any from feelings her relieve least at might she Fairfax,
need she enough; anxiety be would Harriet account. her on solicitude
ill-health whose and troubles whose Jane, about unhappy be longer no
cure.--Her under equally be must origin, same the course, of having,
and well, be soon would over.--She were evil and insignificance of days
attentions own her why imagine now could prosperous.--Emma and happy,
No open. matters smaller many laid discovery This slighted. been had
rival; a been had she eyes Jane’s jealousy.--In from been had it doubt
be regard or assistance of offer could she thing any might well and
rack, the been have would carriage Hartfield the in airing An repulsed.
She poison. been have must storeroom Hartfield the from arrowroot and
from itself disengage could mind her as far as and all; it understood
that acknowledged she feelings, angry of selfishness and injustice the
her beyond happiness nor elevation neither have would Fairfax Jane
little was There charge! engrossing an such was Harriet poor But desert.
fearful sadly was Emma else. body any for spared be to sympathy
first. the than severe more be would disappointment second this that
and ought; it object, the of claims superior very the Considering
producing mind, Harriet’s on effect stronger apparently its by judging
painful the communicate must would.--She it self-command, and reserve
had secresy of injunction An possible. as soon as and however, truth,
whole the present, the “For words. parting Weston’s Mr. among been
of point a made had Churchill Mr. secret. a completely be to was affair
lost; recently very so had he wife the to respect of token a as it,
had decorum.”--Emma due than more no be to it admitted body every and
duty. superior her was It excepted. be must Harriet still but promised;

almost it feeling help not could she vexation, her of spite In
delicate and distressing same very the have should she that ridiculous,
by through gone just had Weston Mrs. which Harriet, by perform to office
her, to announced anxiously so been had which intelligence, The herself.
quick beat heart Her another. to announcing anxiously be to now was she
Mrs. poor had supposed, she so, voice; and footstep Harriet’s hearing on
of event the Could Randalls. approaching was _she_ when felt Weston
unfortunately, that, of resemblance!--But equal an bear disclosure the
chance. no be could there

room--“is the into eagerly coming Harriet, cried Woodhouse!” Miss “Well,
was?” ever that news oddest the this not

or look by guess, to unable Emma, replied mean?” you do news “What
hint. any received have indeed could Harriet whether voice,

Oh!--you strange? so thing any hear ever you Did Fairfax. Jane “About
me told has Weston Mr. for me, to it owning of afraid be not need
secret; great a be to was it me told He now. just him met I himself.
you, but body any to it mentioning of think not should I therefore, and,
it.” knew you said he but

perplexed. still Emma, you?”--said tell Weston Mr. did “What

Churchill Frank Mr. and Fairfax Jane that it; about all me told he “Oh!
one to engaged privately been have they that and married, be to are
odd!” very How while. long this another

odd, extremely so was behaviour Harriet’s odd; so indeed, was, It
appeared character Her it. understand to how know not did Emma that
or agitation, no shewing propose to seemed She changed. absolutely
at looked Emma discovery. the in concern peculiar or disappointment,
speak. to unable quite her,

her?--You, with love in being his “of Harriet, cried idea,” any you “Had
every into see can who spoke) she as (blushing might.--You perhaps,
else--” nobody but heart; body’s

talent. such any having my doubt to begin “I Emma, said word,” my “Upon
attached him imagined I whether Harriet, me, ask seriously you Can
not if was--tacitly, I that time very the at woman another to
never feelings?--I own your to way give to you openly--encouraging
Frank Mr. of hour, last the within till suspicion, slightest the had
very be may You Fairfax. Jane for regard least the having Churchill’s
accordingly.” you cautioned have should I had, I if that sure

caution you should “Why astonished. and colouring, Harriet, cried “Me!”
Churchill.” Frank Mr. about care I think not do me?--You

replied subject,” the on stoutly so speak you hear to delighted am “I
time--and a was there that deny to mean not do you “but smiling; Emma,
you that understand to reason me gave you either--when distant very not
him?” about care did

me?” mistake so you could how Woodhouse, Miss Dear never. “Him!--never,
distressed. away turning

mean?--Good you do pause--“What moment’s a after Emma, cried “Harriet!”
then?--” suppose to I you!--Am mean?--Mistake you do what Heaven!

down, sat she and lost; was voice word.--Her another speak not could She
answer. should Harriet till terror great in waiting

from turned face with and distance, some at standing was who Harriet,
was it speak, did she when and thing; any say immediately not did her,
Emma’s. as agitated as nearly voice a in

have could you “that began, she possible,” it thought have not should “I
considering him--but name to never agreed we know I me! misunderstood
have not should I else, body every to is he superior infinitely how
person. other any mean to supposed be could I that possible it thought
in him at look ever would who know not do I indeed! Churchill, Frank Mr.
of think to than taste better a have I hope I other. the of company the
should you that And side. his by nobody like is who Churchill, Frank Mr.
that believing for but sure, am amazing!--I is mistaken, so been have
I attachment, my in me encourage to meant and approved entirely you
almost, presumption a great too first at it considered have should
more that me told not had you if first, At him. of think to dare to
greater of matches been had there that happened; had things wonderful
to dared have not should words);--I very your were (those disparity
who _you_, if possible--But it thought have not should to--I way give
him--” with acquainted always been had

understand us resolutely--“Let herself collecting Emma, cried “Harriet!”
you Are mistake. farther of possibility the without now, other each
Knightley?” of--Mr. speaking

so else--and body any of idea an have could never I am. I sure be “To
as clear as was it him, about talked we When knew. you thought I
possible.”

then you that all “for calmness, forced with Emma, returned quite,” “Not
almost could I person. different a to relate to me to appeared said,
service the sure am I Churchill. Frank Mr. _named_ had you that assert
the from you protecting in you, rendered had Churchill Frank Mr.
of.” spoken was gipsies,

forget!” do you how Woodhouse, Miss “Oh!

on said I what of substance the remember perfectly I Harriet, dear “My
attachment; your at wonder not did I that you told I occasion. the
extremely was it you, rendered had he service the considering that
to as warmly very yourself expressing it, to agreed you natural:--and
had sensations your what even mentioning and service, that of sense your
is it of impression rescue.--The your to forward come him seeing in been
memory.” my on strong

I but mean; you what recollect I “now Harriet, cried dear,” “Oh,
the not was It time. the at different very something of thinking was
some (with No! meant. I that Churchill Frank Mr. not was gipsies--it
Mr. circumstance--of precious more much a of thinking was I elevation)
not would Elton Mr. when dance, to me asking and coming Knightley’s
That room. the in partner other no was there when and me; with up stand
that generosity; and benevolence noble the was that action; kind the was
every to was he superior how feel to begin me made which service the was
earth.” upon being other

unfortunate--most most a been has “this Emma, cried God!” “Good
done?” be to is mistake!--What deplorable

At me? understood had you if then, me, encouraged have not would “You
the if been, have should I than off worse be cannot I however, least,
possible--” _is_ now--it and person; the been had other

speak. not could Emma moments. few a paused She

a feel should you “that resumed, she Woodhouse,” Miss wonder, not do “I
must You body. any to as or me to as two, the between difference great
But other. the than me above more times million hundred five one think
may it as if--strange supposing--that that Woodhouse, Miss hope, I
wonderful _more_ that words, own your were they know you But appear--.
than place taken had disparity _greater_ of matches happened, had things
such if as seems it therefore, and, me; and Churchill Frank Mr. between
so be should I if before--and occurred have may this, as even thing a
really--if should Knightley Mr. to--if as expression, beyond fortunate,
will you Woodhouse, Miss dear hope, I disparity, the mind not does _he_
But way. the in difficulties put to try and it, against yourself set not
sure.” am I that, for good too are you

at look to round turned Emma windows. the of one at standing was Harriet
said, hastily and consternation, in her

affection?” your returning Knightley’s Mr. of idea any you “Have

I that say must fearfully--“I not but modestly, Harriet replied “Yes,”
have.”

meditating, silently sat she and withdrawn; instantly were eyes Emma’s
sufficient were minutes few A minutes. few a for attitude, fixed a in
hers, like mind A heart. own her with acquainted her making for
touched--she She progress. rapid made suspicion, to opening once
worse much so it was Why truth. whole the acknowledged admitted--she
Frank with than Knightley, Mr. with love in be should Harriet that
having Harriet’s by increased dreadfully so evil the was Why Churchill?
an of speed the with her, through darted It return? a of hope some
herself! but one no marry must Knightley Mr. that arrow,

same the in her before was heart, own her as well as conduct, own Her
blessed never had which clearness a with all it saw She minutes. few
How Harriet! by acting been she had improperly How before. her
been had unfeeling how irrational, how indelicate, how inconsiderate,
her struck It on! her led had madness, what blindness, What conduct! her
the in name bad every it give to ready was she and force, dreadful with
all of spite in however, herself, for respect of portion Some world.
sense strong a and appearance, own her for concern demerits--some these
the to _compassion_ of need no be would Harriet--(there by justice of
required justice Knightley--but Mr. by loved herself believed who girl
the Emma gave now,) coldness any by unhappy made be not should she that
apparent even with calmness, with farther endure and sit to resolution
utmost the that fit was it indeed, advantage own her kindness.--For
done had Harriet and into; enquired be should hopes Harriet’s of extent
voluntarily so been had which interest and regard the forfeit to nothing
whose person, the by slighted be to deserve to maintained--or and formed
therefore, reflection, from right.--Rousing her led never had counsels
more a in and, again, Harriet to turned she emotion, her subduing and
which subject the to as for conversation; the renewed accent, inviting
was that Fairfax, Jane of story wonderful the it, introduced first had
and Knightley Mr. of but thought them of lost.--Neither and sunk quite
themselves.

glad very yet was reverie, unhappy no in standing been had who Harriet,
and judge, a such of manner encouraging now the by it, from called be to
give to invitation, wanted only and Woodhouse, Miss as friend a such
delight.--Emma’s trembling though great, with hopes her of history the
than concealed better were listened, she as and asked, she as tremblings
her but unsteady; not was voice Her less. not were they but Harriet’s,
such self, of development a such that perturbation the all in was mind
perplexing and sudden of confusion a such evil, threatening of burst a
but suffering, inward much with listened create.--She must emotions,
well or detail.--Methodical, Harriet’s to patience, outward great with
it but be; to expected be not could it delivered, well very or arranged,
of tautology and feebleness the all from separated when contained,
the with spirit--especially her sink to substance a narration, the
of favour in brought memory own her which circumstances, corroborating
Harriet. of opinion improved most Knightley’s Mr.

since ever behaviour his in difference a of conscious been had Harriet
occasion, that on had, he that knew dances.--Emma decisive two those
at or evening, that From expectation. his to superior much her found
him, of think to her encouraging Woodhouse’s Miss of time the from least
he than more much her to talking his of sensible be to begun had Harriet
manner different a quite indeed having his of and do, to used been had
been had she sweetness!--Latterly and kindness of manner a her; towards
together, walking all been had they When it. of aware more and more
very so talked and her, by walked and come often so had he
it knew Emma her. with acquainted be to want to seemed delightfully!--He
to change, the observed often had She case. the much very been have to
approbation of expressions repeated extent.--Harriet same the almost
agreement closest the in be to them felt Emma him--and from praise and
for her praised He Harriet. of opinion his of known had she what with
generous, honest, simple, having for affectation, or art without being
he Harriet; in recommendations such saw he that knew feelings.--She
Harriet’s in lived that once.--Much than more her to them on dwelt had
from received had she notice the of particulars little many memory,
compliment a another, to chair one from removal a speech, a look, a him,
unsuspected, because unnoticed, been had inferred, preference a implied,
relation, hour’s an half to swell might that Circumstances Emma. by
passed had them, seen had who her to proofs multiplied contained and
to occurrences latest two the but them; heard now who her by undiscerned
without not were Harriet, to promise strongest of two the mentioned, be
walking his was first, herself.--The Emma from witness of degree some
they where Donwell, at lime-walk the in others, the from apart her with
(as pains taken had he and came, Emma before time some walking been had
first, at himself--and to rest the from her draw to convinced) was she
done ever had he than way particular more a in her to talked had he
recall not could indeed!--(Harriet way particular very a in before,
her whether her, asking almost be to seemed He blush.) a without it
appeared Woodhouse) (Miss she as soon as engaged.--But were affections
about talking began and subject, the changed he them, join to likely
half nearly her with talking sat having his was second, farming:--The
of morning last very the visit, her from back came Emma before hour an
that said had he in, came first he when Hartfield--though, at being his
their during her, told having his minutes--and five stay not could he
against much very was it London, to go must he though that conversation,
(as more much was which all, at home left he that inclination his
of degree superior The _her_. to acknowledged had he than felt) Emma
her gave marked, article one this which Harriet, towards confidence
pain. severe

a after did, she circumstances, two the of first the of subject the On
not?--Is he “Might question. following the venture reflection, little
of state the into thought, you as enquiring, when that possible, it not
have might Martin--he Mr. to alluding be might he affections, your
with suspicion the rejected Harriet But view? in interest Martin’s Mr.
spirit.

I hope I Martin. Mr. of hint a not was indeed!--There No Martin! “Mr.
it.” of suspected be to or Martin, Mr. for care to than now, better know

Miss dear her to appealed she evidence, her closed had Harriet When
hope. for ground good not had she whether say to Woodhouse,

“but she, said first,” at it of think to presumed have should never “I
behaviour his let and carefully, him observe to me told You you. for
may I that feel to seem I now But have. I so mine--and of rule the be
so thing any be not will it me, chuse does he if that and him; deserve
wonderful.” very

feelings, bitter many the speech, this by occasioned feelings bitter The
say to her enable to side, Emma’s on necessary exertion utmost the made
reply, on

last the is Knightley Mr. that declare, to venture only will I “Harriet,
his of idea the woman any give intentionally would who world, the in man
does.” really he than more her for feeling

so sentence a for friend her worship to ready seemed Harriet
which fondness, and raptures from saved only was Emma and satisfactory;
her of sound the by penance, dreadful been have would moment that at
too was Harriet hall. the through coming was He footsteps. father’s
herself-- compose not could “She him. encounter to agitated much
ready most go;”--with better had alarmed--she be would Woodhouse Mr.
another through off passed she therefore, friend, her from encouragement
of burst spontaneous the was this gone, was she moment the door--and
her!” seen never had I that God! “Oh feelings: Emma’s

her for enough hardly were night, following the day, the of rest The
had that all of confusion the amidst bewildered was thoughts.--She
a brought had moment Every hours. few last the within her on rushed
to humiliation of matter be must surprize every and surprize; fresh
had she deceptions the understand to How all! it understand to her.--How
the blunders, under!--The living and herself, on practising thus been
about, walked she still, sat heart!--she and head own her of blindness
every place, every shrubbery--in the tried she room, own her tried she
had she that weakly; most acted had she that perceived she posture,
had she that degree; mortifying most a in others by on imposed been
she that mortifying; more yet degree a in herself on imposing been
of beginning the but day this find probably should and wretched, was
wretchedness.

first the was heart, own her understand thoroughly understand, To
father’s her which moment leisure every went point that To endeavour.
mind. of absence involuntary of moment every and allowed, her on claims

feeling every as her, to dear so been Knightley Mr. had long How
begun?-- influence such influence, his had When be? to now him declared
Frank which affection, her in place that to succeeded he had When
back; looked occupied?--She period, short a for once, had Churchill
her in stood always had they as them, two--compared the compared she
as her--and to known becoming latter’s the of time the from estimation,
by it, had it--oh! had her, by compared been have time any at must they
comparison.--She the institute to her, to occurred felicity, blessed any
Mr. consider not did she when time a been had never there that saw
not had her for regard his when or superior, the infinitely as Knightley
herself, persuading in that saw, She dear. most the infinitely been
a under entirely been had she contrary, the to acting in fancying, in
had she that short, in heart--and, own her of ignorant totally delusion,
all! at Churchill Frank for cared really never

was This reflection. of series first the of conclusion the was This
which inquiry, of question first the on herself, of knowledge the
most was it.--She reaching in long being without and reached; she
revealed one the but sensation every of ashamed indignant; sorrowfully
mind her of part other Knightley.--Every Mr. for affection her--her to
disgusting. was

every of secret the in herself believed she had vanity insufferable With
every arrange to proposed arrogance unpardonable with feelings; body’s
and mistaken; universally been have to proved was She destiny. body’s
had She mischief. done had she nothing--for done quite not had she
Mr. on feared, much too she and herself, on Harriet, on evil brought
on place, take to connexions all of unequal most this Knightley.--Were
his for beginning; a it given having of reproach the all rest must her
of consciousness a by only produced be to believe must she attachment,
known have never would he case, the not this were even Harriet’s;--and
folly. her for but all at Harriet

every distance to union a was Smith!--It Harriet and Knightley Mr.
Fairfax Jane and Churchill Frank of attachment kind.--The the of wonder
no exciting comparison, the in stale threadbare, commonplace, became
or said be to nothing affording disparity, no presenting surprize,
her on elevation an Smith!--Such Harriet and Knightley thought.--Mr.
it how think to Emma to horrible was It his! on debasement a Such side!
sneers, the smiles, the foresee to opinion, general the in him sink must
and mortification the expense; his at prompt would it merriment the
himself.--Could to inconveniences thousand the brother, his of disdain
from far, very far, was it yet And impossible. was it be?--No; it
abilities first-rate of man a for circumstance new a it impossible.--Was
perhaps one, for new it Was powers? inferior very by captivated be to
him?--Was seek would who girl a of prize the be to seek, to busy too
inconsistent, unequal, be to world this in thing any for new it
direct to causes) second (as circumstance and chance for incongruous--or
fate? human the

she where her left she Had forward! Harriet brought never she had Oh!
a with not, she ought!--Had she her told had he where and ought,
the marrying her prevented express, could tongue no which folly
respectable and happy her made have would who man young unexceptionable
been have would belong--all to ought she which to life of line the in
been. have would sequel dreadful this of none safe;

to thoughts her raise to presumption the had have ever could Harriet How
such of chosen the herself fancy to dare could she Knightley!--How Mr.
had humble, less was Harriet it!--But of assured actually till man a
or mind of whether inferiority, formerly.--Her than scruples fewer
Mr. of sensible more seemed had felt.--She little seemed situation,
Mr. of seemed now she than her, marrying in stoop to being Elton’s
at been had Who too? doing own her that not was Knightley’s.--Alas!
but herself?--Who but self-consequence of notions Harriet give to pains
possible, if herself elevate to was she that her, taught had herself
establishment?--If worldly high a to great were claims her that and
too. doing her was it vain, grown were humble, being from Harriet,



XII CHAPTER


known never had Emma loss, its with threatened was she that now Till
Knightley, Mr. with _first_ being on depended happiness her of much how
feeling and so, was it that affection.--Satisfied and interest in first
the in only and reflection; without it enjoyed had she due, her it
had it important inexpressibly how found supplanted, being of dread
no having for, first; been had she felt she long, very been.--Long,
claims whose Isabella only been had there own, his of connexions female
far how exactly known always had she and hers, with compared be could
for him with first been herself had She Isabella. esteemed and loved he
negligent been often had she it; deserved not had She past. years many
him, opposing wilfully even or advice, his slighting perverse, or
would he because him with quarrelling and merits, his half of insensible
still, own--but her of estimate insolent and false her acknowledge not
he mind, of excellence thorough and habit, and attachment family from
to endeavour an with girl, a from her over watched and her, loved had
creature other no which right, doing her for anxiety an and her, improve
dear was she knew she faults, her all of spite In shared. all at had
hope, of suggestions the dear?--When very say, not she might him; to
not could she themselves, presented here, follow must which however,
unworthy not herself think might Smith Harriet them. indulge to presume
Knightley. Mr. by loved passionately exclusively, peculiarly, being of
of idea any with herself flatter not could She not. could _She_
recent very a received had She _her_. to attachment his in blindness
to behaviour her by been he had shocked impartiality.--How its of proof
her to himself expressed he had strongly how directly, How Bates! Miss
too far far, offence--but the for strongly too subject!--Not the on
and justice upright than softer feeling any from issue to strongly
name the deserve to nothing hope, no had goodwill.--She clear-sighted
was which herself for affection of sort that have could he that hope, of
at one, slight a times (at hope a was there but question; in now
be and herself, deceived have might Harriet that stronger,) much times
the sake--be his for must, she it _her_.--Wish for regard his overrating
life. his all single remaining his but herself, to nothing consequence
she all, at marrying never his of indeed, that, of secure be she Could
the continue but him satisfied.--Let perfectly be should she believed
to Knightley Mr. same the father, her and her to Knightley Mr. same
precious their of none lose Hartfield and Donwell let world; the all
be would peace her and confidence, and friendship of intercourse
be would It her. for do not would fact, in secured.--Marriage, fully
felt she what with and father, her to owed she what with incompatible
not would She father. her from her separate should Nothing him. for
Knightley. Mr. by asked were she if even marry,

she and disappointed; be might Harriet that wish ardent her be must It
least at might she again, together them see to able when that hoped,
them see should were.--She it for chances the what ascertain to able be
had she as wretchedly and observance; closest the with henceforward
how know not did she watching, was she those even misunderstood hitherto
every back expected was here.--He blinded be could she that admit to
it soon given--frightfully soon be would observation of power The day.
she meanwhile, the In course. one in were thoughts her when appeared
good, them of neither do would Harriet.--It seeing against resolved
was farther.--She it of talking be to good, no subject the do would it
had yet and doubt, could she as long as convinced, be to not resolved
to only be would talk To confidence. Harriet’s opposing for authority no
beg to decisively, but kindly, therefore, her, to wrote irritate.--She
to it acknowledging Hartfield; to come present, at not, would she that
_one_ of discussion confidential farther all that conviction, her be
allowed were days few a if that hoping, and avoided; be better had topic
others--she of company the in except again, met they before pass to
they if as act to able be might tete-a-tete--they a to only objected
and submitted, yesterday.--Harriet of conversation the forgotten had
grateful. was and approved,

Emma’s tear to arrived visitor a when arranged, just was point This
them, engrossed had which subject one the from little a thoughts
had who Weston, hours--Mrs. twenty-four last the waking, or sleeping
her in Hartfield took and elect, daughter-in-law her on calling been
to herself, to pleasure in as Emma to duty in much as almost home, way
interview. an interesting so of particulars the all relate

his through gone and Bates’s, Mrs. to her accompanied had Weston Mr.
then having she but handsomely; most attention essential this of share
with returned now was airing, an in her join to Fairfax Miss induced
quarter a than satisfaction, with say to more much and say, to more much
of encumbrance the all with parlour, Bates’s Mrs. in spent hour an of
afforded. have could feelings, awkward

her while it of most the made she and had; Emma curiosity little A
deal good a in visit the pay to off set had Weston Mrs. related. friend
all at go to not wished had place first the in and herself; agitation of
and instead, Fairfax Miss to write to merely allowed be to present, at
Mr. and passed, had time little a till call ceremonious this defer to
as, known; becoming engagement’s the to reconciled be could Churchill
paid be not could visit a such thought she thing, every considering
he differently; thought had Weston Mr. reports:--but to leading without
her and Fairfax Miss to approbation his shew to anxious extremely was
it; by excited be could suspicion any that conceive not did and family,
things,” “such for consequence; any of be would it that were, it if or
Weston Mr. that felt and smiled, Emma about.” got “always observed, he
very short--and in gone, had They so. saying for reason good very had
had She lady. the of confusion and distress evident the been had great
shewn had action and look every and word, a speak to able been hardly
heart-felt quiet, The consciousness. from suffering was she deeply how
her of delight rapturous the and lady, old the of satisfaction
a been had usual, as talk to joyous too even proved daughter--who
truly so both were They scene. affecting, an almost yet gratifying,
sensation; every in disinterested so happiness, their in respectable
of little so and body, every of much so Jane; of much so thought
Miss them. for work at was feeling kindly every that themselves,
to Weston Mrs. for plea fair a offered had illness recent Fairfax’s
but, first, at declined and back drawn had she airing; an to her invite
drive, their of course the in and, yielded; had pressed being on
her of much so overcome encouragement, gentle by had, Weston Mrs.
subject. important the on converse to her bring to as embarrassment,
reception, first their in silence ungracious seemingly her for Apologies
feeling always was she gratitude the of expressions warmest the and
but cause; the open necessarily must Weston, Mr. and herself towards
the of deal good a talked had they by, put were effusions these when
was Weston Mrs. engagement. the of state future the of and present
her to relief greatest the be must conversation such that convinced
been, long so had thing every as mind own her within up pent companion,
subject. the on said had she that all with pleased much very was and

so of concealment the during suffered, had she what of misery the “On
one was This energetic. was “she Weston, Mrs. continued months,” many
the into entered I since that say, not will ‘I expressions. her of
have I that say, can I but moments; happy some had not have I engagement
lip, quivering the hour:’--and tranquil one of blessing the known never
heart.” my at felt I that attestation an was it, uttered which Emma,

having for then, wrong, herself thinks “She Emma. said girl!” “Poor
engagement?” private a to consented

disposed is she than more her blame can believe, I one, No “Wrong!
of state a been ‘has she, said consequence,’ ‘The herself. blame to
punishment the all after But ought. it so and me; to suffering perpetual
no is Pain misconduct. less not still is it bring, can misconduct that
all to contrary acting been have I blameless. be can never I expiation.
taken, has thing every that turn fortunate the and right; of sense my
me tells conscience my what is receiving, now am I kindness the and
was I ‘that continued, she madam,’ imagine, not ‘Do be.’ to not ought
the or principles the on fall reflection any let not Do wrong. taught
own; my all been has error The up. me brought who friends the of care
circumstances present that excuse the all with that, you assure do I and
Colonel to known story the making dread yet shall I give, to appear may
Campbell.’”

I excessively, then him loves “She again. Emma said girl!” “Poor
be could she that only, attachment from been have must It suppose.
her overpowered have must affection Her engagement. the form to led
judgment.”

him.” to attached extremely being her of doubt no have I “Yes,

have often must I “that sighing, Emma, returned afraid,” am “I
unhappy.” her make to contributed

she But done. innocently very was it love, my side, your “On
the to alluding when thoughts, her in that of something had probably
natural One before. of hints us given had he which misunderstandings
“was said, she in,” herself involved had she evil the of consequence
done having of consciousness The _unreasonable_. her making of that
captious her made and inquietudes, thousand a to her exposed had amiss,
for been--hard had been--that have must that degree a to irritable and
ought I ‘which she, said allowances,’ the make not did ‘I bear. to him
and spirits, delightful spirits--his and temper his for done, have to
other any under which, disposition, of playfulness that gaiety, that
to bewitching constantly as been have sure, am I would, circumstances,
the of and you, of speak to began then She first.’ at were they as me,
blush a with and illness; her during her shewn had you kindness great
had I whenever me, desired connected, all was it how me shewed which
every much--for too you thank not could you--I thank to opportunity, an
had you that sensible was She good. her do to endeavour every and wish
herself.” from acknowledgment proper any received never

“which, seriously, Emma, said now,” happy be to her know not did I “If
she conscience, scrupulous her from drawback little every of spite in
there if Weston, Mrs. oh! thanks;--for, these bear not could I be, must
Miss done have I good the and evil the of up drawn account an were
this lively), more be to trying and herself, (checking Fairfax!--Well
interesting these me bring to kind very are You forgotten. be to all is
is she sure am I advantage. greatest the to her shew They particulars.
fortune the that fit is It happy. very be will she hope good--I very
hers.” on all be will merit the think I for side, his on be should

thought She Weston. Mrs. by unanswered pass not could conclusion a Such
him loved she more, was what and, respect; every almost in Frank of well
a with talked She earnest. therefore, was, defence her and much, very
much too had she affection--but equal least at and reason, of deal great
or Square Brunswick to gone soon was it attention; Emma’s for urge to
ended Weston Mrs. when and listen; to attempt to forgot she Donwell; to
know, you for, anxious so are we letter the had yet not have “We with,
she before pause to obliged was she come,” soon will it hope I but
at could she before random, at answer to obliged last at and answered,
for. anxious so were they which was it letter what recollect all

question. parting Weston’s Mrs. was Emma?” my well, you “Are

me give to sure Be know. you well, always am I perfectly. “Oh!
possible.” as soon as letter the of intelligence

for food more with Emma furnished communications Weston’s Mrs.
her and compassion, and esteem her increasing by reflection, unpleasant
regretted bitterly She Fairfax. Miss towards injustice past of sense
the for blushed and her, with acquaintance closer a sought having not
cause. the measure, some in been, certainly had which feelings envious
attention that paying in wishes, known Knightley’s Mr. followed she Had
her know to tried she had due; her way every was which Fairfax, Miss to
endeavoured she had intimacy; towards part her done she had better;
all in must, she Smith; Harriet in of instead there friend a find to
her on pressed which pain every from spared been have probability,
as one marking equally been had education, and abilities, now.--Birth,
other--what the and gratitude; with received be to her, for associate an
friends; intimate become never had they that even she?--Supposing was
this on confidence Fairfax’s Miss into admitted been never had she that
as her knowing in probable--still, most was matter--which important
the from preserved been have must she might, she as and ought, she
she which Dixon, Mr. to attachment improper an of suspicions abominable
so had but herself, harboured and fashioned foolishly so only not had
a made been had feared greatly she which idea an imparted; unpardonably
the by feelings, Jane’s of delicacy the to distress material of subject
evil of sources the all Of Churchill’s. Frank of carelessness or levity
persuaded was she Highbury, to coming her since former, the surrounding
a been have must She worst. the been have herself must she that
without together, three all been have could never They enemy. perpetual
on and instances; thousand a in peace Fairfax’s Jane stabbed having her
no bear would that mind a of agony the been had it perhaps, Hill, Box
more.

Hartfield. at melancholy, and long, very was day this of evening The
and in, set rain stormy cold A gloom. of could it what added weather The
was wind the which shrubs, and trees the in but appeared July of nothing
sights cruel such made only which day, the of length the and despoiling,
visible. longer the

tolerably kept be only could he and Woodhouse, Mr. affected weather The
by and side, daughter’s his on attention ceaseless almost by comfortable
reminded It before. much so half her cost never had which exertions
Weston’s Mrs. of evening the on tete-a-tete, forlorn first their of her
tea, after soon then, in walked had Knightley Mr. but wedding-day;
of proofs delightful such Alas! fancy. melancholy every dissipated and
shortly might conveyed, visits of sort those as attraction, Hartfield’s
the of privations the of drawn then had she which picture The over. be
them, deserted had friends no erroneous; proved had winter, approaching
feared she forebodings present her lost.--But been had pleasures no
now, her before prospect The contradiction. similar no experience would
dispelled--that entirely be not could that degree a to threatening was
that place took all If brightened. partially even be not might
be must Hartfield friends, her of circle the among place take might
the with father her cheer to left she and deserted; comparatively
happiness. ruined of only spirits

than dearer even there tie a be must Randalls at born be to child The
it. by occupied be would time and heart Weston’s Mrs. and herself;
husband her measure, great in probably, and, her; lose should They
Miss and more; no them among return would Churchill also.--Frank
to belong to cease soon would suppose, to reasonable was it Fairfax,
Enscombe. near or at either settled and married, be would They Highbury.
the losses, these to if and withdrawn; be would good were that All
or cheerful of remain would what added, be to were Donwell of loss
longer no be to Knightley Mr. reach? their within society rational of
all at in walking longer comfort!--No evening his for there coming
was their’s!--How for home own his change to willing ever if as hours,
sake; Harriet’s for them to lost be to were he if And endured? be to it
society Harriet’s in finding as hereafter, of thought be to were he if
first, the chosen, the be to were Harriet if wanted; he that all
best the all for looked he whom to wife the friend, the dearest, the
but wretchedness Emma’s increasing be could what existence; of blessings
her all been had it that mind, her from distant far never reflection the
work? own

from refrain to able not was she this, as pitch a such to came it When
a for room the about walking from even or sigh, heavy a or start, a
consolation like thing any whence source only the seconds--and few
better own her of resolution the in was drawn, be could composure or
might gaiety and spirit in inferior however that, hope the and conduct,
it past, the to life her of winter future every and following the be
and herself, with acquainted more rational, more her find yet would
gone. were it when regret to less her leave



XIII CHAPTER


and morning; following the all same the much continued weather The
at reign to seemed melancholy, same the and loneliness, same the
a into changed wind the cleared; it afternoon the in Hartfield--but
was it appeared; sun the off; carried were clouds the quarter; softer
Emma gives, transition a such which eagerness the all With again. summer
exquisite the had Never possible. as soon as doors of out be to resolved
after brilliant and warm, tranquil, nature, of sensation smell, sight,
they serenity the for longed She her. to attractive more been storm, a
after soon in coming Perry’s Mr. on and introduce; gradually might
time no lost she father, her give to hour disengaged a with dinner,
and freshened, spirits with shrubbery.--There, the into hurrying in
Mr. saw she when turns, few a taken had she relieved, little a thoughts
her.--It towards coming and door, garden the through passing Knightley
had She London. from returned being his of intimation first the was
miles sixteen unquestionably as before, moment the him of thinking been
She mind. of arrangement quickest the for only time was distant.--There
The together. were they minute a half In calm. and collected be must
after asked She side. each on constrained and quiet were do’s” d’ye “How
them?--Only left he had well.--When all were they friends; mutual their
with walk to meant ride.--Yes.--He wet a had have must He morning. that
was he as and dining-room, the into looked just had “He found. she her,
neither he thought doors.”--She of out being preferred there, wanted not
it, for cause possible first the and cheerfully; spoke nor looked
his communicating been perhaps had he that was, fears, her by suggested
had they which in manner the by pained was and brother, his to plans
received. been

looking often was he thought She silent. was He together. walked They
to her suited it than face her of view fuller a for trying and her, at
to wanted he Perhaps dread. another produced belief this And give.
for watching be might he Harriet; to attachment his of her, to speak
the lead to equal feel not, could not, did begin.--She to encouragement
could she Yet himself. all it do must He subject. such any to way
She unnatural. most was it him With silence. this bear not
began-- smile, to trying considered--resolved--and,

rather will that back, come are you now hear, to news some have “You
you.” surprize

nature?” what “of her; at looking and quietly, he said I?” “Have

wedding.” world--a the in nature best the “Oh!

he more, no say to intended she sure be to if as moment, a waiting After
replied,

that heard have I Churchill, Frank and Fairfax Miss mean you “If
already.”

towards cheeks glowing her turning Emma, cried possible?” it is “How
called have might he that her to occurred it spoke, she while for, him;
way. his in Goddard’s Mrs. at

and morning, this Weston Mr. from business parish on lines few a had “I
happened.” had what of account brief a me gave he them of end the at

more little a with say, presently could and relieved, quite was Emma
composure,

have you for us, of any than surprized less been have probably “_You_
give to tried once you that forgotten not have suspicions.--I your had
voice sinking a it--but--(with to attended had I wish caution.--I a me
blindness.” to doomed been have to seem I sigh) heavy a and

having of unsuspicious was she and said, was nothing two or moment a For
within drawn arm her found she till interest, particular any excited
tone a in saying, thus him heard and heart, his against pressed and his,
low, speaking sensibility, great of

excellent own wound.--Your the heal will time Emma, dearest my “Time,
allow not will you know sake--I father’s your for exertions sense--your
more a in added, he as again, pressed was arm Her yourself--.”
warmest the of feelings “The accent, subdued and broken
louder, a in scoundrel!”--And friendship--Indignation--Abominable
soon will They gone. be soon will “He with, concluded he tone, steadier
fate.” better a deserves She _her_. for sorry am I Yorkshire. in be

flutter the from recover could she as soon as and him; understood Emma
replied, consideration, tender such by excited pleasure, of

right.-- you set must I mistaken--and are you kind--but very are “You
was what to blindness My compassion. of sort that of want in not am I
ashamed be always must I that way a in them by act to me led on, going
may which things many do and say to tempted foolishly very was I and of,
reason other no have I but conjectures, unpleasant to open me lay well
earlier.” secret the in not was I that regret to

indeed?”--but you, “are her, at eagerly looking he, cried “Emma!”
pleased am me--I you--forgive understand I no, himself--“No, checking
and indeed! regret, of object no is much.--He so even say can you that
acknowledgment the becomes that before hope, I long, very be not will it
not were affections your that reason.--Fortunate your than more of
assure manners, your from confess, I never, could entangled!--I farther
that certain be only could felt--I you what of degree the to as myself
to him believed never I which preference a preference--and a was there
rewarded be to he is man.--And of name the to disgrace a is deserve.--He
miserable a be will you Jane, woman?--Jane, young sweet that with
creature.”

confused--“I really but lively, be to trying Emma, said Knightley,” “Mr.
your in continue you let cannot I situation. extraordinary very a in am
I impression, an such gave manners my since perhaps, yet, and error;
been have never I that confessing of ashamed be to reason much as have
natural be might it as of, speaking are we person the to attached all at
never I reverse.--But the exactly confessing in feel to woman a for
have.”

would he but speak, to him wished She silence. perfect in listened He
his to entitled were she before more say must she supposed She not.
in herself lower to still obliged be to case hard a was it but clemency;
however. on, went She opinion. his

his by tempted was conduct.--I own my for say to little very have “I
story, old pleased.--An appear to myself allowed and attentions,
my of hundreds to happened has than more no case--and common probably--a
up sets who one in excusable more the be not may it yet and before; sex
temptation. the assisted circumstances Many Understanding. for do I as
found always here--I continually was Weston--he Mr. of son the was He
the out swell me let sigh) a (with for short, in pleasant--and, very him
vanity last--my at this in centre all they ingeniously, so ever causes
some however--for Latterly, attentions. his allowed I and flattered, was
thought thing.--I any meaning their of idea no had have indeed--I time,
side. my on seriousness for called that nothing trick, a habit, a them
been never have I me. injured not has he but me, on imposed has He
He behaviour. his comprehend tolerably can I now And him. to attached
real his conceal to blind a merely was It me. attach to wished never
and him; about all blind to object his was another.--It with situation
myself--except than blinded effectually more be could sure, am I one, no
I short, in fortune--that, good my was it blinded--that _not_ was I that
him.” from safe other or somehow was

her that say to words few a here--for answer an for hoped had She
she as far as and, silent; was he but intelligible; least at was conduct
tone, usual his in tolerably and last, At thought. in deep judge, could
said, he

suppose, can Churchill.--I Frank of opinion high a had never have “I
has him with acquaintance My him. underrated have may I that however,
he hitherto, him underrated not have I if even trifling.--And but been
no have chance.--I a has he woman a such well.--With out turn yet may
be will happiness whose sake, her for ill--and him wishing for motive
him wish certainly shall I conduct, and character good his in involved
well.”

believe “I Emma; said together,” happy being their of doubt no have “I
attached.” sincerely very and mutually very be to them

“So energy. with Knightley, Mr. returned man!” fortunate most a is “He
a chuses man a if when, period three-and-twenty--a life--at in early
such drawn have to three-and-twenty At ill. chuses generally he wife,
calculation, human all in man, that felicity of years What prize! a
disinterested woman--the a such of love the of him!--Assured before has
disinterestedness; her for vouches character Fairfax’s Jane for love,
as far as mean, situation--I of favour,--equality his in thing every
important; are that manners and habits the all and society, regards
her of purity the since one, that one--and but point every in equality
it for felicity, his increase must as such doubted, be to not is heart
always would man wants.--A she advantages only the bestow to his be will
from; her takes he one the than home better a woman a give to wish
must, regard, _her_ of doubt no is there where it, do can who he and
the indeed, is, Churchill mortals.--Frank of happiest the be think, I
meets good.--He his for out turns thing Every fortune. of favourite
even cannot affection, her gains watering-place, a at woman young a with
sought family his all and he had treatment--and negligent by her weary
found have not could they him, for wife perfect a for world the round
to only has dies.--He aunt way.--His the in is aunt superior.--His her
used had happiness.--He his promote to eager are friends speak.--His
a is him.--He forgive to delighted all are they ill--and body every
indeed!” man fortunate

him.” envied you if as speak “You

envy.” my of object the is he respect one In Emma. him, envy do I “And

sentence a half within be to seemed They more. no say could Emma
if subject, the avert to was feeling immediate her and Harriet, of
totally something of speak would she plan; her made She possible.
for waited only she and Square; Brunswick in children different--the
saying, by her, startled Knightley Mr. when begin, to breath

I determined, are envy.--You of point the is what me ask not will “You
Emma, wise. be cannot _I_ wise--but are curiosity.--You no have to see,
the unsaid it wish may I though ask, not will you what you tell must I
moment.” next

a “Take cried. eagerly she it,” speak don’t it, speak don’t then, “Oh!
yourself.” commit not do consider, time, little

not and mortification, deep of accent an in he, said you,” “Thank
followed. syllable another

in confide to wishing was He pain. him give to bear not could Emma
listen. would she would, it what her her;--cost consult to her--perhaps
give might she it; to him reconcile or resolution, his assist might She
independence, own his him to representing by or, Harriet, to praise just
more be must which indecision, of state that from him relieve
had his.--They as mind a such to alternative any than intolerable
house. the reached

he. said suppose?” I in, going are “You

which in manner depressed the by confirmed Emma--quite “No,”--replied
not is Perry Mr. turn. another take to like should spoke--“I still he
you stopped added--“I she steps, few a proceeding after And, gone.”
you gave afraid, am I and, Knightley, Mr. now, just ungraciously,
or friend, a as me to openly speak to wish any have you if pain.--But
contemplation--as in have may you that thing any of opinion my ask to
I like. you whatever hear will me.--I command may you indeed, friend, a
think.” I what exactly you tell will

a is fear I that Knightley.--“Emma, Mr. friend!”--repeated a “As
hesitate?--I I should why yes, wish--Stay, no have I word--No,
your accept I concealment.--Emma, for already far too gone have
to myself refer and it, accept I seem, may it as offer--Extraordinary
succeeding?” ever of chance no I have then, me, friend.--Tell a as you

expression the and question, the look to earnestness his in stopped He
her. overpowered eyes his of

whatever be, always will you dearest “for he, said Emma,” dearest “My
beloved most dearest, my conversation, hour’s this of event the
could said.”--She be to is it if ‘No,’ Say once. at me Emma--tell
animation; great with cried, he silent,” are nothing.--“You say really
more.” no ask I present at silent! “absolutely

The moment. this of agitation the under sink to ready almost was Emma
most the perhaps was dream, happiest the from awakened being of dread
feeling. prominent

of tone a in and resumed; soon he Emma:” speeches, make cannot “I
tolerably was as tenderness intelligible decided, sincere, such
it about talk to able be might I less, you loved I convincing.--“If
me.--I from truth but nothing hear am.--You I what know you But more.
other no as it borne have you and you, lectured and you, blamed have
would I truths the with it.--Bear borne have would England in woman
The them. with borne have you as well as Emma, dearest now, you tell
have I knows, God them. recommend to little as have may perhaps, manner,
see, you me.--Yes, understand you lover.--But indifferent very a been
present, At can. you if them return will feelings--and my understand you
voice.” your hear to once hear, to only ask I

wonderful the all with and, busy, most was mind Emma’s spoke, he While
word--to a losing without yet able--and been had thought, of velocity
Harriet’s that see to whole; the of truth exact the comprehend and catch
a complete as delusion, a mistake, a groundless, entirely been had hopes
every was she that nothing; was Harriet own--that her of any as delusion
Harriet to relative saying been had she what that herself; thing
her that and feelings; own her of language the as taken all been had
all been had discouragement, her reluctance, her doubts, her agitation,
time there was only not herself.--And from discouragement as received
there happiness; attendant of glow their all with convictions, these for
and her, escaped not had secret Harriet’s that rejoice to also time was
service the all was not.--It should and not, need it that resolve to
of heroism that of any to as for friend; poor her render now could she
his transfer to him entreat to her prompted have might which sentiment
the of worthy most the infinitely as Harriet, to herself from affection
at him refuse to resolving of sublimity simple more the even two--or
not could he because motive, any vouchsafing without ever, for and once
and pain with Harriet, for felt She not. it had Emma both, them marry
that all opposing mad, run generosity of flight no but contrition; with
her led had She brain. her entered reasonable, or probable be could
her but ever; for her to reproach a be would it and astray, friend
ever had it as strong as and feelings, her as strong as was judgment
unequal most as him, for alliance such any reprobating in before, been
spoke smooth.--She quite not though clear, was way Her degrading. and
ought, she what say?--Just she did entreated.--What so being on then,
not need there shew to enough said does.--She always lady A course. of
at despaired _had_ He himself. more say to him invite to despair--and be
silence, and caution to injunction an such received had he period; one
hear to refusing by begun had hope;--she every crushed time the for as
of proposal sudden;--her somewhat been perhaps had change him.--The
had she which conversation the renewing her turn, another taking
its felt extraordinary!--She little a be might to, end an put just
it, with up put to as obliging so was Knightley Mr. but inconsistency;
explanation. farther no seek and

disclosure; human any to belong truth complete does seldom, very Seldom,
a or disguised, little a not is something that happen it can seldom
is conduct the though case, this in as where, but mistaken; little
material.--Mr. very be not may it not, are feelings the mistaken,
she than heart relenting more a Emma to impute not could Knightley
his. of accept to disposed more heart a or possessed,

had He influence. own his of unsuspicious wholly been fact, in had, He
come, had He it. trying of idea no with shrubbery the into her followed
no with engagement, Churchill’s Frank bore she how see to anxiety his in
an him allowed she if endeavouring, of but all, at view no view, selfish
of work the been had rest her.--The counsel to or soothe to opening,
The feelings. his on heard, he what of effect immediate the moment, the
Churchill, Frank towards indifference total her of assurance delightful
birth given had him, from disengaged completely heart a having her of
himself;--but affection her gain might he time, in that, hope, the to
of conquest momentary the in only, had hope--he present no been had it
his forbid not did she that told be to aspired judgment, over eagerness
were opened gradually which hopes superior her.--The attach to attempt
asking been had he which affection, enchanting.--The more the much so
half his!--Within already was could, he if create, to allowed be to
to mind, of state distressed thoroughly a from passed had he hour, an
name. other no bear could it that happiness, perfect like so something

same the each to given had half-hour one equal.--This was change _Her_
same the each from cleared had beloved, being of certainty precious
been had there side, his distrust.--On or jealousy, ignorance, of degree
expectation, the even or arrival, the as old jealousy, long-standing a
Frank of jealous and Emma, with love in been had Churchill.--He Frank of
probably having sentiment one period, same the about from Churchill,
Churchill Frank of jealousy his was It other. the to as him enlightened
decided had party Hill Box country.--The the from him taken had that
again witnessing from himself save would He away. going on him
be to learn to gone had attentions.--He encouraged permitted, such
much too was There place. wrong a to gone had he indifferent.--But
form a amiable too wore woman house; brother’s his in happiness domestic
striking those in only Emma--differing like much too was Isabella it; in
before brilliancy in other the brought always which inferiorities,
had longer.--He been time his had even done, been have to much for him,
morning’s very this day--till after day vigorously, however, on, stayed
gladness the with Fairfax.--Then, Jane of history the conveyed had post
never having feel, to scruple not did he which nay, felt, be must which
much so there was Emma, deserving all at be to Churchill Frank believed
no stay could he that her, for anxiety keen much so solicitude, fond
directly up walked had and rain; the through home ridden had He longer.
creatures, all of best and sweetest this how see to dinner, after
discovery. the bore faults, her all of spite in faultless

villain.-- a was Churchill low.--Frank and agitated her found had He
Churchill’s Frank him. loved never had she that declare her heard He
word, and hand by Emma, own his was desperate.--She not was character
Frank of thought have could he if and house; the into returned they when
fellow. of sort good very a him deemed have might he then, Churchill



XIV CHAPTER


from house the into back take Emma did feelings different totally What
for hope to daring only been then had out!--she brought had she what
of flutter exquisite an in now was suffering;--she of respite little a
be still must believed she as moreover happiness such and happiness,
away. passed have should flutter the when greater

often table--how same the round party same tea--the to down sat They
same the on fallen eyes her had often how collected!--and been had it
the of effect beautiful same the observed and lawn, the in shrubs
thing any in never spirits, of state a such in never sun!--But western
her of enough summon could she that difficulty with was it and it; like
attentive the even or house, the of lady attentive the be to self usual
daughter.

the in him against plotting was what suspected little Woodhouse Mr. Poor
anxiously so and welcoming, cordially so was he whom man that of breast
the seen have he ride.--Could his from cold taken have not might hoping
the without but lungs; the for little very cared have would he heart,
slightest the without evil, impending the of imagination distant most
either, of ways or looks the in extraordinary thing any of perception
had he news of articles the all comfortably very them to repeated he
self-contentment, much with on talked and Perry, Mr. from received
return. in him told have could they what of unsuspicious totally

continued; fever Emma’s them, with remained Knightley Mr. as long As
and tranquillised little a be to began she gone, was he when but
tax the was which night, sleepless the of course the in subdued--and
points serious very such two or one found she evening, an such for
some have must happiness her even that feel, her made as consider, to
feeling without alone be not could She Harriet. father--and Her alloy.
comfort the guard to how and claims; separate their of weight full the
father, her to respect With question. the was utmost, the to both of
Knightley Mr. what yet knew hardly She answered. soon question a was it
most the produced heart own her with parley short very a but ask; would
over wept even father.--She her quitting never of resolution solemn
an only be must it lived, he While thought. of sin a as it, of idea the
of danger the of divested if that herself, flattered she but engagement;
him.--How to comfort of increase an become might it away, her drawing
spare to decision;--how difficult more of was Harriet, by best her do to
atonement; possible any her make to how pain; unnecessary any from her
perplexity her subjects, these enemy?--On her least appear to how
and again pass to had mind her great--and very were distress and
ever had that regret sorrowful and reproach bitter every through again
still would she that last, at resolve only could it.--She surrounded
by told be need that all communicate and her, with meeting a avoid
removed her have to desirable inexpressibly be would it that letter;
scheme one in and--indulging Highbury, from time a for now just
invitation an get to practicable be might it that resolve, more--nearly
Harriet; with pleased been had Square.--Isabella Brunswick to her for
did amusement.--She some her give must London in spent weeks few a and
novelty by benefited being escape to nature Harriet’s in it think not
rate, any children.--At the and shops, the streets, the by variety, and
whom from herself, in kindness and attention of proof a be would it
the of averting an present; the for separation a due; was thing every
again. together be all must they when day, evil

which employment an Harriet; to letter her wrote and early, rose She
walking in Knightley, Mr. that sad, nearly so serious, very so her left
half and soon; too all at arrive not did breakfast, to Hartfield to up
him, with again ground same the over go to afterwards stolen hour an
a in her reinstate to necessary quite was figuratively, and literally
before. evening the of happiness the of share proper

the have to her for enough long means no by long, her left not had He
was letter a when else, body any of thinking for inclination slightest
it what guessed letter;--she thick very Randalls--a from her brought
now was it.--She reading of necessity the deprecated and contain, must
she explanations, no wanted she Churchill; Frank with charity perfect in
understanding for as herself--and to thoughts her have to only wanted
be must it.--It of incapable was she sure was she wrote, he thing any
so;--a surely too was it packet; the opened She however. through, waded
to Frank from letter the in ushered herself, to Weston Mrs. from note
Weston. Mrs.

the you to forwarding in Emma, dear my pleasure, greatest the have “I
scarcely have and it, do will you justice thorough what know I enclosed.
disagree materially never shall we think effect.--I happy its of doubt a
preface.--We long a by you delay not will I but again; writer the about
little the all of cure the been has letter well.--This quite are
looks your like quite not did lately.--I feeling been have I nervousness
never will you though and morning; ungenial an was it but Tuesday, on
north-east a feels body every think I weather, by affected being own
Tuesday of storm the in much very father dear your for felt wind.--I
last hearing of comfort the had but morning, yesterday and afternoon
ill. him made not had it that Perry, Mr. by night,

ever, “Yours
W.” “A.

Weston.] Mrs. [To


WINDSOR-JULY.
MADAM, DEAR MY

be will letter this yesterday, intelligible myself made I “If
and candour with read be will it know I not, or expected but expected;
of need be will there believe I and goodness, all are indulgence.--You
conduct.--But past my of parts some for allow to goodness your all even
courage My resent. to more still had who one by forgiven been have I
be to prosperous the for difficult very is It write. I while rises
for applications two in success such with met already have I humble.
yours, of sure too myself thinking of danger in be may I that pardon,
offence.--You of ground any had have who friends your among those of and
I when situation my of nature exact the comprehend to endeavour all must
which secret a having as me consider must you Randalls; at arrived first
place to right My fact. the was This hazards. all at kept be to was
question. another is concealment, such requiring situation a in myself
right, a it _think_ to temptation my For here. it discuss not shall I
and below, windows sashed house, brick a to caviller every refer I
my openly; her address not dared I Highbury. in above, casements
to known well too be must Enscombe of state then the in difficulties
we before prevail, to enough fortunate was I and definition; require
the in mind female upright most the induce to and Weymouth, at parted
I refused, she engagement.--Had secret a to charity in stoop to creation
your was what say, to ready be will you mad.--But gone have should
every thing, any to?--To forward look you did this?--What doing in hope
bursts, sudden effects, slow circumstance, chance, time, thing--to
of possibility Every sickness. and health weariness, and perseverance
her obtaining in secured, blessings of first the and me, before was good
explanation, farther need you If correspondence. and faith of promises
and son, husband’s your being of madam, dear my honour, the have I
no which good, for hope to disposition a inheriting of advantage the
of.--See value the equal ever can lands or houses of inheritance
to visit first my on arriving circumstances, these under then, me,
have might visit that for wrong, of conscious am I here Randalls;--and
till come not did I that see and back look will You paid. sooner been
you slighted, person the were _you_ as and Highbury; in was Fairfax Miss
by compassion, father’s my on work must I but instantly; me forgive will
long so house, his from myself absented I as long so that him, reminding
very the during behaviour, My you. knowing of blessing the lost I
to open me lay hope, I not, did you, with spent I which fortnight happy
principal, the to come I now And point. one on excepting reprehension,
which you, to belonging while conduct my of part important only the
With explanation. solicitous very requires or anxiety, own my excites
Miss mention I do friendship, warmest the and respect, greatest the
deepest the with add, to ought I think will perhaps father my Woodhouse;
his spoke yesterday him from dropped which words few humiliation.--A
behaviour to.--My liable myself acknowledge I censure some and opinion,
to order ought.--In it than more believe, I indicated, Woodhouse Miss to
than more make to on led was I me, to essential so concealment a assist
immediately were we which into intimacy of sort the of use allowable an
object--but ostensible my was Woodhouse Miss that deny cannot thrown.--I
been not I had that declaration, the believe will you sure am I
any by induced been have not would I indifference, her of convinced
is, Woodhouse Miss as delightful and on.--Amiable go to views selfish
and attached; be to likely woman young a of idea the me gave never she
me, to attached being to tendency any from free perfectly was she that
with attentions my received wish.--She my as conviction my much as was
me. suited exactly which playfulness, goodhumoured friendly, easy, an
those situation, relative our From other. each understand to seemed We
Woodhouse Miss so.--Whether be to felt were and due, her were attentions
fortnight, that of expiration the before me understand to really began
was I that remember I her, of leave take to called I say;--when cannot I
not was she fancied then I and truth, the confessing of moment a within
me, detected since having her of doubt no have I but suspicion; without
her but whole, the surmised have not may degree.--She some in least at
find, will You it. doubt cannot I part. a penetrated have must quickness
it that restraints, present its from freed becomes subject the whenever
it. of hints me gave frequently She surprize. by wholly her take not did
gratitude Elton Mrs. owed I that ball, the at me telling her remember I
conduct my of history this hope Fairfax.--I Miss to attentions her for
extenuation great as father my and you by admitted be will her towards
against sinned having as me considered you While amiss. saw you what of
and here, me Acquit either. from nothing deserve could I Woodhouse, Emma
wishes good and acquittal the allowable, is it when me, for procure
brotherly much so with regard I whom Woodhouse, Emma said that of
as love in happily as and deeply as her have to long to as affection,
fortnight, that during did or said I things strange myself.--Whatever
to was business my and Highbury, in was heart My to. key a now have you
suspicion. least the with and be, might as often as thither body my get
account.--Of right the to all them set queernesses, any remember you If
that say, to necessary only it feel I of, talked much so pianoforte the
never would who F--, Miss to unknown absolutely was ordered being its
her.--The given been choice any had it, send to me allowed have
madam, dear my engagement, whole the throughout mind her of delicacy
earnestly I soon, will You to. justice doing of power my beyond much is
her. describe can description yourself.--No thoroughly her know hope,
never for word, by not is--yet she what herself you tell must She
own her suppress designedly so would who creature human a there was
foresaw, I than longer be will which letter, this began I merit.--Since
but health; own her of account good a gives her.--She from heard have I
opinion your have to want I depend. not dare I complains, never she as
dread in living is she her; on call soon will you know I looks. her of
without you from hear me Let already. paid is it Perhaps visit. the of
few how Remember particulars. thousand a for impatient am I delay;
and state: a mad how bewildered, how in and Randalls, at was I minutes
or happiness from either insane still yet; better much not am I
her of with, met have I favour and kindness the of think I When misery.
joy: with mad am I generosity, uncle’s my and patience, and excellence
little how and her, occasioned I uneasiness the all recollect I when but
her see but could I If anger. with mad am I forgiven, be to deserve I
me for good too been has uncle My yet. it propose not must I again!--But
heard not have You letter. long this to add still must encroach.--I to
detail connected any give not could I hear. to ought you that all
unseasonableness the light, one in and, suddenness, the but yesterday;
event the though for explanation; needs out, burst affair the which with
the me to opened immediately conclude, will you as ult., 26th the of
measures, early such on presumed have not should I prospects, happiest
to hour an not me left which circumstances, particular very the from but
she and hasty, so thing any from shrunk have myself should I lose.
and strength multiplied with mine of scruple every felt have would
entered had she engagement hasty The choice. no had I refinement.--But
off leave to obliged was I madam, dear my woman--Here, that with into
over walking been have myself.--I compose and recollect to abruptly,
of rest the make to enough rational hope, I now, am and country, the
mortifying most a fact, in is, be.--It to ought it what letter my
that admit, can I here And shamefully. behaved I me. for retrospect
highly were F., Miss to unpleasant being in W., Miss to manners my
enough.--My been have to ought which them, disapproved _She_ blameable.
was sufficient.--She think not did she truth the concealing of plea
thousand a on her, thought I so: unreasonably thought I displeased;
even her thought I cautious: and scrupulous unnecessarily occasions,
and judgment, her followed had I If right. always was she But cold.
have should I proper, deemed she what of level the to spirits my subdued
quarrelled.-- known.--We ever have I unhappiness greatest the escaped
little every Donwell?--_There_ at spent morning the remember you Do
late; was I crisis. a to came before occurred had that dissatisfaction
she but her, with walk to wanted and herself, by home walking her met I
then I which me, allow to refused absolutely She it. suffer not would
very a but it in nothing see I however, Now, unreasonable. most thought
the blind to I, While discretion. of degree consistent and natural
objectionable with hour one behaving was engagement, our to world
a to next the consenting be to she was woman, another to particularity
we useless?--Had caution previous every made have might which proposal
must truth the Highbury, and Donwell between together walking met been
doubted resent.--I to however, enough, mad was suspected.--I been have
when, Hill; Box on day next the more it doubted I affection. her
neglect insolent shameful, such side, my on conduct such by provoked
been have would it as W., Miss to devotion apparent such and her, of
in resentment her spoke she endure, to sense of woman any for impossible
dear my short, me.--In to intelligible perfectly words of form a
and mine; on abominable side, her on blameless quarrel a was it madam,
with staid have might I though Richmond, to evening same the returned I
with angry as be would I because merely morning, next the till you
to mean to not as fool a such not was I then, Even possible. as her
her by injured person, injured the was I but time; in reconciled be
first the make should she that determined away went I and coldness,
of not were you that myself congratulate always shall advances.--I
hardly can I there, behaviour my witnessed you Had party. Hill Box the
upon effect Its again. me of well thought have ever would you suppose
she as soon as produced: it resolution immediate the in appears her
that of offer the with closed she Randalls, from gone really was I found
the by her, of treatment whose of system whole the Elton; Mrs. officious
quarrel not must I hatred. and indignation with me filled ever has bye,
towards extended richly so been has which forbearance of spirit a with
it of share the against protest loudly should I otherwise, but, myself;
I that observe will indeed!--You known.--‘Jane,’ has woman that which
you. to even name, that by her calling in myself indulged yet not have
between bandied it hearing in endured have must I what then, Think,
the all and repetition, needless of vulgarity the all with Eltons the
soon shall I me, with patience Have superiority. imaginary of insolence
me with break to resolving offer, this with closed done.--She have
meet to were never we that me tell to day next the wrote and entirely,
_of_ _source_ _a_ _be_ _to_ _engagement_ _the_ _felt_ again.--_She_
_it_.--This _dissolved_ _she_ _each_: _to_ _misery_ _and_ _repentance_
I death. aunt’s poor my of morning very the on me reached letter
the and mind, my of confusion the from but hour; an within it answered
of instead answer, my once, at me on falling business of multiplicity
in up locked was day, that of letters other many the all with sent being
but though enough, written had I that trusting I, and writing-desk; my
was uneasiness.--I any without remained her, satisfy to lines, few a
I but speedily; again her from hear not did I that disappointed rather
cheerful add?--too I and--may busy, too was and her, for excuses made
two and Windsor; to removed captious.--We be to views my in
all letters own my her, from parcel a received I afterwards days
her stating post, the by time same the at lines few a returned!--and
and last; her to reply smallest the had having not at surprize extreme
misconstrued, be not could point a such on silence as that adding,
subordinate every have to both to desirable equally be must it as and
safe a by me, sent now she possible, as soon as concluded arrangement
directly not could I if that requested, and letters, my all conveyance,
would I week, a within Highbury to them send to as so hers, command
direction full the short, in at--: her to period that after them forward
the knew I face. the in me stared Bristol, near Smallridge’s, Mr. to
had she what saw instantly and it, about all knew I place, the name,
character of resolution that with accordant perfectly was It doing. been
to as maintained, had she secrecy the and possess; to her knew I which
its of descriptive equally was letter, former her in design such any
threaten to seemed have she not would world the For delicacy. anxious
my detected actually had I till how, imagine shock; the me.--Imagine
be to was post.--What the of blunders the at raved I blunder, own
I sanction his Without uncle. my to speak must only.--I thing done?--One
were circumstances spoke; again.--I to listened be to hope not could
was, he and pride, his away softened had event late the favour; my in
complying; and reconciled wholly anticipated, have could I than earlier
I wished he that sigh, deep a with man! poor last, at say could and
done.--I had he as state marriage the in happiness much as find might
pity to disposed you sort.--Are different a of be would it that felt
my for him, to cause the opening in suffered have must I what for me
reached I till me pity not do stake?--No; at was all while suspense
her saw I till me pity not Do her. made had I ill how saw and Highbury,
my from when, day of time the at Highbury reached looks.--I sick wan,
chance good a of certain was I hour, breakfast late their of knowledge
not was I last at and disappointed; not was alone.--I her finding of
very of deal great A journey. my of object the in either disappointed
is it But away. persuade to had I displeasure just very reasonable,
moment’s no and ever, than dearer, much dearer, reconciled, are we done;
will I madam, dear my Now, again. us between occur ever can uneasiness
thousand a and thousand A before. conclude not could I but you; release
for thousand ten and me, shewn ever have you kindness the all for thanks
in me think you her.--If towards dictate will heart your attentions the
opinion.--Miss your of quite am I deserve, I than happier be to way a
one right.--In is she hope I fortune. good of child the me calls W.
subscribe to able being of that undoubted, is fortune good my respect,
myself,

Son, affectionate and obliged Your

CHURCHILL. WESTON C. F.



XV CHAPTER


in obliged, was She feelings. Emma’s to way its make must letter This
the all it do to contrary, the to determination previous her of spite
name, own her to came she as soon As foretold. Weston Mrs. that justice
interesting, was herself to relating line every irresistible; was it
subject the ceased, charm this when and agreeable; line every almost and
regard former her of return natural the by itself, maintain still could
of picture any which attraction strong very the and writer, the for
gone had she till stopt never She moment. that at her for have must love
had he that feel to not impossible was it though and whole; the through
had he supposed--and had she than wrong less been had he yet wrong, been
and Weston, Mrs. to grateful so was he sorry--and very was and suffered,
that herself, happy so was she and Fairfax, Miss with love in much so
must she room, the entered have he could and severe; being no was there
ever. as heartily as him with hands shaken have

again, came Knightley Mr. when that letter, the of well so thought She
to it wishing Weston’s Mrs. of sure was She it. read to him desired she
so seen had Knightley, Mr. like who, one, to especially communicated; be
conduct. his in blame to much

I long. seems it “but he; said over,” it look to glad very be shall “I
night.” at me with home it take will

she and evening, the in call to was Weston Mr. do. not would that But
him. by it return must

a seems it as “but replied; he you,” to talking be rather would “I
done.” be shall it justice, of matter

offered been I “Had say, to directly almost however, began--stopping, He
few a mother-in-law his to letters gentleman’s this of one of sight the
indifference.” such with taken been have not would it Emma, ago, months

a with then, and himself; to reading farther, little a proceeded He
his is it But opening: complimentary fine a “Humph! observed, smile,
be not will We another’s. of rule the be not must style man’s One way.
severe.”

my speak “to afterwards, shortly added he me,” for natural be will “It
you. near am I that feel shall I it, doing By read. I as aloud opinion
it--” dislike you if but time: of loss a great so be not will It

it.” wish should I all. at “Not

alacrity. greater with reading his to returned Knightley Mr.

wrong, is he knows He temptation. the to “as he, said here,” trifles “He
the formed have to not ought urge.--Bad.--He to rational nothing has and
his to however, unjust, is disposition:’--he father’s engagement.--‘His
upright his all on blessing a was temper sanguine Weston’s Mr. father.
comfort present every earned Weston Mr. but exertions; honourable and
Miss till come not did he true; it.--Very gain to endeavoured he before
here.” was Fairfax

might he that were you sure “how Emma, said forgotten,” not have I “And
you handsomely--but very over it pass You would. he if sooner come have
right.” perfectly were

think--had I yet, Emma:--but judgment, my in impartial quite not was “I
him.” distrusted have still should case--I the in been not _you_

it of whole the read to obliged was he Woodhouse, Miss to came he When
the of shake a look; a smile; a with her, to related that aloud--all
as love, of merely or disapprobation; or assent, of two or word a head;
steady after and, seriously, however, concluding, required; subject the
thus-- reflection,

dangerous most a worse.--Playing been have might it bad--though “Very
of judge acquittal.--No his for event the to indebted much Too game.
and wishes, own his by fact in deceived you.--Always by manners own his
have to you convenience.--Fancying own his besides little of regardless
intrigue, of full mind own enough!--his Natural secret. his fathomed
pervert they Finesse--how others.--Mystery; in it suspect should he that
more prove to serve thing every not does Emma, My understanding! the
each with dealings our all in sincerity and truth of beauty the more and
other?”

account, Harriet’s on sensibility of blush a with and it, to agreed Emma
of. explanation sincere any give not could she which

she. said on,” go better had “You

That Ah! pianoforte! “the say, to again stopt soon very but so, did He
whether consider to young too one man, young very very, a of act the was
A pleasure. the exceed much very not might it of inconvenience the
a give to wishing man’s a comprehend cannot indeed!--I scheme, boyish
dispense rather would she knows he which affection of proof any woman
instrument’s the prevented have would she that know did he and with;
could.” she if coming

Churchill’s Frank pause. any without progress some made he this, After
for call to thing first the was shamefully behaved having of confession
passing. in word a than more

behave did “You remark. his then sir,”--was you, with agree perfectly “I
through gone having And line.” truer a wrote never You shamefully. very
his and disagreement, their of basis the of followed immediately what
right, of sense Fairfax’s Jane to opposition direct in act to persisting
her induced had bad.--He very is “This say, to pause fuller a made he
and difficulty extreme of situation a in sake, his for herself, place to
from her prevent to object first his been have should it and uneasiness,
contend to more much had have must unnecessarily.--She suffering
have should He could. he than correspondence, the on carrying in with,
were hers but such; been there had scruples, unreasonable even respected
she that remember and fault, one her to look must We reasonable. all
she that bear to engagement, the to consenting in thing wrong a done had
punishment.” of state a such in been have should

grew and party, Hill Box the to getting now was he that knew Emma
was She improper! very so been had behaviour own Her uncomfortable.
read, all was It look. next his of afraid little a and ashamed, deeply
and, remark; smallest the without and attentively, steadily, however,
fear the in withdrawn, instantly her, at glance momentary one excepting
exist. to seemed Hill Box of remembrance pain--no giving of

the friends, good our of delicacy the for much saying no is “There
natural.--What! are feelings observation.--“His next his was Eltons,”
to engagement the felt entirely!--She him with break to resolve actually
a it.--What dissolved each--she to misery and repentance of source a be
most a be must he behaviour!--Well, his of sense her of gives this view
extraordinary--”

suffers.” he much very how find will on.--You read nay, “Nay,

letter. the resuming and coolly, Knightley Mr. replied does,” he hope “I
this?” all is What mean? this does “‘Smallridge!’--What

children--a Smallridge’s Mrs. to governess as go to engaged had “She
the by and, Grove; Maple of neighbour Elton’s--a Mrs. of friend dear
disappointment?” the bears Elton Mrs. how wonder I bye,

of even read--not to me oblige you while Emma, dear my nothing, “Say
letter a What done. have soon shall I more. page one Only Elton. Mrs.
writes!” man the

him.” towards spirit kinder a with it read would you wish “I

in suffered have to seem does here.--He feeling _is_ there “Well,
of fond being his of doubt no have can I ill.--Certainly, her finding
to continue long may he hope I ever.’ than dearer much ‘Dearer, her.
liberal very a is reconciliation.--He a such of value the all feel
I than thousands.--‘Happier of tens and thousands his with thanker,
the me calls Woodhouse ‘Miss there. himself knows he Come, deserve.’
they?-- were words, Woodhouse’s Miss were fortune.’--Those good of child
fortune! good of child The letter. the is there ending--and fine a And
it?” was him, for name your was That

still but am; I as letter his with satisfied well so appear not do “You
I it. for him of better the think must, you hope I least at must, you
you.” with service some him does it hope

of faults faults, great had has He does. it certainly “Yes,
opinion his of much very am I and thoughtlessness; and inconsideration
he as still but deserves: he than happier be to likely him thinking in
it soon, will and Fairfax, Miss to attached really doubt, a beyond is,
very am I her, with constantly being of advantage the have hoped, be may
the hers from acquire and improve, will character his believe to ready
talk me let now, And wants. it that principle of delicacy and steadiness
present at interest person’s another have I else. something of you to
Churchill. Frank about longer any think cannot I that heart, at much so
work at hard been has mind my Emma, morning, this you left I since Ever
subject.” one on

gentlemanlike unaffected, plain, in was it followed; subject The
love in was he woman the to even used Knightley Mr. as such English,
the attacking without him, marry to her ask to able be to how with,
word. first the at ready was answer Emma’s father. her of happiness
impossible be must condition of change any lived, father dear her “While
however, answer, this of only Part him.” quit never could She her. for
Mr. father, her quitting her of impossibility The admitted. was
any of inadmissibility the but herself; as strongly as felt Knightley
most over it thinking been had He to. agree not could he change, other
to Woodhouse Mr. induce to hoped first at had he intently; most deeply,
but feasible, it believe to wanted had he Donwell; to her with remove
himself deceive to him suffer not would Woodhouse Mr. of knowledge his
transplantation a such that persuasion, his confessed he now and long;
which life, his of even perhaps comfort, father’s her of risk a be would
felt he Hartfield!--No, from taken Woodhouse Mr. hazarded. be not must
the on arisen had which plan the But attempted. be to not ought it that
any in find not would Emma dearest his trusted he this, of sacrifice
Hartfield; at received be should he that was, it objectionable; respect
life--required his words, other happiness--in father’s her as long so that
likewise. his be should it home, her continue to Hartfield

passing own her had already had Emma Donwell, to removing all their Of
such but it; rejected and scheme the tried had she him, Like thoughts.
all of sensible was She her. to occurred not had this as alternative an
must he Donwell, quitting in that, felt She evinced. it affection the
that habits; and hours of independence of deal great a sacrificing be
there own, his of house no in and father, her with constantly living in
it, of think to promised She with. borne be to much, very much, be would
no that convinced, fully was he but more; it of think to him advised and
had He subject. the on opinion his or wishes his alter could reflection
had he consideration; calm and long very her, assure could he it, given
his have to morning, whole the Larkins William from away walking been
himself. to thoughts

sure am “I Emma. cried for,” unprovided difficulty one is there “Ah!
you before consent his get must You it. like not will Larkins William
mine.” ask

promised, nearly pretty and it; of think to however, promised, She
good very a it finding of intention the with it, of think to moreover,
scheme.

in view of points many, very many, the in Emma, that remarkable, is It
never was Abbey, Donwell consider to beginning now was she which
as rights whose Henry, nephew her to injury of sense any with struck
must she Think regarded. tenaciously so been formerly had heir-expectant
only she yet and boy; little poor the to difference possible the of
in amusement found and it, about smile conscious saucy a herself gave
Knightley’s Mr. of dislike violent that of cause real the detecting
had she time the at which else, body any or Fairfax, Jane marrying
aunt. the and sister the of solicitude amiable the to imputed wholly

at continuing and marrying of plan this his, of proposal This
became. it pleasing more the it, contemplated she more Hartfield--the
mutual their increase, to advantages own her lessen, to seemed evils His
the in herself for companion a Such drawback. every outweigh to good
in partner a her!--Such before cheerlessness and anxiety of periods
of increase giving be must time which to cares and duties those all
melancholy!

blessing every but Harriet; poor for but happy too been have would She
friend, her of sufferings the advance and involve to seemed own her of
family delightful The Hartfield. from excluded even be now must who
mere in must, Harriet poor herself, for securing was Emma which party
in loser a be would She from. distance a at kept be caution, charitable
deduction any as absence future her deplore not could Emma way. every
a rather be would Harriet party, a such In enjoyment. own her from
a seemed it herself, girl poor the for but otherwise; than weight dead
of state a such in her placing be to was that necessity cruel peculiarly
punishment. unmerited

is, that forgotten, be would Knightley Mr. course, of time, In
Mr. early. very happen to expected be not could this but supplanted;
cure;--not the assist to nothing doing be would himself Knightley
truly so feeling, so kind, so always Knightley, Mr. Elton. Mr. like
worshipped less be to deserve never would body, every for considerate
she that Harriet, of even hope to much too was really it and now; than
year. one in men _three_ than more with love in be could



XVI CHAPTER


as desirous as Harriet find to Emma to relief great very a was It
by enough painful was intercourse Their meeting. a avoid to herself
meet! to obliged been they had worse, much How letter.

without supposed, be might as much very herself expressed Harriet
there fancied Emma yet and ill-usage; of sense apparent or reproaches,
style, her in it on bordering something a resentment, of something a was
be might separate.--It being their of desirableness the increased which
have could only angel an if as seemed it but consciousness; own her only
stroke. a such under resentment without quite been

was she and invitation; Isabella’s procuring in difficulty no had She
resorting without it, asking for reason sufficient a having in fortunate
and wished, really Harriet amiss. tooth a was invention.--There to
was Knightley John Mrs. dentist. a consult to time, some wished had
to recommendation a was health ill of thing any use; of be to delighted
was she Wingfield, Mr. a of as dentist a of fond so not though her--and
settled thus was it care.--When her under Harriet have to eager quite
her found and friend, her to it proposed Emma side, sister’s her on
a least at for invited was she go; to was persuadable.--Harriet very
was carriage.--It Woodhouse’s Mr. in conveyed be to was she fortnight;
Brunswick in safe was Harriet and completed, all was it arranged, all
Square.

could she now visits; Knightley’s Mr. enjoy indeed, could, Emma Now
sense that by unchecked happiness, true with listen could she and talk,
her haunted had which painful, most something of guilt, of injustice, of
might much how her, near was heart a disappointed how remembering when
feelings the by enduring be distance, little a at and moment, that at
herself. astray led had she which

perhaps made London, in or Goddard’s, Mrs. at Harriet of difference The
think not could she but sensations; Emma’s in difference unreasonable an
must which employment, and curiosity of objects without London in her of
herself. of out her carrying and past, the averting be

place the to directly succeed to anxiety other any allow not would She
before communication a was There occupied. had Harriet which mind her in
of confession make--the to competent be could only _she_ which one her,
it with do to nothing have would she but father; her to engagement her
Weston Mrs. till disclosure the defer to resolved had present.--She at
this at thrown be should agitation additional No well. and safe were
herself on act not should evil the loved--and she those among period
of least, at fortnight, time.--A appointed the before anticipation by
agitating, more but warmer, every crown to mind, of peace and leisure
hers. be should delight,

an half employ to pleasure, a and duty a as equally resolved, soon She
ought Fairfax.--She Miss on calling in spirits of holiday this of hour
present their of resemblance the her; see to longing was she go--and to
a be would It goodwill. of motive other every increasing situations
prospect of similarity a of consciousness the but satisfaction; _secret_
any to attend should she which with interest the to add certainly would
communicate. might Jane thing

not had but door, the to unsuccessfully once driven had went--she She
had Jane poor when Hill, Box after morning the since house the into been
the all though compassion, with her filled had as distress such in been
still being of fear unsuspected.--The been had sufferings her of worst
to home, at being their of assured though her, determined unwelcome,
announcing Patty heard name.--She her up send and passage, the in wait
so made before had Bates Miss poor as succeeded bustle such no but it;
of, reply instant the but nothing heard she intelligible.--No; happily
stairs the on met was she afterwards moment a up;”--and walk to her “Beg
her of reception other no if as forward, eagerly coming herself, Jane by
lovely, so well, so look her seen never had sufficient.--Emma felt were
was there warmth; and animation, consciousness, was There engaging. so
wanted.-- have ever could manner or countenance her which thing every
very but low, a in said, and hand; offered an with forward came She
tone, feeling

me for impossible is it Woodhouse, indeed!--Miss kind, most is “This
entirely so being for me believe--Excuse will you hope express--I to
words.” without

the if words, of want no shewn have soon would and gratified, was Emma
checked not had sitting-room the from voice Elton’s Mrs. of sound
her all and friendly her all compress to expedient it made and her,
hand. the of shake earnest very very, a into sensations congratulatory

which out, was Bates Miss together. were Elton Mrs. and Bates Mrs.
Mrs. wished have could Emma tranquillity. previous the for accounted
every with patience have to humour a in was she but elsewhere; Elton
the hoped she graciousness, unusual with her met Elton Mrs. as and body;
harm. no them do would rencontre

and thoughts, Elton’s Mrs. penetrate to herself believed soon She
in being was it spirits; happy in herself, like was, she why understand
was what with acquainted herself fancying and confidence, Fairfax’s Miss
in immediately it of symptoms saw Emma people. other to secret a still
Mrs. to compliments own her paying while and face; her of expression the
saw she replies, lady’s old good the to attend to appearing and Bates,
she which letter a up fold mystery of parade anxious of sort a with her
into it return and Fairfax, Miss to aloud reading been apparently had
nods, significant with saying, side, her by reticule gold and purple the

want not shall I and You know. you time, other some this finish can “We
I already. essential the all heard have you fact, in And, opportunities.
is and apology, our admits S. Mrs. that you to prove to wanted only
sweet a is she Oh! writes. she delightfully how see You offended. not
word a not gone.--But you had her, on doated have would You creature!
behaviour.--Hush!--You good our on discreet--quite be us Let more.
moment: this at poem the forget lines--I those remember

case, the in lady’s a when “For
place.” give things other all know “You

to word a read----mum! _lady_, for case, _our_ in dear, my say, I Now
set to want I But I? an’t spirits, of flow fine a in am wise.--I the
has see, you representation, S.--_My_ Mrs. to as ease at heart your
her.” appeased quite

Bates’s Mrs. at look to head her turning merely Emma’s on again, And
whisper, half a in added, she knitting,

a as cautious no; observe.--Oh! will you _names_, no mentioned “I
well.” extremely it managed I state. of minister

every on repeated display, palpable a was It doubt. not could Emma
of harmony in while little a talked all had they When occasion. possible
with, addressed abruptly herself found she Weston, Mrs. and weather the

is here friend little saucy our Woodhouse, Miss think, you not “Do
highest the Perry does cure her think you not recovered?--Do charmingly
my Upon Jane.) at meaning great of side-glance a was credit?--(here
had you if time!--Oh! short wonderful a in her restored has Perry word,
Bates Mrs. when worst!”--And the at was she when did, I as her, seen
word a say not do “We farther, whispered Emma, to something saying was
young certain a of word a not have; might Perry that _assistance_ any of
credit.” the all have shall Perry no; Windsor.--Oh! from physician

she Woodhouse,” Miss you, seeing of pleasure the had scarce have “I
pleasant Very Hill. Box to party the “since began, afterwards shortly
not did Things wanting. something was there think I yet But party.
some.--So of spirits the upon cloud little a seemed there is, seem--that
think I However, mistaken. be might I but least, at me to appeared it
our to both you say What again. go to one tempt to as far so answered it
the while again, Hill Box to exploring and party, same the collecting
the quite know, you party, same the be must lasts?--It weather fine
exception.” _one_ not party, same

being help not could Emma and in, came Bates Miss this after Soon
resulting, herself, to answer first her of perplexity the by diverted
say to impatience and said, be might what of doubt from supposed, she
thing. every

impossible is kindness.--It all are you Woodhouse, Miss dear you, “Thank
prospects--that Jane’s understand--dearest quite I indeed, say--Yes, to
Mr. is recovered.--How charmingly is she mean.--But not do I is,
little happy a power.--Such my of out glad.--Quite so am Woodhouse?--I
man!--that young indeed.--Charming here.--Yes, us find you as circle
to attention Perry!--such Mr. good mean I friendly; very is--so
delight thankful commonly than more her great, her from Jane!”--And
a been had there that guessed Emma there, being for Elton Mrs. towards
quarter, vicarage the from Jane, towards resentment of show little
which indeed, whispers, few a overcome.--After graciously now was which
said, louder, speaking Elton, Mrs. guess, a beyond it placed

that long, so been have I here and friend; good my am, I here “Yes,
truth the but, apologise; to necessary it think should I else anywhere
me join to promised He master. and lord my for waiting am I that is,
you.” to respects his pay and here,

will Elton?--That Mr. from call a of pleasure the have to we are “What!
and visits, morning like not do gentlemen know I for indeed! favour a be
engaged.” so is time Elton’s Mr.

to morning from engaged is really Bates.--He Miss is, it word my “Upon
or pretence some on him, to coming people’s of end no is night.--There
always are churchwardens, and overseers, and magistrates, other.--The
without thing any do to able not seem They opinion. his wanting
do I.--I than you ‘rather say, often I E.,’ Mr. word, my him.--‘Upon
had I if instrument, my and crayons my of become would what know not
neglect absolutely I for is, it as enough applicants.’--Bad many so half
bar a played not have I believe degree.--I unpardonable an to both them
on indeed, yes, you: assure I coming, is he fortnight.--However, this
her screen to hand her up putting And all.” you on wait to purpose
quite yes, know.--Oh! you visit, congratulatory Emma--“A from words
indispensable.”

happily--! so her, about looked Bates Miss

himself disengage could he as soon as me to come to promised “He
deep in together up shut are Knightley and he but Knightley; from
hand.” right Knightley’s is E. consultation.--Mr.

Elton Mr. “Is said, only and world, the for smiled have not would Emma
walk.” hot a have will Donwell?--He to foot on gone

and Weston meeting. regular a Crown, the at meeting a is it no, “Oh!
who those of only speak to apt is one but too; there be will Cole
way.” own their thing every have Knightley and E. Mr. fancy lead.--I

that certain almost am “I Emma. said day?” the mistaken you not “Have
at was Knightley to-morrow.--Mr. till not is Crown the at meeting the
Saturday.” for as it of spoke and yesterday, Hartfield

which answer, abrupt the was to-day,” certainly is meeting the no, “Oh!
do side.--“I Elton’s Mrs. on blunder any of impossibility the denoted
ever that parish troublesome most the is “this continued, she believe,”
Grove.” Maple at things such of heard never We was.

Jane. said small,” was there parish “Your

subject the heard never I for know, not do I dear, my word, my “Upon
of.” talked

heard have I which school, the of smallness the by proved is it “But
the Bragge; Mrs. and sister your of patronage the under as of, speak you
children.” five-and-twenty than more not and school, only

you brain thinking a What true. very that’s creature, clever you “Ah!
we if make, should I and you character perfect a what Jane, say, I have!
produce would solidity your and liveliness My together. shaken be could
_some_ that however, insinuate, to presume I that perfection.--Not
word, a hush!--not already.--But perfection _you_ think not may people
please.” you if

words, her give to wanting was Jane caution; unnecessary an seemed It
saw. plainly latter the as Woodhouse, Miss to but Elton, Mrs. to not
very was permitted, civility as far as her, distinguishing of wish The
look. a beyond proceed often not could it though evident,

her of some with him greeted lady His appearance. his made Elton Mr.
vivacity. sparkling

an be to here, on me send to word; my upon sir, pretty, “Very
come!--But to vouchsafe you before long so friends, my to encumbrance
should I knew You with. deal to had you creature dutiful a what knew you
sitting been I have appeared.--Here master and lord my till stir not
conjugal true of sample a ladies young these giving hour, this
wanted?” be may it soon how know, you say, can who obedience--for

away. thrown seemed wit this all that tired, and hot so was Elton Mr.
subsequent his but paid; be must ladies other the to civilities His
the and suffering, was he heat the for himself over lament to was object
nothing. for had had he walk

Very found. be not could “Knightley he, said Donwell,” to got I “When
the and morning, this him sent I note the after unaccountable! very odd!
one.” till home at be certainly should he that returned, he message

to been not have you E., Mr. dear wife.--“My his cried “Donwell!”
Crown.” the at meeting the from come you Crown; the mean Donwell!--You

Knightley see to wanted particularly I and to-morrow; that’s no, “No,
went morning!--I broiling dreadful a account.--Such very that on to-day
made which ill-usage,) great of tone a in too--(speaking fields the over
you assure I home! at him find to not then And worse. the much so it
The me. for message no left, apology no And pleased. all at not am I
expected.--Very being my of nothing knew she declared housekeeper
Perhaps gone. was he way which all at knew nobody extraordinary!--And
woods.--Miss his into perhaps Mill, Abbey the to perhaps Hartfield, to
it?” explain you Knightley!--Can friend our like not is this Woodhouse,

extraordinary, very was it that protesting by herself amused Emma
him. for say to syllable a not had she that and indeed,

wife a as indignity the (feeling Elton, Mrs. said imagine,” cannot “I
of you, by thing a such do could he how imagine cannot “I do,) to ought
to expect should one whom person last very The world! the in people all
am I you, for message a left have must he E., Mr. dear forgotten!--My be
his eccentric;--and very so be could Knightley even must.--Not he sure
likely very and case: the was that it, upon Depend it. forgot servants
observed, often have I all, are who servants, Donwell the with happen to
a such have not would I sure am remiss.--I and awkward extremely
And consideration. any for sideboard our at stand Harry his as creature
promised indeed.--She cheap very her holds Wright Hodges, Mrs. for as
it.” sent never and receipt, a Wright

house, the near got I “as Elton, Mr. continued Larkins,” William met “I
not did I but home, at master his find not should I me told he and
what know not did He humour. of out rather seemed him.--William believe
the get ever hardly could he but said, he lately, master his to come was
really it but wants, William’s with do to nothing have I him. of speech
it and to-day; Knightley see should _I_ that importance great very of is
should I that inconvenience serious very of therefore, matter, a becomes
purpose.” no to walk hot this had have

In directly. home go than better do not could she that felt Emma
Mr. and there; for waited time very this at was she probability all
towards aggression in deeper sinking from preserved be might Knightley
Larkins. William towards not if Elton, Mr.

to determined Fairfax Miss find to leave, taking on pleased, was She
her gave it downstairs; even her with go to room, the of out her attend
say, to of, use made immediately she which opportunity an

you Had possibility. the had not have I that perhaps, well, as is “It
to tempted been have might I friends, other by surrounded been not
might than openly more speak to questions, ask to subject, a introduce
been have certainly should I that feel correct.--I strictly been have
impertinent.”

thought Emma which hesitation an and blush a with Jane, cried “Oh!”
usual her all of elegance the all than her to becoming more infinitely
have would danger The danger. no been have would composure--“there
than more me gratified have not could You you. wearying my of been
more (speaking Woodhouse, Miss Indeed, interest--. an expressing by
very misconduct, of have I which consciousness the with collectedly,)
those that know to me to consoling particularly is it misconduct, great
not are preserving, worth most is opinion good whose friends, my of
could I that half for time not have to--I as degree a such to disgusted
for something urge to excuses, apologies, make to long I say. to wish
your if short, unfortunately--in But, due. very so it feel I myself.
friend--” my stand not does compassion

and warmly, Emma cried are,” you indeed scrupulous, too are you “Oh!
you whom to body every and apologies; no me owe “You hand. her taking
delighted so satisfied, perfectly so is them, owe to supposed be might
even--”

you.--So to were manners my what know I but kind, very are “You
of life a was act.--It to part a always had artificial!--I and cold
you.” disgusted have must I that know deceit!--I

side. my on be should apologies the all that feel I more. no say “Pray
done be to is whatever do must We once. at other each forgive us Let
you hope I there. time no lose will feelings our think I and quickest,
Windsor?” from accounts pleasant have

“Very.”

as you--just lose to are we that be, will suppose, I news, next the “And
you.” know to begin I

here am I yet. of thought be can nothing course of that, all to as “Oh!
Campbell.” Mrs. and Colonel by claimed till

Emma, replied perhaps,” yet, settled actually be can “Nothing
of.” thought be must it me, excuse smiling--“but,

answered, Jane as returned was smile The

(I you, to own will I And of. thought been has it right; very are “You
Churchill Mr. with living our as far so that safe), be will it sure am
of least, at months, three be must There settled. is it Enscombe, at
nothing be will there imagine I over, are they when but mourning; deep
for.” wait to more

assured be to wanted I what just is you.--This thank you, “Thank
and decided is that thing every love I much how knew you if of.--Oh!
good-bye.” open!--Good-bye,



XVII CHAPTER


the if and safety; her by happy made all were friends Weston’s Mrs.
by was it Emma, to increased be could well-doing her of satisfaction
in decided been had She girl. little a of mother the be to her knowing
with was it that acknowledge not would She Weston. Miss a for wishing
Isabella’s of either with hereafter, her, for match a making of view any
father both suit would daughter a that convinced was she but sons;
grew he as Weston, Mr. to comfort great a be would It best. mother and
hence--to years ten older growing be might Weston Mr. even older--and
freaks the nonsense, the and sports the by enlivened fireside his have
Weston--no Mrs. and home; from banished never child a of fancies the and
be would it and her; to most be would daughter a that doubt could one
have not should teach, to how knew well so who one any that pity a quite
again. exercise in powers their

she me,” on practising of know, you advantage, the had has “She
Madame in d’Ostalis, Comtesse La on d’Almane Baronne La continued--“like
little own her see now shall we and Theodore, and Adelaide Genlis’ de
plan.” perfect more a on educated Adelaide

than more even her indulge will “she Knightley, Mr. replied is,” “That
will It all. at her indulge not does she that believe and you, did she
difference.” only the be

her?” of become will what rate, that “at Emma; cried child!” “Poor

disagreeable be will She thousands. of fate bad.--The very “Nothing
my all losing am I older. grows she as herself correct and infancy, in
all owing am who I, Emma. dearest my children, spoilt against bitterness
be to me in ingratitude horrible be it not would _you_, to happiness my
them?” on severe

your all of assistance the had I “But replied: and laughed, Emma
whether doubt I people. other of indulgence the counteract to endeavours
it.” without me corrected have would sense own my

Taylor understanding:--Miss you gave Nature doubt. no have you?--I “Do
quite was interference My well. done have must You principles. you gave
what say, to you for natural very was It good. as harm do to likely as
to you for natural very afraid am I me?--and lecture to he has right
did I believe not do I manner. disagreeable a in done was it that feel
the of object an you making by myself, to all was good The good. any you
without much so you about think not could I me. to affection tenderest
errors, many so fancying of dint by and all; and faults you, on doating
least.” at thirteen were you since ever you with love in been have

often very was “I Emma. cried me,” to use of were you sure am “I
I time. the at own would I than you--oftener by rightly influenced
be to is Weston Anna little poor if And good. me did you sure very am
her for much as do to you in humanity greatest the be will it spoiled,
is she when her with love in falling except me, for done have you as
thirteen.”

your of one with me, to said you have girl, a were you when often, “How
I says papa so-and-so; do to going am I Knightley, looks--‘Mr. saucy
I knew, you which, leave’--something Taylor’s Miss have I or may,
bad two you giving was interference my cases such In approve. not did
one.” of instead feelings

speeches my hold should you wonder was!--No I creature amiable an “What
remembrance.” affectionate such in

from and, Knightley;’ ‘Mr. me, called always Knightley.’--You “‘Mr.
want I formal. is it yet sound.--And a formal very so not has it habit,
what.” know not do I but else, something me call to you

about fits, amiable my of one in ‘George,’ you calling once remember “I
as but, you; offend would it thought I because it did I ago. years ten
again.” it did never I objection, no made you

now?” ‘George’ me call you cannot “And

I Knightley.’ ‘Mr. but thing any you call can never “Impossible!--I
by Elton, Mrs. of terseness elegant the equal to even promise not will
laughing presently, added she promise,” will I K.--But Mr. you calling
name. Christian your by once you call to promise will blushing--“I and
in building the where;--in guess may you perhaps but when, say not do I
worse.” for better, for M. takes N. which

important one to just openly more be not could she that grieved Emma
the to her, rendered have would sense better his which service
womanly her all of worst the from her saved have would which advice
a tender too was it but Smith; Harriet with intimacy wilful follies--her
mentioned seldom very was it.--Harriet on enter not could subject.--She
being not her from proceed merely might side, his on This, them. between
delicacy, to it attribute to inclined rather was Emma but of; thought
were friendship their that appearances, some from suspicion, a and
other any under parting that, herself, aware was She declining.
that and more, corresponded have should certainly they circumstances,
on did, wholly almost now it as rested, have not would intelligence her
being of pain The so. was it that observe might He letters. Isabella’s
to inferior little very was him, towards concealment practise to obliged
unhappy. Harriet made having of pain the

be could as visitor her of account an good as quite sent Isabella
which spirits, of out her thought had she arrival first her on expected;
but, consulted; be to dentist a was there as natural, perfectly appeared
Harriet find to appear not did she over, been had business that since
sure, be to before.--Isabella, her known had she what from different
playing to equal been not had Harriet if yet observer; quick very no was
and comforts Emma’s her. escaped have not would it children, the with
longer; stay to being Harriet’s by on, carried agreeably most were hopes
John Mrs. and Mr. least. at month a be to likely was fortnight her
remain to invited was she and August, in down come to were Knightley
back. her bring could they till

is “Here Knightley. Mr. said friend,” your mention even not does “John
it.” see to like you if answer, his

Emma marriage. intended his of communication the to answer the was It
know to alive all impatience an with hand, eager very a with it accepted
her that hearing by checked all at not and it, about say would he what
unmentioned. was friend

Knightley, Mr. continued happiness,” my into brother a like enters “John
have, to him know well I though and complimenter; no is he “but
making from far so is he you, for affection brotherly most a likewise,
in cool rather him think might woman young other any that flourishes,
writes.” he what seeing your of afraid not am I But praise. her

the read had she when Emma, replied man,” sensible a like writes “He
the considers he that plain very is It sincerity. his honour “I letter.
not is he that but side, my on all as engagement the of fortune good
as affection, your of worthy as time, in growing, my of hope without
different a bear to thing any said he Had already. me think you
him.” believed have not should I construction,

means--” only He thing. such no means he Emma, “My

two,” the of estimation our in little very differ should I and “He
than perhaps, less, smile--“much serious of sort a with she, interrupted
the on reserve or ceremony without enter could we if of, aware is he
subject.”

Emma--” dear my “Emma,

brother your fancy you “if gaiety, thorough more with cried she “Oh!”
secret, the in is father dear my till wait only justice, me do not does
doing from farther much be will he it, upon Depend opinion. his hear and
on advantage, the all happiness, the all think will He justice. _you_
not may I wish I mine. on merit the all question; the of side your
towards compassion tender once.--His at him with Emma’ ‘poor into sink
farther.” no go can worth oppressed

as convinced easily as half be might father your wish “I cried, he “Ah!”
be to give, can worth equal that right every having our of be, will John
notice you letter--did John’s of part one by amused am I together. happy
by wholly him take not did information my that says, he it?--where
the of something hearing of expectation in rather was he that surprize,
kind.”

having your as far so means only he brother, your understand I “If
perfectly seems He me. of idea no had He marrying. of thoughts some
that.” for unprepared

my into far so seen have should he that amused am I yes--but “Yes,
any of conscious not am by?--I judging been he has What feelings.
at him prepare could that conversation or spirits my in difference
I so, was it another.--But at than more any marrying my for time this
them with staying was I when difference a was there say dare I suppose.
much so quite children the with play not did I believe I day. other the
seems ‘Uncle saying, boys poor the evening one remember I usual. as
now.’” tired always

other and farther, spread must news the when coming was time The
sufficiently was Weston Mrs. as soon As tried. it of reception persons’
that view in it having Emma visits, Woodhouse’s Mr. admit to recovered
to first resolved cause, the in employed be should reasonings gentle her
her to it break to how Randalls.--But at then and home, at it announce
Mr. of hour an such in it, do to herself bound had last!--She at father
have would heart her point the to came it when or absence, Knightley’s
come to was Knightley Mr. but off; it put have must she and her, failed
was make.--She to was she beginning the up follow and time, a such at
a it make not must She too. cheerfully speak to and speak, to forced
herself. tone melancholy a by him, to misery of subject decided more
she spirits the all misfortune.--With a it think to appear not must She
then, and strange, something for first him prepared she command, could
be could approbation and consent his if that said, words, few a in
difficulty, no with attended be would trusted, she obtained--which,
Mr. and all--she of happiness the promote to plan a was it since
the receive would Hartfield means which by marry; to meant Knightley
next loved, he knew she whom company person’s that of addition constant
world. the in best Weston, Mrs. and daughters his to

tried he and him, to shock considerable a first at was man!--it Poor
of once, than more reminded, was She it. from her dissuade to earnestly
be would it that assured and marry, never would she said always having
Isabella, poor of told and single; remain to her for better deal great a
him about hung Emma do. not would it Taylor.--But Miss poor and
must he that and so; be must it said and smiled, and affectionately,
them taking marriages whose Weston, Mrs. and Isabella with her class not
not was she but change: melancholy a made indeed, had, Hartfield, from
introducing was she there; always be should she Hartfield; from going
she and better; the for but comforts their or numbers their in change no
Mr. having for happier the deal great a be would he that sure very was
idea.--Did the to used got once were he when hand, at always Knightley
did, he that deny not would much?--He very Knightley Mr. love not he
Mr. but business on consult to want ever he did sure.--Whom was she
letters, his write to ready so who him, to useful so was Knightley?--Who
attached so attentive, so cheerful, so him?--Who assist to glad so who
That spot?--Yes. the on always him have to like he not him?--Would to
should he often; too there be not could Knightley Mr. true. very all was
it as day every him see did they day;--but every him see to glad be
done? had they as on go they not could was.--Why

overcome, was worst the but reconciled; soon be not could Woodhouse Mr.
rest.--To the do must repetition continual and time given; was idea the
fond whose Knightley’s, Mr. succeeded assurances and entreaties Emma’s
soon was he and welcome; of kind a even subject the gave her of praise
all had occasion.--They fair every on each, by to talked be to used
strongest the of letters by give, could Isabella which assistance the
to meeting, first the on ready, was Weston Mrs. and approbation;
settled, a as light--first, serviceable most the in subject the consider
importance equal nearly the of aware one--well good a as secondly, and,
agreed was mind.--It Woodhouse’s Mr. to recommendations two the of
be to used was he whom by body every and be; to was what as upon,
some having and happiness; his for be would it that him assuring guided
some that think to began he it, admitted almost which himself feelings
very so be not might perhaps--it two, or year another other--in or time
place. take did marriage the if bad

she that all in feelings no feigning part, no acting was Weston Mrs.
surprized, extremely been had event.--She the of favour in him to said
she but her; to affair the opened first Emma when than so, more never
in scruple no had and all, to happiness of increase only it in saw
as Knightley, Mr. for regard a such had utmost.--She the to him urging
respect every in was it and Emma; dearest her even deserved he think to
one in and connexion, a unexceptionable and suitable, proper, so
eligible, peculiarly so importance, highest the of point one respect,
safely not could Emma if as seemed it now that fortunate, singularly so
herself had she that and creature, other any to herself attached have
it wished and it, of thought having not in beings of stupidest the been
Emma address to life of rank a in men those of few very ago.--How long
Mr. but who And Hartfield! for home own their renounced have would
such make to as so Woodhouse, Mr. with bear and know could Knightley
Mr. poor of disposing of difficulty desirable!--The arrangement an
for own, her and plans husband’s her in felt always been had Woodhouse
Enscombe of claims the settle to How Emma. and Frank between marriage a
Mr. by acknowledged impediment--less continual a been had Hartfield and
finish to able been never had he even herself--but by than Weston
of care take will matters saying--“Those by than better subject the
was there here But way.” a find will people young the themselves;
was It future. the on speculation wild a in off shifted be to nothing
name. the worth side any on sacrifice No equal. all open, all right, all
without and itself, in felicity of promise highest the of union a was It
it. delay or oppose to difficulty rational real, one

reflections such in indulging knee, her on baby her with Weston, Mrs.
could thing any If world. the in women happiest the of one was these, as
have soon would baby the that perceiving was it delight, her increase
caps. of set first its outgrown

Weston Mr. and spread; it wherever surprize a universally was news The
to enough were minutes five but it; of share minutes five his had
advantages the saw mind.--He of quickness his to idea the familiarise
wife; his of constancy the all with them in rejoiced and match, the of
he hour an of end the by and nothing; soon very was it of wonder the but
it. foreseen always had he that believing from far not was

a always are matters “These he. said conclude,” I secret, a be to is “It
be me let Only them. knows body every that out found is it till secret,
suspicion.” any has Jane whether wonder out.--I speak may I when told

that on himself satisfied and morning, next the Highbury to went He
eldest his daughter, a like she not Was news. the her told He point.
passed, it present, being Bates Miss and her; tell must daughter?--he
immediately Elton, Mrs. and Perry, Mrs. Cole, Mrs. to course, of
they for; prepared were principals the than more no was It afterwards.
it soon how Randalls, at known being its of time the from calculated had
evening the as themselves, of thinking were and Highbury; over be would
sagacity. great with circle, family a many in wonder

and him, think might Some match. approved well very a was it general, In
their recommend might set One luck. in most the her, think might others
Knightleys; John the for Hartfield leaving and Donwell, to removing all
yet, but servants; their among disagreements predict might another and
one in except raised, objection serious no was there whole, the upon
any by softened not was surprize the Vicarage.--There, the habitation,
wife; his with compared it, about little cared Elton Mr. satisfaction.
and contented;” be now would pride lady’s young “the hoped only he
and, could;” she if Knightley catch to meant always had “she supposed
“Rather exclaim, daringly could Hartfield, at living of point the on
indeed.--“Poor discomposed much very was Elton Mrs. I!”--But than he
extremely was him.”--She for business fellow!--sad poor Knightley!
good thousand a had he eccentric, very though for, concerned;
in all at him think not in?--Did taken so be he could qualities.--How
all of end an be would Knightley!--There least.--Poor the in love--not
dine and come to been had he happy him.--How with intercourse pleasant
now.--Poor over all be would that But him! asked they whenever them with
Oh! _her_. for made Donwell to parties exploring more fellow!--No
every on water cold throw to Knightley Mrs. a be would there no;
that sorry all at not was she But disagreeable! thing.--Extremely
living plan, day.--Shocking other the housekeeper the abused had she
who Grove Maple near family a knew She do. never would It together.
first the of end the before separate to obliged been and it, tried had
quarter.



XVIII CHAPTER


would London from party the and to-morrows, more few A on. passed Time
one it of thinking was Emma and change; alarming an was It arriving. be
when her, grieve and agitate to deal great a bring must what as morning,
the After by. put were thoughts distressing and in, came Knightley Mr.
began tone, graver a in then, and silent; was he pleasure of chat first
with,

news.” some Emma; you, tell to something have “I

face. his in up looking quickly, she, said bad?” or “Good

called.” be to ought it which know not do “I

not trying are You countenance. your in it see sure.--I am I good “Oh!
smile.” to

afraid, much very am “I features, his composing he, said afraid,” am “I
it.” hear you when smile not will you that Emma, dear my

pleases which thing any that imagine hardly can so?--I why but “Indeed!
too.” me amuse and please not should you, amuses or

not do we which on one, but hope “I replied, he subject,” one is “There
on fixed eyes his with smiling, again moment, a paused He alike.” think
recollect?--Harriet you not you?--Do to occur nothing “Does face. her
Smith.”

though something, of afraid felt she and name, the at flushed cheeks Her
what. not knew she

I have, “You he. cried morning?” this yourself her from heard you “Have
whole.” the know and believe,

me.” tell pray nothing; know I not; have I “No,

Harriet is. it bad very see--and I worst, the for prepared are “You
Martin.” Robert marries Smith

eyes, her prepared--and being like seem not did which start, a gave Emma
closed. were lips her but impossible!” is this “No, said, gaze, eager in

Robert from it have “I Knightley; Mr. continued indeed,” so, is “It
ago.” hour an half not me left He himself. Martin

amazement. speaking most the with him at looking still was She

were opinions our wish feared.--I I as little as Emma, my it, like “You
one make will sure, be may you Time, will. they time in But same. the
not need we meanwhile, the in and, differently; think us of other the or
subject.” the on much talk

herself. exerting replied, she me,” mistake quite you me, mistake “You
I but unhappy, me make now would circumstance a such that not is “It
say, to mean cannot impossibility!--You an seems It it. believe cannot
he that mean cannot You Martin. Robert accepted has Smith Harriet that
it.” intends he that mean, only You again--yet. her to proposed even has

but smiling with Knightley, Mr. answered it,” done has he that mean “I
accepted.” been “and decision, determined

workbasket, her to recourse having cried.--“Well!”--Then she God!” “Good
exquisite the all concealing and face, her down leaning for excuse in
be must she knew she which entertainment and delight of feelings
this make thing; every me tell now “Well, added, she expressing,
was never I all. it know me when?--Let where, How, me. to intelligible
you.--How--how assure I unhappy, me make not does it surprized--but more
possible?” been it has

ago, days three business on town to went He story. simple very a is “It
send to wanting was I which papers some of charge take to him got I and
was and chambers, his at John, to papers these delivered John.--He to
were They Astley’s. to evening same the party their join to him by asked
our be to was party The Astley’s. to boys eldest two the take to going
could Robert friend My Smith. Miss John--and Henry, sister, and brother
amused; extremely all were way; their in him for called They resist. not
he day--which next the them with dine to him asked brother my and
an found he understand) I (as visit that of course the in did--and
speak not did certainly and Harriet; to speaking of opportunity
is he as even happy as acceptance, her by him, made vain.--She in
this me with was and coach, yesterday’s by down came He deserving.
first proceedings, his report to breakfast, after immediately morning
of relate can I that all is This own. his on then and affairs, my on
much a make will Harriet friend Your when. and where, how, the
minute the all you give will her.--She see you when history longer
our interesting.--In make can language woman’s only which particulars,
that say, must I great.--However, the in only deal we communications
overflowing; very _me_, to and _him_, for seemed heart Martin’s Robert
that purpose, the to much being its without mention, did he that and
John Mrs. of charge took brother my Astley’s, at box their quitting on
Henry; and Smith Miss with followed he and John, little and Knightley
Smith Miss make to as crowd, a such in were they time one at that and
uneasy.” rather

she speak, To reply. immediate any attempt not dared stopped.--Emma He
happiness. of degree unreasonable most a betray to be would sure was
disturbed silence Her mad. her think would he or moment, a wait must She
added, he while, little a her observing after and him;

you make now not would circumstance this that said you love, my “Emma,
His expected. you than pain more you gives it afraid am I but unhappy;
your satisfies what as it consider must you evil--but an is situation
him of better and better thinking your for answer will I and friend;
delight would principles good and sense good His more. him know you as
friend your wish not could you concerned, is man the as far you.--As
is which could, I if alter would I society in rank His hands. better in
William about me at laugh Emma.--You you, assure I deal great a saying
Martin.” Robert spare ill as quite could I but Larkins;

not herself brought now having and smile; and up look to her wanted He
answering, did--cheerfully broadly--she too smile to

think I match. the to me reconcile to pains any at be not need “You
than worse be may connexions _Her_ well. extremely doing is Harriet
they that doubt no be can there character, of respectability In _his_.
You surprize. excessive merely, surprize from silent been have I are.
unprepared peculiarly how me! on come has it suddenly how imagine cannot
determined more lately very her believe to reason had I was!--for I
before.” was she than more, much him, against

I “but Knightley; Mr. replied best,” friend your know to ought “You
be to likely not girl, soft-hearted good-tempered, a was she say should
her.” loved he her told who man young any against determined very very,

believe I word, my “Upon answered, she as laughing help not could Emma
you are Knightley, Mr. do.--But, I as well as quite her know you
him. _accepted_ downright and absolutely has she that sure perfectly
you not already?--Did she can time--but in might she suppose could I
business, of things; other of talking both were him?--You misunderstand
of confusion the in you, not might drills--and new or cattle, of shows
was he that hand Harriet’s not was him?--It mistake subjects, many so
ox.” famous some of dimensions the was of--it certain

Robert and Knightley Mr. of air and countenance the between contrast The
strong so and feelings, Emma’s to strong so moment, this at was, Martin
Harriet’s on passed recently so had that all of recollection the was
emphasis, such with spoken words, those of sound the fresh so side,
was she that Martin,” Robert of think to than better know I hope I “No,
premature. measure, some in prove, to intelligence the expecting really
otherwise. be not could It

me suppose to dare you “Do Knightley. Mr. cried this?” say dare you “Do
do of?--What talking is man a what know to not as blockhead, a great so
deserve?” you

with up put never I because treatment, best the deserve always I “Oh!
Are answer. direct plain, a me give must you therefore, and, other; any
and Martin Mr. which on terms the understand you that sure quite you
are?” now Harriet

he “that distinctly, very speaking replied, he sure,” quite am “I
nothing obscurity, no was there that and him; accepted had she me told
that proof a you give can I think I and used; he words the in doubtful,
knew He do. to now was he what to as opinion my asked He so. be must it
of information for apply could he whom to Goddard Mrs. but one no of
done, be to fit more thing any mention I Could friends. or relations her
he Then, not. could I that him assured I Goddard? Mrs. to go to than
day.” this of course the in her see to endeavour would he said,

smiles, brightest the with Emma, replied satisfied,” perfectly am “I
happy.” them wish sincerely most “and

before.” subject this on talked we since changed materially are “You

fool.” a was I time that at so--for hope “I

all you grant to willing very now am I for also; changed am I “And
for and sake, your for pains some taken have I qualities. good Harriet’s
much as believe to reason had always have I (whom sake, Martin’s Robert
often have I her. with acquainted get to ever,) as her with love in
Sometimes, did. I that seen have must You deal. good a her to talked
poor pleading of me suspecting half were you thought have I indeed,
observations, my all from but, case; the never was which cause, Martin’s
good very with girl, amiable artless, an being her of convinced am I
in happiness her placing and principles, good seriously very notions,
no have I this, of life.--Much domestic of utility and affections the
for.” you thank may she doubt,

Harriet!” poor head.--“Ah! her shaking Emma, cried “Me!”

more little a to quietly submitted and however, herself, checked She
deserved. she than praise

her of entrance the by closed afterwards soon was conversation Their
a in was mind Her alone. be to wanted She sorry. not was She father.
be to her for impossible it made which wonder, and flutter of state
she till and spirits; exclaiming singing, dancing, in was She collected.
she reflected, and laughed and herself, to talked and about, moved had
rational. nothing for fit be could

the put to out gone being James’s announce to was business father’s Her
she and Randalls; to drive daily now their to preparatory to, horses
disappearing. for excuse immediate an therefore, had,

be may sensations her of delight exquisite the gratitude, the joy, The
of prospect the in removed thus alloy and grievance sole The imagined.
for happy too becoming of danger in really was she welfare, Harriet’s
of worthy more grow to but Nothing, for? wish to she had security.--What
own. her to superior so ever been had judgment and intentions whose him,
humility her teach might folly past her of lessons the that but Nothing,
future. in circumspection and

her in and thankfulness, her in serious very was, she Serious
the in sometimes laugh, a preventing no was there yet and resolutions;
the of end an Such close! a such at laugh must She them. of midst very
Harriet! a heart--such a Such back! weeks five of disappointment doleful

a be would thing returning--Every her in pleasure be would there Now
Martin. Robert know to pleasure great a be would It pleasure.

the was felicities, heartfelt and serious most her of rank the in High
would Knightley Mr. from concealment of necessity all that reflection
to her to hateful so mystery, equivocation, disguise, The over. be soon
him giving to forward look now could She over. be soon might practise,
to ready most was disposition her which confidence perfect and full that
duty. a as welcome

not father; her with forward set she spirits happiest and gayest the In
in whether and, said; he what to agreeing always but listening, always
his of persuasion comfortable the at conniving silence, or speech
be would Weston Mrs. poor or day, every Randalls to go to obliged being
disappointed.

hardly drawing-room:--but the in alone was Weston arrived.--Mrs. They
thanks the received Woodhouse Mr. and baby, the of told been they had
the through caught was glimpse a when for, asked he which coming, for
window. the near passing figures two of blind,

to going just was “I Weston. Mrs. said Fairfax,” Miss and Frank is “It
He morning. this arrive him seeing in surprize agreeable our of you tell
the spend to persuaded been has Fairfax Miss and to-morrow, till stays
hope.” I in, coming are us.--They with day

to glad extremely was Emma room. the in were they minute a half In
embarrassing of number confusion--a of degree a was there him--but see
a with but smiling, and readily met They side. each on recollections
all having and said; be to little allowed first at which consciousness
that circle, the in blank a such time some for was there again, down sat
long had she which indulged, now wish the whether doubt to began Emma
Jane, with him seeing of and more, once Churchill Frank seeing of felt,
the joined Weston Mr. When pleasure. of proportion its yield would
a longer no was there fetched, was baby the when and however, party,
Frank for opportunity and courage of animation--or or subject of want
say, and her near draw to Churchill

message forgiving kind very a for Woodhouse, Miss you, thank to have “I
less you made not has time hope I letters. Weston’s Mrs. of one in
said.” then you what retract not do you hope I pardon. to willing

am I least. the in “not begin, to happy most Emma, cried indeed,” “No,
joy you give to you--and with hands shake and see to glad particularly
person.” in

with speak to time some continued and heart, his all with her thanked He
happiness. and gratitude his of feeling serious

Jane. towards eyes his turning he, said well?” looking she not “Is
Weston Mrs. and father my how see do?--You to used ever she than “Better
her.” upon doat

after eyes, laughing with and again, rising soon were spirits his But
of name the named he Campbells, the of return expected the mentioning
hearing. her in pronounced being its forbade and blushed, Dixon.--Emma

shame.” extreme “without cried, she it,” of think never can “I

it is But be. to ought or mine, all “is answered, he shame,” “The
you know, I Early, late. of mean suspicion?--I no had you that possible
none.” had

you.” assure I smallest, the had never “I

I wish I near--and very once was I wonderful. quite appears “That
wrong doing always was I though But better. been have would had--it
no me did as such and things, wrong bad very were they things,
broken I had transgression better much a been have would service.--It
thing.” every you told and secrecy of bond the

Emma. said regret,” a worth now not is “It

a pay to persuaded being uncle’s my “of he, resumed hope,” some have “I
Campbells the When her. to introduced be to wants he Randalls; at visit
trust, I there, continue and London, in them meet shall we returned, are
from distance a such at am I now, northward.--But her carry may we till
not have we morning, this Woodhouse?--Till Miss hard, it not her--is
me?” pity you not Do reconciliation. of day the since met once

gay of accession sudden a with that kindly, very so pity her spoke Emma
cried, he thought,

the for demure looking and voice, his sinking then bye,” the by “Ah!
and coloured paused.--She He well?” is Knightley Mr. hope moment--“I
wish my remember may you think and letter, my saw you know laughed.--“I
that you assure congratulations.--I your return me Let favour. your in
is satisfaction.--He and interest warmest the with news the heard have I
praise.” to presume cannot I whom man a

but style; same the in on go to him wanted only and delighted, was Emma
Jane, own his with and concerns own his in moment next the was mind his
were, words next his and

delicacy!--and such smoothness! skin?--such a such see ever you “Did
a is It fair. her call cannot fair.--One actually being without yet
most hair--a and eye-lashes dark her with complexion, uncommon most
colour it.--Just in lady the peculiarly So complexion! distinguishing
beauty.” for enough

“but archly; Emma, replied complexion,” her admired always have “I
so being for her with fault found you when time the remember I not do
forgotten?” quite you her.--Have of talk to began first we pale?--When

dare--” I could was!--How I dog impudent an no--what “Oh!

help not could Emma that recollection, the at heartily so laughed he But
saying,

you time, that at perplexities your of midst the in that suspect do “I
am had.--I you sure am all.--I us tricking in amusement great very had
you.” to consolation a was it sure

most the was I thing? a such of me suspect you can no--how no, no, “Oh!
wretch!” miserable

a was it sure am I mirth. to insensible be to as miserable so quite “Not
us taking were you that feel to you, to entertainment high of source
the you tell to because, suspect, to readier the am I in.--Perhaps all
same the in myself to amusement some been have might it think I truth,
us.” between likeness little a is there think I situation.

bowed. He

true of look a with added, presently she dispositions,” our in not “If
bids which destiny the destiny; our in likeness a is “there sensibility,
own.” our to superior much so characters two with us connect to fair

can You side. your on true not “No, warmly. answered, he true,” “True,
Look angel. complete a is mine.--She on true most but superior, no have
her of turn the Observe gesture? every in angel an she not Is her. at
will father.--You my at up looking is she as eyes, her Observe throat.
my that seriously) whispering and head, his (inclining hear to glad be
set. new be to are They jewels. aunt’s my all her give to means uncle
be it not Will head. the for ornament an in some have to resolved am I
hair?” dark her in beautiful

he that kindly, so spoke she and Emma; replied indeed,” beautiful, “Very
out, burst gratefully

excellent such in you see to and again! you see to am I delighted “How
should I world. the for meeting this missed have not would looks!--I
come.” to failed you had Hartfield, at called have certainly

account an giving Weston Mrs. child, the of talking been had others The
the from before, evening the under, been had she alarm little a of
foolish, been had she believed She well. quite not appearing infant’s
sending of minute a half within been had she and her, alarmed had it but
been had Weston Mr. but ashamed, be to ought she Perhaps Perry. Mr. for
had child the however, minutes, ten herself.--In as uneasy as almost
particularly and history; her was This again. well perfectly been
for much very her commended who Woodhouse, Mr. to was it interesting
done not had she that regretted only and Perry, for sending of thinking
the in appeared child the if Perry, for send always should “She it.
be not could She moment. a for only it were disordered, degree slightest
perhaps, pity, a was It often. too Perry for send nor alarmed, soon too
now, well seemed child the though for, night; last come not had he that
had Perry if better been have probably would it considering, well very
it.” seen

name. the caught Churchill Frank

Miss catch to spoke, he as trying, and Emma, to he said “Perry!”
Mr. about saying they are What Perry! Mr. friend “My eye. Fairfax’s
now?--Has travel he does how morning?--And this here been he Perry?--Has
carriage?” his up set he

the in joined she while and him; understood and recollected, soon Emma
really was too she that countenance Jane’s from evident was it laugh,
deaf. seem to trying though him, hearing

of think never can “I cried. he mine!” of dream extraordinary an “Such
see I Woodhouse. Miss us, hears she us, hears laughing.--She without it
Do her. at Look frown. to attempt vain her smile, her cheek, her in it
letter, own her of passage very the instant, this at that, see you not
whole the eye--that her under passing is report, the me sent which
else, nothing to attend can she her--that before spread is blunder
others?” the to listen to pretending though

partly smile the and moment; a for completely, smile to forced was Jane
yet low, conscious, a in said and him, towards turned she as remained
voice, steady

me!--They to astonishing is recollections, such bear can you “How
them!” court can you how obtrude--but sometimes _will_

but entertainingly; very and return, in say to deal great a had He
leaving on and argument; the in Jane, with chiefly were feelings Emma’s
she men, two the of comparison a into naturally falling and Randalls,
really and Churchill, Frank see to been had she as pleased that felt,
more been never had she friendship, with did she as him regarding
happiness The character. of superiority high Knightley’s Mr. of sensible
animated the in completion, its received day, happy most this of
produced. comparison this which worth his of contemplation



XIX CHAPTER


a Harriet, for feeling anxious an intervals, at still, had Emma If
her of cured really be to her for possible being its of doubt momentary
from man another accept to able really and Knightley, Mr. to attachment
the from suffer to had she that long not was it inclination, unbiased
party the brought days few very A uncertainty. such any of recurrence
hour one being of opportunity an sooner no had she and London, from
satisfied--unaccountable perfectly became she than Harriet, with alone
Knightley, Mr. supplanted thoroughly had Martin Robert was!--that it as
happiness. of views her all forming now was and

first: at foolish little a look distressed--did little a was Harriet
and silly, and presumptuous been had she that owned once having but
with away die to seemed confusion and pain her before, self-deceived,
the with and past, the for care a without her leave and words, the
friend’s her to as for, future; and present the in exultation fullest
by nature, that of fear every removed instantly had Emma approbation,
was congratulations.--Harriet unqualified most the with her meeting
the and Astley’s, at evening the of particular every give to happy most
delight. utmost the with all it on dwell could she day; next the dinner
now could Emma as was, fact explain?--The particulars such did what But
his that and Martin; Robert liked always had Harriet that acknowledge,
ever must it this, irresistible.--Beyond been had her love to continuing
Emma. to unintelligible be

fresh her giving was day every and joyful; most was however, event, The
proved She known. became parentage so.--Harriet’s thinking for reason
the her afford to enough rich tradesman, a of daughter the be to
to enough decent and hers, been ever had which maintenance comfortable
gentility of blood the was concealment.--Such for wished always have
to likely was for!--It vouch to ready so been formerly had Emma which
what but gentleman: a many of blood the as perhaps, untainted, as be
the for Knightley--or Mr. for preparing been she had connexion a
illegitimacy, of stain Elton!--The Mr. for even Churchills--or
indeed. stain a been have would wealth, or nobility by unbleached

treated was man young the side; father’s the on raised was objection No
acquainted became Emma as and be: should it as all was it liberally;
fully she Hartfield, at introduced now was who Martin, Robert with
could which worth and sense of appearance the all him in acknowledged
Harriet’s of doubt no had She friend. little her for fairest bid
he home the in and him, with but man; good-tempered any with happiness
and stability, security, of more, of hope the be would there offered,
her, loved who those of midst the in placed be would She improvement.
safety, for enough retired herself; than sense better had who and
into led never be would She cheerfulness. for enough occupied and
respectable be would She out. her find to it for left nor temptation,
the in creature luckiest the be to her admitted Emma and happy; and
a such in affection an persevering and steady so created have to world,
herself. to only yield to luckiest, the quite not if man;--or,

Martins, the with engagements her by away drawn necessarily Harriet,
regretted.--The be to not was which Hartfield; at less and less was
change must friendship their sink; must Emma and her between intimacy
be, to ought what fortunately, and, goodwill; of sort calmer a into
natural gradual, most the in and beginning, already seemed be, must and
manner.

saw and church, to Harriet attended Emma September, of end the Before
as satisfaction, a complete so with Martin Robert on bestowed hand her
them, before stood he as Elton Mr. with connected even remembrances, no
Elton, Mr. saw scarcely she time that at indeed, impair.--Perhaps, could
on fall next might altar the at blessing whose clergyman the as but
of engaged couple latest the Smith, Harriet and Martin herself.--Robert
married. be to first the were three, the

the to restored was and Highbury, quitted already had Fairfax Jane
Churchills Mr. Campbells.--The the with home beloved her of comforts
November. for waiting only were they and town; in also were

by dared, they as far as on, fixed one the was month intermediate The
ought marriage their that determined had Knightley.--They Mr. and Emma
to Hartfield, at still were Isabella and John while concluded be to
was which seaside, the to tour a in absence fortnight’s the them allow
in agreed were friend, other every and Isabella, and plan.--John the
induced be to Woodhouse Mr. was Woodhouse--how Mr. But it. approving
a as but marriage their to alluded yet never had who consent?--he, to
event. distant

were they that miserable, so was he subject, the on sounded first When
pain.--He less gave indeed, allusion, second hopeless.--A almost
very it--a prevent not could he that and be, to was it think to began
he however, Still, resignation. to way its on mind the of step promising
daughter’s his that otherwise, much so appeared he Nay, happy. not was
know to suffering, him see to bear not could She failed. courage
almost understanding her though and neglected; himself fancying him
when that Knightleys, Mr. the both of assurance the in acquiesced
she too, over soon be would distress his over, were event the once
proceed. not could hesitated--she

sudden any by not befriended, were they suspense of state this In
his of change wonderful any or mind, Woodhouse’s Mr. of illumination
another in system same the of operation the by but system, nervous
her all of night one robbed was poultry-house Weston’s way.--Mrs.
in poultry-yards Other man. of ingenuity the by turkeys--evidently
Mr. to _housebreaking_ was suffered.--Pilfering also neighbourhood the
his of sense the for but and uneasy; very was fears.--He Woodhouse’s
every alarm wretched under been have would protection, son-in-law’s
the of mind of presence and resolution, strength, The life. his of night
them of either While dependence. fullest his commanded Knightleys, Mr.
must Knightley John Mr. safe.--But was Hartfield his, and him protected
November. in week first the of end the by again London in be

voluntary, more much a with that, was, distress this of result The
the at for hope to presumed ever had daughter his than consent cheerful
called was Elton Mr. wedding-day--and her fix to able was she moment,
to Martin, Robert Mrs. and Mr. of marriage the from month a within on,
Woodhouse. Miss and Knightley Mr. of hands the join

have parties the where weddings, other like much very was wedding The
particulars the from Elton, Mrs. and parade; or finery for taste no
very and shabby, extremely all it thought husband, her by detailed
a veils; lace few very satin, white little own.--“Very her to inferior
it.”--But, of heard she when stare would business!--Selina pitiful most
confidence, the hopes, the wishes, the deficiencies, these of spite in
the witnessed who friends true of band small the of predictions the
union. the of happiness perfect the in answered fully were ceremony,



FINIS
seven only with Huntingdon, of Ward, Maria Miss ago years thirty ﻿About
of Bertram, Thomas Sir captivate to luck good the had pounds, thousand
raised thereby be to and Northampton, of county the in Park, Mansfield
consequences and comforts the all with lady, baronet’s a of rank the to
the on exclaimed Huntingdon All income. large and house handsome an of
her allowed himself, lawyer, the uncle, her and match, the of greatness
it. to claim equitable any of short pounds thousand three least at be to
their of such and elevation; her by benefited be to sisters two had She
as handsome as quite Frances Miss and Ward Miss thought as acquaintance
equal almost with marrying their predict to scruple not did Maria, Miss
in fortune large of men many so not are certainly there But advantage.
the at Ward, Miss them. deserve to women pretty are there as world the
to attached be to obliged herself found years, dozen a half of end
any scarcely with brother-in-law, her of friend a Norris, Mr. Rev. the
match, Ward’s Miss worse. yet fared Frances Miss and fortune, private
Thomas Sir contemptible: not was point, the to came it when indeed,
of living the in income an friend his give to able happily being
conjugal of career their began Norris Mrs. and Mr. and Mansfield;
Frances Miss But year. a thousand a than less little very with felicity
on fixing by and family, her disoblige to phrase, common the in married,
did connexions, or fortune, education, without marines, of lieutenant a
choice. untoward more a made have hardly could She thoroughly. very it
as well as principle from which, interest, had Bertram Thomas Sir
all seeing of desire a and right, doing of wish general a pride--from
would he respectability, of situations in him with connected were that
but sister; Bertram’s Lady of advantage the for exert to glad been have
before and reach; could interest no as such was profession husband’s her
absolute an them, assisting of method other any devise to time had he
of result natural the was It place. taken had sisters the between breach
almost marriage imprudent very a as such and party, each of conduct the
Price Mrs. remonstrance, useless from herself save To produces. always
Lady married. actually till subject the on family her to wrote never
temper a and feelings, tranquil very of woman a was who Bertram,
merely with herself contented have would indolent, and easy remarkably
Mrs. but matter; the of more no thinking and sister, her up giving
she till satisfied be not could which activity, of spirit a had Norris
of folly the out point to Fanny, to letter angry and long a written had
consequences. ill possible its all with her threaten and conduct, her
which answer, an and angry; and injured was turn, her in Price, Mrs.
very such bestowed and bitterness, its in sister each comprehended
Norris Mrs. as Thomas Sir of pride the on reflections disrespectful
intercourse all to end an put herself, to keep possibly not could
period. considerable a for them between

so moved they which in circles the and distant, so were homes Their
each of hearing ever of means the preclude to almost as distinct,
to least, at or, years, following eleven the during existence other’s
have ever should Norris Mrs. that Thomas Sir to wonderful very it make
angry an in did, then and now she as them, tell to power her in it
years, eleven of end the By child. another got had Fanny that voice,
or pride cherish to afford longer no could Price Mrs. however,
her. assist possibly might that connexion one lose to or resentment,
active for disabled husband an family, increasing still and large A
very a and liquor, good and company to equal less the not but service,
friends the regain to eager her made wants, their supply to income small
in Bertram Lady addressed she and sacrificed; carelessly so had she
a such despondence, and contrition much so spoke which letter a
as else, everything almost of want a such and children, of superfluity
preparing was She reconciliation. a to all them dispose but not could
and circumstance, the bewailing after and lying-in; ninth her for
she child, expected the to sponsors as countenance their imploring
future the to be might they felt she important how conceal not could
ten of boy a was eldest Her being. in already eight the of maintenance
world; the in out be to longed who fellow, spirited fine a old, years
hereafter being his of chance any there Was do? she could what but
property? Indian West his of concerns the in Thomas Sir to useful
of think Thomas Sir did what or him; beneath be would situation No
East? the to out sent be boy a could how or Woolwich?

kindness. and peace re-established It unproductive. not was letter The
dispatched Bertram Lady professions, and advice friendly sent Thomas Sir
letters. the wrote Norris Mrs. and baby-linen, and money

more a twelvemonth a within and effects, immediate its were Such
was Norris Mrs. it. from resulted Price Mrs. to advantage important
and sister poor her get not could she that others the to observing often
her, for done all had they as much that, and head, her of out family her
but not could she length at and more; do to wanting be to seemed she
the from relieved be should Price Mrs. poor that wish her be to it own
“What number. great her of out entirely child one of expense and charge
daughter, eldest her of care the undertake to them among were they if
her than attention more require to age an of old, years nine now girl a
them to it of expense and trouble The give? possibly could mother poor
Lady action.” the of benevolence the with compared nothing, be would
said better,” do cannot we think “I instantly. her with agreed Bertram
child.” the for send us “let she;

He consent. a unqualified and instantaneous so give not could Thomas Sir
up brought so girl charge;--a serious a was hesitated;--it and debated
instead cruelty be would there or for, provided adequately be must
four own his of thought He family. her from her taking in kindness of
sooner no etc.;--but love, in cousins of sons, two his of children,
Norris Mrs. than objections, his state to begun deliberately he had
not. or stated whether all, them to reply a with him interrupted

the to justice do and you, comprehend perfectly I Thomas, Sir dear “My
a of quite are indeed which notions, your of delicacy and generosity
in you with agree entirely I and conduct; general your with piece
of way by could one everything doing of propriety the to as main the
hands; own one’s into taken manner a in had one child a for providing
my withhold to world the in person last the be should I sure am I and
I should who own, my of children no Having occasion. an such upon mite
children the but bestow, to have ever may I matter little any in to look
am I know you just--but too is Norris Mr. sure am I sisters?--and my of
from frightened be us let not Do professions. and words few of woman a
introduce and education, an girl a Give trifle. a by deed good a
of means the has she but one to ten and world, the into properly her
Sir ours, of niece A anybody. to expense farther without well, settling
this in up grow not would _yours_, of least at or say, may I Thomas,
so be would she say don’t I advantages. many without neighbourhood
be would she but not; would she say dare I cousins. her as handsome
favourable very such under country this of society the into introduced
creditable a her get would probability, human all in as, circumstances
that, know you not do sons--but your of thinking are You establishment.
brought happen, to likely least the is _that_ earth, upon things all of
is It sisters? and brothers like together always be, would they as up
the fact, in is, It it. of instance an knew never I impossible. morally
pretty a her Suppose connexion. the against providing of way sure only
hence, years seven time first the for Edmund or Tom by seen and girl,
been having her of idea very The mischief. be would there say dare I and
neglect, and poverty in all us from distance a at up grow to suffered
love in boys sweet-tempered dear, the of either make to enough be would
her suppose and time, this from them with up her breed But her. with
to more be never will she and angel, an of beauty the have to even
sister.” a than either

Thomas, Sir replied say,” you what in truth of deal great a is “There
a of way the in impediment fanciful any throw to me from it be far “and
each. of situations relative the with consistent so be would which plan
in, engaged lightly be to not ought it that observe to meant only I
to creditable and Price, Mrs. to serviceable really it make to that and
to engaged ourselves consider or child, the to secure must we ourselves,
of provision the arise, may circumstances as hereafter, her to secure
so are you as offer should establishment such no if gentlewoman, a
expecting.” in sanguine

everything are “you Norris, Mrs. cried you,” understand thoroughly “I
disagree never shall we sure am I and considerate, and generous is that
ready always am I know, well you as do, can I Whatever point. this on
never could I though and, love; I those of good the for do to enough
your bear I regard the of part hundredth the girl little this for feel
own, my much so respect, any in her, consider nor children, dear own
a she not Is her. neglecting of capable were I if myself hate should I
of bit a had I while want her see to bear I could and child? sister’s
warm a have I faults my all with Thomas, Sir dear My her? give to bread
of necessaries the myself deny rather would am, I as poor and, heart;
will I it, against not are you if So, thing. ungenerous an do than life
soon as and, proposal; the make and tomorrow, sister poor my to write
Mansfield; to child the get to engage will _I_ settled, are matters as
never I know, you trouble, own My it. about trouble no have shall _you_
bed a have may she and purpose, on London to Nanny send will I regard.
her meet to appointed be child the and saddler’s, the cousin her at
coach, the by town to Portsmouth from her get easily may They there.
I going. be to chance may that person creditable any of care the under
going other or wife tradesman’s reputable some always is there say dare
up.”

any made longer no Thomas Sir cousin, Nanny’s on attack the to Except
rendezvous economical less though respectable, more a and objection,
settled, as considered was everything substituted, accordingly being
The enjoyed. already were scheme a benevolent so of pleasures the and
to justice, strict in not, ought sensations gratifying of division
and real the be to resolved fully was Thomas Sir for equal; been have
the not had Norris Mrs. and child, selected the of patron consistent
maintenance. her in whatever expense any at being of intention least
thoroughly was she reached, contriving and talking, walking, as far As
others; to liberality dictate to how better knew nobody and benevolent,
knew she and directing, of love her to equal was money of love her but
friends. her of that spend to as own her save to how well as quite
look to used been had she than income narrower a on married Having
of line strict very a fancied first, the from had, she to, forward
grew soon prudence, of matter a as begun was what and necessary; economy
which solicitude needful that of object an as choice, of matter a into
provide to family a been there Had supply. to children no were there
care no having but money; her saved have never might Norris Mrs. for,
the lessen or frugality, her impede to nothing was there kind, that of
never had they which income an to addition yearly a making of comfort
real no by counteracted principle, infatuating this Under to. up lived
than more at aim to her for impossible was it sister, her for affection
though charity; a expensive so arranging and projecting of credit the
the to home walk to as herself know little so might she perhaps
the being of belief happy the in conversation, this after Parsonage,
world. the in aunt and sister liberal-minded most

fully more were views her again, forward brought was subject the When
shall “Where of inquiry calm Bertram’s Lady to reply in and, explained;
with heard Thomas Sir us?” to or you to sister, first, to come child the
to power Norris’s Mrs. of out totally be would it that surprise some
considering been had He her. of charge personal the in share any take
desirable a as Parsonage, the at addition welcome particularly a as her
found he but own; her of children no had who aunt an to companion
little the that say to sorry was Norris Mrs. mistaken. wholly himself
of out quite was were, then things as least at them, with staying girl’s
an it made health of state indifferent Norris’s Mr. Poor question. the
could he than child a of noise the bear more no could he impossibility:
it complaints, gouty his of well get ever should he indeed, if, fly;
turn, her take to glad be then should she matter: different a be would
Norris Mr. poor now, just but inconvenience; the of nothing think and
thing a such of mention very the and time, her of moment every up took
him. distract would sure was she

utmost the with Bertram, Lady said us,” to come better had she “Then
let “Yes, dignity, with added Thomas Sir pause short a After composure.
and her, by duty our do to endeavour will We house. this in be home her
and age, own her of companions of advantage the have least, at will, she
instructress.” regular a of

important very both are “which Norris, Mrs. cried true,” “Very
has she whether Lee Miss to same the just be will it and considerations;
only I difference. no be can two--there only or teach, to girls three
not am I power. my in all do I see you but useful; more be could I wish
her, fetch shall Nanny and trouble; own their spare that those of one
away counsellor chief my have to inconvenience to me put may it however
little the in child the put will you sister, suppose, I days. three for
place best the much be will It nurseries. old the near attic, white
the by close and girls, the from far not and Lee, Miss near so her, for
and know, you her, dress to help them of either could who housemaids,
to fair it think not would you suppose I for clothes, her of care take
see not do I Indeed, others. the as well as her on wait to Ellis expect
else.” anywhere her place possibly could you that

opposition. no made Bertram Lady

Norris, Mrs. continued girl,” well-disposed a prove will she hope “I
friends.” such having in fortune good uncommon her of sensible be “and

not, must “we Thomas, Sir said bad,” really be disposition her “Should
is there but family; the in her continue sake, children’s own our for
wish to much see probably shall We evil. an great so expect to reason no
some ignorance, gross for ourselves prepare must and her, in altered
but manner; of vulgarity distressing very and opinions, of meanness
for dangerous be they can trust, I nor, faults; incurable not are these
should I herself, than _younger_ been daughters my Had associates. her
very of matter a as companion a such of introduction the considered have
for fear to nothing be can there hope I is, it as but, moment; serious
association.” the from _her_, for hope to everything and _them_,

was I what “and Norris, Mrs. cried think,” I what exactly is “That
the for education an be will It morning. this husband my to saying
her taught Lee Miss if cousins; her with being only I, said child,
_them_.” from clever and good be to learn would she nothing,

but have “I Bertram; Lady said pug,” poor my tease not will she hope “I
alone.” it leave to Julia got just

Sir observed Norris,” Mrs. way, our in difficulty some be will “There
girls the between made be to proper distinction the to “as Thomas,
the _daughters_ my of minds the in preserve to how up: grow they as
of lowly too think them making without are, they what of consciousness
make to far, too spirits her depressing without how, and cousin; their
them see to wish should I Bertram_. _Miss a not is she that remember her
the girls my in authorise account, no on would, and friends, good very
they still but relation; their towards arrogance of degree smallest
will expectations and rights, fortune, rank, Their equals. be cannot
must you and delicacy, great of point a is It different. be always
of line right the exactly choose to endeavours our in us assist
conduct.”

agreed perfectly she though and service; his at quite was Norris Mrs.
hope to him encouraged thing, difficult most a being its to as him with
managed. easily be would it them between that

sister her to write not did Norris Mrs. that believed readily be will It
be should girl a that surprised rather seemed Price Mrs. vain. in
most offer the accepted but boys, fine many so had she when on, fixed
well-disposed, very a being daughter’s her of them assuring thankfully,
throw to cause have never would they trusting and girl, good-humoured
was but puny, and delicate somewhat as farther her of spoke She off. her
air. of change for better materially being her of hope the in sanguine
of many with agree might air of change thought probably she woman! Poor
children. her



II CHAPTER

Northampton at and safety; in journey long her performed girl little The
foremost being of credit the in regaled thus who Norris, Mrs. by met was
others, the to in her leading of importance the in and her, welcome to
kindness. their to her recommending and

might there though and old, years ten just time this at was Price Fanny
least, at was, there captivate, to appearance first her in much be not
glow no with age, her of small was She relations. her disgust to nothing
shy, and timid exceedingly beauty; striking other any nor complexion, of
vulgar, not was awkward, though air, her but notice; from shrinking and
Sir pretty. was countenance her spoke she when and sweet, was voice her
Thomas, Sir and kindly; very her received Bertram Lady and Thomas
was that all be to tried encouragement, needed she much how seeing
of gravity untoward most a against work to had he but conciliating:
or trouble, much so half taking without Bertram, Lady and deportment;
good-humoured a of aid mere the by ten, spoke he where word one speaking
two. the of character awful less the immediately became smile,

the in share their sustained and home, at all were people young The
at embarrassment, no and humour, good much with well, very introduction
tall and sixteen, and seventeen at who, sons, the of part the on least
little their of eyes the in men of grandeur the all had age, their of
in and younger being from loss a at more were girls two The cousin.
with occasion the on them addressed who father, their of awe greater
to used much too were they But particularity. injudicious an rather
their and shyness; natural like anything have to praise and company
were they it, of want total cousin’s their from increasing confidence
easy in frock her and face her of survey full a take to able soon
indifference.

the well-looking, very sons the family, fine remarkably a were They
of forward and well-grown them of all and handsome, decidedly daughters
cousins the between difference a striking as produced which age, their
would one no and address; their to given had education as person, in
There were. really they as age an of nearly so girls the supposed have
Julia Fanny. and youngest the between years two but fact in were
visitor little The older. year a but Maria and twelve, only was Bertram
of ashamed everybody, of Afraid possible. as unhappy as was meanwhile
look to how not knew she left, had she home the for longing and herself,
Norris Mrs. crying. without or heard, be to speak scarcely could and up,
wonderful her of Northampton from way whole the her to talking been had
good and gratitude of degree extraordinary the and fortune, good
was misery of consciousness her and produce, to ought it which behaviour
her for thing wicked a being its of idea the by increased therefore
no soon became journey, a long so of too, fatigue, The happy. be to not
Thomas, Sir of condescensions well-meant the were vain In evil. trifling
be would she that Norris Mrs. of prognostications officious the all and
sofa the on sit her make and smile Bertram Lady did vain in girl; good a
tart gooseberry a of sight the even was vain and pug, and herself with
mouthfuls two swallow scarcely could she comfort; her giving towards
likeliest her be to seeming sleep and her, interrupted tears before
bed. in sorrows her finish to taken was she friend,

Fanny when Norris, Mrs. said beginning,” promising very a not is “This
I along, came we as her to said I that all “After room. the left had
depend might much how her told I better; behaved have would she thought
a be not may there wish I first. at well herself acquitting her upon
must we but deal; good a had mother poor temper--her of sulkiness little
sorry being her that know not do I child--and a such for allowances make
faults, its all with for, her, against really is home her leave to
has she much how understand yet as cannot she and home, her _was_ it
things.” all in moderation is there then but better; the for changed

to inclined was Norris Mrs. than however, time, longer a required It
the and Park, Mansfield of novelty the to Fanny reconcile to allow,
very were feelings Her to. used been had she everybody from separation
Nobody to. attended properly be to understood little too and acute,
secure to way their of out themselves put nobody but unkind, be to meant
comfort. her

to purpose on day, next the Bertrams Miss the to allowed holiday The
young their entertaining and with, acquainted getting for leisure afford
on cheap her hold but not could They union. little produced cousin,
and French; learned never had and sashes, two but had she that finding
so were they duet the with struck little be to her perceived they when
present generous a her make than more no do could they play, to as good
while herself, to her leave and toys, valued least their of some of
the of sport holiday favourite the be might whatever to adjourned they
paper. gold wasting or flowers artificial making moment,

the schoolroom, the in whether cousins, her from or near whether Fanny,
something finding forlorn, equally was shrubbery, the or drawing-room,
Lady by disheartened was She place. and person every in fear to
overcome quite and looks, grave Thomas’s Sir by awed silence, Bertram’s
by her mortified cousins elder Her admonitions. Norris’s Mrs. by
Miss shyness: her noticing by her abashed and size, her on reflections
her at sneered maid-servants the and ignorance, her at wondered Lee
brothers the of idea the added was sorrows these to when and clothes;
playfellow, as important been always had she whom among sisters and
was heart little her sunk that despondence the nurse, and instructress,
severe.

The her. console not could but astonished, house the of grandeur The
touched she whatever ease: with in move to her for large too were rooms
of terror constant in about crept she and injure, to expected she
and cry; to chamber own her towards retreating often other; or something
it left she when drawing-room the in of spoken was who girl little the
fortune, good peculiar her of sensible desirably so seeming as night at
had week A sleep. to herself sobbing by sorrows day’s every ended
quiet her by conveyed it of suspicion no and way, this in passed
the Edmund, cousin her by morning one found was she when manner, passive
stairs. attic the on crying sitting sons, the of youngest

an of gentleness the all with he, said cousin,” little dear “My
her, by down sitting And matter?” the be can “what nature, excellent
and surprised, so being in shame her overcome to pains great at was he
with angry anybody was or ill? she Was openly. speak to her persuade
puzzled she was or Julia? and Maria with quarrelled she had or her?
short, in she, Did explain? could he that lesson her in anything about
while long a For her? for do or her, get possibly could he anything want
thank all--no, at no--not “no, a beyond obtained be could answer no
revert to begun he had sooner no and persevered; still he but you”;
the where him to explained sobs increased her than home, own her to
her. console to tried He lay. grievance

“which he, said Fanny,” little dear my Mama, leave to sorry are “You
are you that remember must you but girl; good very a be to you shows
you make to wish and you, love all who friends, and relations with
your about all me tell shall you and park, the in out walk us Let happy.
sisters.” and brothers

and brothers these all as dear that, found he subject, the pursuing On
her in more ran who them among one was there were, generally sisters
and most, of talked she whom William was It rest. the than thoughts
her herself, than older year a eldest, the William, see. to most wanted
whom (of mother her with advocate her friend; and companion constant
should she like not did “William distress. every in darling) the was he
“But indeed.” much very her miss should he her told had he away; come
would, he promised had he “Yes, say.” dare I you, to write will William
She it?” do you shall when “And first.” write to _her_ told had he but
not had she know; not did “she hesitatingly, answered and head her hung
paper.” any

every and paper with you furnish will I difficulty, your all be that “If
Would choose. you whenever letter your write may you and material, other
William?” to write to happy you make it

very.” “Yes,

shall we breakfast-room, the into me with Come now. done be it let “Then
ourselves.” to room the having of sure be and there, everything find

post?” the to go it will cousin, “But,

and, letters; other the with go shall it shall: it me upon depend “Yes,
nothing.” William cost will it it, frank will uncle your as

look. frightened a with Fanny, repeated uncle!” “My

to father my to it take will I letter, the written have you when “Yes,
frank.”

and resistance; further no offered but measure, bold a it thought Fanny
her prepared Edmund where breakfast-room, the into together went they
brother her that goodwill the all with lines her ruled and paper,
He exactness. more somewhat with probably and felt, have himself could
his with her assist to writing, her of time whole the her with continued
these to added and wanted; were either as orthography, his or penknife
which brother her to kindness a much, very felt she which attentions,
his hand own his with wrote He rest. the all beyond her delighted
seal. the under guinea a half him sent and William, cousin his to love
herself believed she as such were occasion the on feelings Fanny’s
words artless few a and countenance her but expressing; of incapable
began cousin her and delight, and gratitude their all conveyed fully
all from and, more, her to talked He object. interesting an her find to
and heart, affectionate an having her of convinced was said, she that
farther be to her perceive could he and right; doing of desire strong a
great and situation, her of sensibility great by attention to entitled
that felt now he but pain, her given knowingly never had He timidity.
endeavoured, view that with and kindness; positive more required she
her gave and all, them of fears her lessen to place, first the in
and Maria with playing to as advice good of deal great a especially
possible. as merry as being and Julia,

a had she that felt She comfortable. more grew Fanny day this From
spirits better her gave Edmund cousin her of kindness the and friend,
less people the and strange, less became place The else. everybody with
cease not could she whom them amongst some were there if and formidable;
best the catch to and ways, their know to least at began she fear, to
awkwardnesses and rusticities little The them. to conforming of manner
all, of tranquillity the on inroads grievous made first at had which
longer no was she and away, wore necessarily herself, of least not and
Norris’s aunt her did nor uncle, her before appear to afraid materially
occasionally became she cousins her To much. very start her make voice
and age of inferiority from unworthy, Though companion. acceptable an
schemes and pleasures their associate, constant their be to strength,
when especially useful, very third a make to nature a of sometimes were
but not could they and temper; yielding obliging, an of was third that
Edmund brother their or faults, her into inquired aunt their when own,
good-natured was “Fanny that kindness, their to claims her urged
enough.”

endure to worse nothing had she and himself; kind uniformly was Edmund
of man young a which merriment of sort that than Tom of part the on
just was He ten. of child a with fair think always will seventeen
liberal the all with and spirits, of full life, into entering
and expense for only born feels who son, eldest an of dispositions
his with consistent was cousin little his to kindness His enjoyment.
laughed and presents, pretty very some her made he rights: and situation
her. at

Norris Mrs. and Thomas Sir improved, spirits and appearance her As
it and plan; benevolent their of satisfaction greater with thought
she clever, from far though that, them between decided soon pretty was
little them give to likely seemed and disposition, tractable a showed
_them_. to confined not was abilities her of opinion mean A trouble.
more; nothing taught been had she but write, and work, read, could Fanny
had they which with things many of ignorant her found cousins her as and
the for and stupid, prodigiously her thought they familiar, long been
of report fresh some bringing continually were weeks three or two first
cannot cousin my think, only mama, “Dear drawing-room. the into it
principal the tell cannot cousin my together--or Europe of map the put
does she Minor--or Asia of heard never she Russia--or, in rivers
crayons!--How and water-colours between difference the know not
stupid?” so anything hear ever you strange!--Did

but bad, very is “it reply, would aunt considerate their dear,” “My
as learning at quick and forward as be to everybody expect not must you
yourself.”

her asked we know, you ignorant!--Do very so really is she aunt, “But,
she said, she and Ireland; to get to go would she way which night last
of Isle the but nothing of thinks She Wight. of Isle the to cross should
island other no were there if as _Island_, _the_ it calls she and Wight,
had I if myself, of ashamed been have should I sure am I world. the in
remember cannot I is. she as old so was I before long better known not
least the not has she that deal great a know not did I when time the
the repeat to used we since aunt, is, it ago long How yet. of notion
their of dates the with England, of kings the of order chronological
reigns!” their of events principal the of most and accession,

Severus; as low as emperors Roman the of “and other; the added “Yes,”
metals, the all and mythology, heathen the of deal great a besides
philosophers.” distinguished and planets, semi-metals,

wonderful with blessed are you but dears, my indeed, true “Very
a is There all. at none probably has cousin poor your and memories,
else, everything in as well as memories, in difference of deal vast
her pity and cousin, your for allowance make must you therefore and
clever and forward so ever are you if that, remember And deficiency.
already, know you as much for, modest; be always should you yourselves,
learn.” to you for more deal great a is there

another you tell must I But seventeen. am I till is, there know I “Yes,
not does she says she know, you Do stupid. so and odd so Fanny, of thing
drawing.” or music either learn to want

great a shows and indeed, stupid very is that dear, my sure, be “To
know not do I considered, things all But, emulation. and genius of want
know you though for, so, be should it that well as not is it whether
with up her bring to as good so are mama and papa your me) to (owing
as accomplished as be should she that necessary all at not is it you,
should there that desirable more much is it contrary, the are;--on you
difference.” a be

nieces’ her form to assisted Norris Mrs. which by counsels the were Such
promising their all with that, wonderful very not is it and minds;
the in deficient entirely be should they information, early and talents
In humility. and generosity self-knowledge, of acquirements common less
did Thomas Sir taught. admirably were they disposition but everything
he father, anxious truly a though because, wanting, was what know not
repressed manner his of reserve the and affectionate, outwardly not was
him. before spirits their of flow the all

smallest the not paid Bertram Lady daughters her of education the To
spent who woman a was She cares. such for time not had She attention.
of piece long some doing sofa, a on dressed, nicely sitting, in days her
than pug her of more thinking beauty, no and use little of needlework,
put not did it when latter the to indulgent very but children, her
Thomas, Sir by important everything in guided inconvenience, to herself
leisure greater possessed she Had sister. her by concerns smaller in and
it supposed have probably would she girls, her of service the for
proper with governess, a of care the under were they for unnecessary,
at stupid being Fanny’s for As more. nothing want could and masters,
people some but unlucky, very was it say only could “she learning,
what know not did she pains: more take must Fanny and stupid, _were_
saw she add must she dull, so being her except and, done; be to was else
and handy very her found always and thing, little poor the in harm no
wanted.” she what fetching and messages, carrying in quick

at fixed was timidity, and ignorance of faults her all with Fanny,
her of much favour its in transfer to learning and Park, Mansfield
her among unhappily not there up grew home, former her to attachment
though and Julia; or Maria in ill-nature positive no was There cousins.
too thought she her, of treatment their by mortified often was Fanny
it. by injured feel to claims own her of lowly

in Bertram, Lady family, the entering her of time the about From
gave indolence, of deal great a and ill-health, little a of consequence
spring, every occupy to used been had she which town, in house the up
his attend to Thomas Sir leaving country, the in wholly remained and
comfort of diminution or increase whatever with Parliament, in duty
Miss the therefore, country, the In absence. her from arise might
duets, their practise memories, their exercise to continued Bertrams
person, in becoming them saw father their and womanly: and tall grow and
anxiety. his satisfy could that everything accomplishments, and manner,
him given already had and extravagant, and careless was son eldest His
good. but nothing him promised children other his but uneasiness; much
must Bertram, of name the retained they while felt, he daughters, His
extend would trusted, he it, quitting in and grace, new it giving be
good strong his Edmund, of character the and alliances; respectable its
and honour, utility, for fairly most bid mind, of uprightness and sense
clergyman. a be to was He connexions. his all and himself to happiness

suggested, children own his which complacency the and cares the Amid
Mrs. of children the for could he what do to forget not did Thomas Sir
her of disposal and education the in liberally her assisted he Price:
Fanny, and pursuit; determinate a for enough old became they as sons
the of sensible was family, her from separated totally almost though
of or them, towards kindness any of hearing in satisfaction truest
once and Once, conduct. or situation their in promising all at anything
with being of happiness the she had years, many of course the in only,
ever her of think to seemed nobody nothing: saw she rest the Of William.
to seemed home at nobody visit, a for even again, them amongst going
a be to removal, her after soon determining, William but her; want
Northamptonshire in sister his with week a spend to invited was sailor,
exquisite their meeting, in affection eager Their sea. to went he before
of moments and mirth, happy of hours their together, being in delight
and views sanguine the as well as imagined; be may conference, serious
he when girl the of misery the and last, the to even boy the of spirits
she when holidays, Christmas the in happened visit the Luckily her. left
her told he and Edmund; cousin her to comfort for look directly could
in hereafter, be and do, to was William what of things charming such
the that admit gradually her made as profession, his of consequence
her: failed never friendship Edmund’s use. some have might separation
and dispositions, kind his in change no made Oxford for Eton leaving his
any Without them. proving of opportunities frequent more afforded only
much, too doing of fear any or rest, the than more doing of display
feelings, her of considerate and interests, her to true always was he
the conquer to and understood, qualities good her make to trying
advice, her giving apparent; more being their prevented which diffidence
encouragement. and consolation,

not could support single his else, everybody by was she as back Kept
highest the of otherwise were attentions his but forward; her bring
its extending and mind, her of improvement the assisting in importance
apprehension quick a have to clever, be to her knew He pleasures.
properly which, reading, for fondness a and sense, good as well as
French, her taught Lee Miss itself. in education an be must directed,
recommended he but history; of portion daily the read her heard and
and taste, her encouraged he hours, leisure her charmed which books the
what of her to talking by useful reading made he judgment: her corrected
return In praise. judicious by attraction its heightened and read, she
except world the in anybody than better him loved she services such for
two. the between divided was heart her William:



III CHAPTER

Mr. of death the was family the in importance any of event first The
necessarily and fifteen, about was Fanny when happened which Norris,
the quitting on Norris, Mrs. novelties. and alterations introduced
house small a to afterwards and Park, the to first removed Parsonage,
her of loss the for herself consoled and village, the in Thomas’s Sir of
for and him; without well very do could she that considering by husband
economy. stricter of necessity evident the by income of reduction her

years few a died uncle his had and, Edmund; for hereafter was living The
he till hold to friend some to given duly been have would it sooner,
to previous had, extravagance Tom’s But orders. for enough old were
next the of disposal different a render to as great so been event, that
the for pay to help must brother younger the and necessary, presentation
held actually living family another was There elder. the of pleasures
arrangement the made had circumstance this though but Edmund; for
to it feel but not could he conscience, Thomas’s Sir to easier somewhat
son eldest his impress to tried earnestly he and injustice, of act an be
effect better a producing its of hope the in conviction, same the with
do. or say to able been yet had he anything than

blush “I manner; dignified most his in he, said Tom,” you, for blush “I
your pity may I trust I and on, driven am I which expedient the for
ten, for Edmund robbed have You occasion. the on brother a as feelings
income the half than more of life, for perhaps years, thirty twenty,
yours in or power, my in be hereafter may It his. be to ought which
not must it but preferment; better him procure to will), it hope (I
his beyond been have would sort that of benefit no that forgotten be
equivalent an be fact, in can, nothing that and us, on claims natural
the through forego to obliged now is he which advantage certain the for
debts.” your of urgency

as quickly as escaping but sorrow; some and shame some with listened Tom
he that firstly, reflect, selfishness cheerful with soon could possible,
that secondly, friends; his of some as debt in much so half been not had
and, it; of work of piece tiresome most a made had father his
all in would, be, might he whoever incumbent, future the that thirdly,
soon. very die probability,

Grant, Dr. a of right the became presentation the death Norris’s Mr. On
a be to proving on and Mansfield; at reside to consequently came who
Bertram’s Mr. disappoint to likely seemed forty-five, of man hearty
fellow, of sort apoplectic short-necked, a was he “no, But calculations.
off.” pop soon would things, good with well plied and,

and children; no but junior, his years fifteen about wife a had He
very being of report fair usual the with neighbourhood the entered they
people. agreeable respectable,

to sister-in-law his expected Thomas Sir when come now was time The
situation, Norris’s Mrs. in change the niece, their in share her claim
any away do to merely not seeming age, Fanny’s in improvement the and
most the it give to even but together, living their to objection former
less rendered were circumstances own his as and eligibility; decided
in estate, India West his on losses recent some by heretofore, than fair
undesirable not became it extravagance, son’s eldest his to addition
the and support, her of expense the from relieved be to himself to
that belief his of fullness the In provision. future her of obligation
the and wife; his to probability its mentioned he be, must thing a such
when be to happening again her to occurring subject’s the of time first
going are you Fanny, “So, her, to observed calmly she present, was Fanny
it?” like you shall How sister. my with live and us, leave to

words, aunt’s her repeat than more do to surprised much too was Fanny
you?” leave to “Going

years five been have You astonished? be you should why dear; my “Yes,
died. Norris Mr. when you take to meant always sister my and us, with
same.” the all patterns my on tack and up come must you But

had She unexpected. been had it as Fanny to disagreeable as was news The
her. love not could and Norris, aunt her from kindness received never

voice. faltering a with she, said away,” go to sorry very be shall “I

have you suppose I enough. natural _that’s_ will; you say dare I “Yes,
creature any as house this into came you since you vex to little as had
world.” the in

modestly. Fanny said aunt,” ungrateful, not am I hope “I

girl.” good very a you found always have I not. hope I dear; my “No,

again?” here live to never I am “And

make can It home. comfortable a of sure are you but dear; my “Never,
the or house one in are you whether you, to difference little very
other.”

the feel not could she heart; sorrowful very a with room the left Fanny
aunt her with living of think not could she small, so be to difference
told she Edmund with met she as soon As satisfaction. like anything with
distress. her him

like not do I which happen to going is “something she, said “Cousin,”
to reconciled being into me persuaded often have you though and all; at
am I now. it do to able be not will you first, at disliked I that things
Norris.” aunt my with entirely live to going

“Indeed!”

to am I settled. quite is It so. me told just has Bertram aunt my “Yes;
as soon as suppose, I House, White the to go and Park, Mansfield leave
there.” removed is she

call should I you, to unpleasant not were plan the if and Fanny, “Well,
one.” excellent an it

cousin!” “Oh,

sensible a like acting is aunt My favour. its in else everything has “It
exactly companion and friend a choosing is She you. for wishing in woman
interfere. not does money of love her glad am I and ought, she where
you distress not does it hope I her. to be to ought you what be will You
Fanny?” much, very

in everything and house this love I it. like cannot I does: it “Indeed
with feel I uncomfortable how know You there. nothing love shall I it:
her.”

the was it but child; a as you to manner her for nothing say can “I
to pleasant be to how knew never She so. nearly or all, us with same
is she think I better; treated be to age an of now are you But children.
_must_ you companion, only her are you when and already; better behaving
her.” to important be

one.” any to important be never can “I

you?” prevent to is “What

awkwardness.” and foolishness my situation, My “Everything.

you me, believe Fanny, dear my awkwardness, and foolishness your to “As
improperly. so words the using in but either, of shadow a have never
where important be not should you why world the in reason no is There
sure am I and temper, sweet a and sense, good have You known. are you
without kindness receive never could that heart, grateful a have you
a for qualifications better any know not do I it. return to wishing
companion.” and friend

I shall “how praise; such at colouring Fanny, said kind,” too are “You
I if cousin, Oh! me. of well so thinking for ought, I as you thank ever
my of moment last the to goodness your remember shall I away, go to am
life.”

distance a such at remembered be to hope should I Fanny, indeed, “Why,
miles hundred two going were you if as speak You House. White the as
almost us to belong will you but park; the across only of instead off
the in day every meeting be will families two The ever. as much as
will you aunt, your with living that, be will difference only The year.
are there _Here_ be. to ought you as forward brought be necessarily
to forced be will you _her_ with but behind; hide can you whom many too
yourself.” for speak

so.” say not do I “Oh!

better much is Norris Mrs. pleasure. with it say and it, say must “I
a of is She now. you of charge the having for mother my than fitted
herself interests really she anybody for deal great a do to temper
powers.” natural your to justice do to you force will she and about,

to ought I but do; you as things see cannot “I said, and sighed, Fanny
obliged much very am I and myself, than rather right be to you believe
suppose could I If be. must what to me reconcile to trying for you to
of myself feel to delightful be would it me, for care to really aunt my
the love I yet and none, of am I know, I _Here_, anybody. to consequence
well.” so place

house. the quit you though quit, not will you what is Fanny, place, “The
Even ever. as gardens and park the of command a free as have will You
nominal a such at fright take not need heart little constant _your_
to library same the frequent, to walks same the have will You change.
ride.” to horse same the at, look to people same the from, choose

how remember I when cousin, Ah! pony! grey old dear Yes, true. “Very
talked it hear to me gave it terrors what riding, dread to used I much
uncle’s my at trembled have I how (oh! good me do to likely as of
kind the of think then and of), talked were horses if lips his opening
convince and fears, my of out me persuade and reason to took you pains
you right how feel and while, little a after it like should I that me
well.” as prophesy always may you hope to inclined am I be, to proved

as be will Norris Mrs. with being your that convinced quite am I “And
for much as and health, your for been has riding as mind your for good
too.” happiness ultimate your

it service appropriate very any for which, discourse, their ended So
had Norris Mrs. for spared, been have well as might Fanny, render could
her, to occurred never had It her. taking of intention smallest the not
To avoided. carefully be to thing a as but occasion, present the on
habitation smallest the on fixed had she expected, being its prevent
parish, Mansfield of buildings the among genteel as rank could which
her and herself receive to enough large just only being House White the
a made she which of friend, a for room spare a allow and servants,
been never had Parsonage the at rooms spare The point. particular very
now was friend a for room spare a of necessity absolute the but wanted,
from her save could however, precautions, her all Not forgotten. never
of display very her perhaps, or, better; something of suspected being
suppose to Thomas Sir misled have might room spare a of importance the
a to matter the brought soon Bertram Lady Fanny. for intended really it
Norris-- Mrs. to observing carelessly by certainty

goes Fanny when longer, any Lee Miss keep not need we sister, think, “I
you.” with live to

do what Bertram! Lady dear me, with “Live started. almost Norris Mrs.
mean?” you

Sir with it settled had you thought I you? with live to not she “Is
Thomas.”

to he nor Thomas, Sir to it about syllable a spoke never I never. “Me!
think to me for world the in thing last the me! with live Fanny me.
what heaven! Good both. us knows really that wish to anybody for or of,
for unfit widow, forlorn helpless, poor, a Me! Fanny? with do I could
at girl a with do I could what down; broke quite spirits my anything,
need to others all of age very the fifteen! of girl A life? of time her
test! the to spirits cheerfullest the put and care, and attention most
is Thomas Sir thing! a such expect seriously not could Thomas Sir Sure
propose would sure, am I well, me wishes that Nobody friend. my much too
it?” about you to speak to Thomas Sir came How it.

best.” it thought he suppose I know. not do I “Indeed,

I Fanny. take to me _wished_ he say not could He say? he did what “But
it.” do to me wish not could he heart his in sure am

We too. so thought I and likely; very it thought he said only he “No;
it, like not do you if But you. to comfort a be would it thought both
here.” encumbrance no is She said. be to more no is there

any be she can how state, unhappy my consider you if sister, “Dear
of best the of deprived widow, desolate poor a I, am Here me? to comfort
still spirits my him, nursing and attending in gone health my husbands,
to enough hardly with destroyed, world this in peace my all worse,
not as so live to me enable and gentlewoman, a of rank the in me support
could comfort possible departed--what dear the of memory the disgrace to
for it wish could I If Fanny? as me upon charge a such taking in have I
She girl. poor the by thing a unjust so do not would I sake, own my
my through struggle must I well. doing of sure and hands, good in is
can.” I as difficulties and sorrows

alone?” quite yourself by living mind not will you “Then

done, have I as live cannot I know I complain. not do I Bertram, “Lady
I manager. better a be to learn and can, I where retrench must I but
ashamed be not shall I but enough, housekeeper liberal a _been_ _have_
income. my as altered much as is situation My now. economy practise to
the of clergyman as Norris, Mr. poor from due were things many great A
was much how unknown is It me. from expected be cannot that parish,
House, White the At goers. and comers odd by kitchen our in consumed
or income, my within live _must_ I after. looked better be must matters
to satisfaction great me give would it own I and miserable; be shall I
year.” the of end the at little a by lay to more, rather do to able be

you?” don’t do, always You will. you say dare “I

me. after come that those to use of be to is Bertram, Lady object, “My
nobody have I richer. be to wish I that good children’s your for is It
a leave could I think to glad very be should I but for, care to else
having.” their worth them among trifle little

are They them. about yourself trouble not do but good, very are “You
that.” of care take will Thomas Sir for. provided well being of sure

the if straitened rather be will means Thomas’s Sir know, you “Why,
returns.” poor such make to is estate Antigua

it, about writing been has Thomas Sir settled. be soon will _that_ “Oh!
know.” I

say only can “I go, to moving Norris, Mrs. said Bertram,” Lady “Well,
Sir if so, and family: your to use of be to is desire sole my that
able be will you Fanny, taking my about again speak ever should Thomas
question; the of out quite it put spirits and health my that say to
must I for her, give to bed a have not should really I that, besides
friend.” a for room spare a keep

to husband her to conversation this of enough repeated Bertram Lady
and views; sister-in-law’s his mistaken had he much how him convince
the or expectation, all from safe perfectly moment that from was she
her at wonder but not could He him. from it to allusion slightest
to forward so been had she whom niece a for anything do to refusing
Bertram, Lady as well as him, make to care early took she as but, adopt;
family, their for designed was possessed she whatever that understand
it that time same the at which, distinction a to reconciled grew soon he
to better him enable would them, to complimentary and advantageous was
himself. Fanny for provide

removal; a of fears her been had unnecessary how learnt soon Fanny
some conveyed discovery, the on felicity untaught spontaneous, her and
to expected had he what in disappointment his for Edmund to consolation
the of possession took Norris Mrs. her. to serviceable essentially so be
over, events these and Parsonage, the at arrived Grants the House, White
usual. as time some for on went Mansfield at everything

great gave sociable, and friendly be to disposition a showing Grants The
their had They acquaintance. new their among main the in satisfaction
of fond very was Doctor The out. them found soon Norris Mrs. and faults,
instead Grant, Mrs. and day; every dinner good a have would and eating,
high as cook her gave expense, little at him gratify to contriving of
her in seen ever scarcely was and Park, Mansfield at did they as wages
grievances, such of temper any with speak not could Norris Mrs. offices.
consumed regularly were that eggs and butter of quantity the of nor
herself; than more hospitality and plenty loved “Nobody house. the in
never had believed, she Parsonage, the doings; pitiful hated more nobody
character bad a borne never had sort, any of comforts in wanting been
not could she that on going of way a was this but _time_, _her_ in
place. of out quite was parsonage country a in lady fine A understand.
Mrs. for enough good been have might thought, she store-room, _Her_
that out find not could she would, she where Inquire into. go to Grant
pounds.” thousand five than more had ever had Grant Mrs.

invective. of sort this to interest much without listened Bertram Lady
all felt she but economist, an of wrongs the into enter not could She
life in settled well so being Grant’s Mrs. in beauty of injuries the
point that on astonishment her expressed and handsome, being without
the discussed Norris Mrs. as diffusely, so not though often, as almost
other.

event another before year a canvassed hardly been had opinions These
place some claim fairly might as family, the in importance such of arose
it found Thomas Sir ladies. the of conversation and thoughts the in
his of arrangement better the for himself, Antigua to go to expedient
detaching of hope the in him, with son eldest his took he and affairs,
the with England left They home. at connexions bad some from him
absent. twelvemonth a nearly being of probability

its of hope the and light, pecuniary a in measure the of necessity The
the quitting of effort the to Thomas Sir reconciled son, his to utility
of direction the to daughters his leaving of and family, his of rest
not could He life. of time interesting most present their at others
rather, or them, with place his supply to equal quite Bertram Lady think
watchful Norris’s Mrs. in but, own; her been have should what perform to
to confidence sufficient had he judgment, Edmund’s in and attention,
conduct. their for fears without go him make

she but her; leave husband her have to like all at not did Bertram Lady
his for solicitude or safety, his for alarm any by disturbed not was
dangerous, be can nothing think who persons those of one being comfort,
themselves. but anybody to fatiguing or difficult, or

their for not occasion: the on pitied be to much were Bertrams Miss The
to love of object no was father Their it. of want their for but sorrow,
absence his and pleasures, their of friend the seemed never had he them;
restraint; all from it by relieved were They welcome. most unhappily was
been have probably would that gratification one at aiming without and
their at immediately themselves felt they Thomas, Sir by forbidden
Fanny’s reach. their within indulgence every have to and disposal, own
cousins’; her to equal quite were it, of consciousness her and relief,
ungrateful, were feelings her that suggested nature tender more a but
who Thomas, “Sir grieve. not could she because grieved really she and
perhaps gone was who and brothers, her and her for much so done had
a was it tear! a without go him see should she that return! to never
last very the on moreover, her, to said had He insensibility.” shameful
the of course the in again William see might she hoped he that morning,
Mansfield to him invite and write to her charged had and winter, ensuing
be to known be should belonged he which to squadron the as soon as
have only he would and kind!” and thoughtful so was “This England. in
every it, said he while Fanny,” dear “my her called and her, upon smiled
ended had he But forgotten. been have might address cold or frown former
“If adding, by mortification, sad in her sink to way a in speech his
him convince to able be may you hope I Mansfield, to come does William
been not have parted you since passed have which years many the that
must he fear, I though, improvement; without entirely side your on spent
at sister his like much too respects some in sixteen at sister his find
was uncle her when reflection this over bitterly cried She ten.”
a as down her set eyes, red with her seeing on cousins, her and gone;
hypocrite.



IV CHAPTER

he that home at time his of little so spent late of had Bertram Tom
astonished soon was Bertram Lady and missed; nominally only be could
Edmund well how father, his without even did they well very how find to
to writing steward, the to talking carving, in place his supply could
her saving equally and servants, the with settling attorney, the
of that but particular every in exertion or fatigue possible all from
letters. her directing

Antigua, at arrival safe travellers’ the of intelligence earliest The
Norris Mrs. before not though received; was voyage, favourable a after
Edmund make to trying and fears, dreadful very in indulging been had
depended she as and alone; him get could she whenever them participate
catastrophe, fatal any with acquainted made person first the being on
others, the all to it breaking of manner the arranged already had she
it made well and alive being both their of assurances Thomas’s Sir when
speeches preparatory affectionate and agitation her by lay to necessary
while. a for

accounts the for; called being their without passed and came winter The
her for gaieties promoting in Norris, Mrs. and good; perfectly continued
accomplishments, their displaying toilets, their assisting nieces,
in as, do to much so had husbands, future their for about looking and
of those in interference some cares, household own her all to addition
very her left overlook, to doings wasteful Grant’s Mrs. and sister, her
absent. the for fears in occupied be to occasion little

the of belles the among established fully now were Bertrams Miss The
acquirements brilliant and beauty to joined they as and neighbourhood;
and civility general to formed carefully and easy, naturally manner a
Their admiration. its as well as favour its possessed they obligingness,
it, from free quite be to seemed they that order good such in was vanity
behaviour, such attending praises the while airs; no themselves gave and
in them strengthen to served aunt, their by round brought and secured
faults. no had they believing

too was She daughters. her with public into go not did Bertram Lady
their witnessing in gratification mother’s a accept to even indolent
the and trouble, personal any of expense the at enjoyment and success
a than better nothing desired who sister, her to over made was charge
relished thoroughly very and representation, honourable such of post
to horses having without society in mixing of her afforded it means the
hire.

enjoyed she but season; the of festivities the in share no had Fanny
the away called they when companion aunt’s her as useful avowedly being
naturally she Mansfield, left had Lee Miss as and, family; the of rest
party. a or ball a of night the during Bertram Lady to everything became
tranquillity the and her; to read her, to listened her, to talked She
any from _tete-a-tete_ a such in security perfect her evenings, such of
seldom had which mind a to welcome unspeakably was unkindness, of sound
cousins’ her to As embarrassments. or alarms its in pause a known
the of especially them, of account an hear to loved she gaieties,
her of lowly too thought but with; danced had Edmund whom and balls,
and same, the to admitted be ever should she imagine to situation own
Upon them. in concern nearer any of idea an without therefore, listened,
brought it though for her; to winter comfortable a was it whole, the
worth was arrival his of hope never-failing the England, to William no
much.

pony; grey old the friend, valued her of her deprived spring ensuing The
as health her in loss the feeling of danger in was she time some for and
importance acknowledged the of spite in for affections; her in as well
her mounting for taken were measures no horse-back, on riding her of
one ride might “she aunts, her by observed was it as “because,” again,
as and them,” want not did they when time any at horses cousin’s her of
had and day, fine every horses their wanted regularly Bertrams Miss the
real any of sacrifice the to manners obliging their carrying of idea no
cheerful their took They came. never course, of time, that pleasure,
at sat either Fanny and May; and April of mornings fine the in rides
at strength her beyond walked or aunt, one with day whole the home
as be to exercise holding Bertram Lady other: the of instigation the
Mrs. and herself; to unpleasant was it as everybody for unnecessary
walk to ought everybody thinking day, all walking was who Norris,
have would evil the or time, this at absent was Edmund much. as
was Fanny how understand to returned, he When remedied. earlier been
one but him with seemed there effects, ill its perceived and situated,
resolute the was horse” a have must “Fanny that and done; be to thing
the by urged be could whatever opposed he which with declaration
appear it make to aunt, his of economy the or mother, his of supineness
old steady some that thinking help not could Norris Mrs. unimportant.
would that Park the to belonging numbers the among found be might thing
that or steward; the of borrowed be might one that or well; vastly do
the to sent he pony the them lend then and now might Grant Dr. perhaps
even and unnecessary, absolutely as it consider but not could She post.
in own, her of horse lady’s regular a have should Fanny that improper,
it: intended never had Thomas Sir sure was She cousins. her of style the
and absence, his in purchase a such making be to that, say must she and
part large a when time a at stable, his of expenses great the to adding
“Fanny unjustifiable. very her to seemed unsettled, was income his of
see not could Norris Mrs. reply. only Edmund’s was horse,” a have must
son her with agreed entirely she did: Bertram Lady light. same the in it
by necessary considered being its to as and it, of necessity the to as
only she hurry; any being there against pleaded only she father; his
might Thomas Sir then and return, Thomas’s Sir till wait to him wanted
would where and September, in home at be would He himself. all it settle
September? till waiting only of harm the be

his with than aunt his with displeased more much was Edmund Though
paying help not could he niece, her for regard least evincing as mother,
of method a on determined length at and said; she what to attention more
he thinking father’s his of risk the obviate would which proceeding
immediate the Fanny for procure time same the at and much, too done had
had He without. be should she bear not could he which exercise, of means
Two woman. a carry would that one not but own, his of horses three
he third this road-horse: useful a third, the hunters; were them of
where knew he ride; might cousin his that one for exchange to resolved
the mind, his up made once having and with; met be to was one a such
with treasure; a proved mare new The completed. soon was business whole
purpose, the for calculated exactly became she trouble little very a
not had She her. of possession full almost in put then was Fanny and
grey old the like her suit ever could anything that before supposed
former any beyond far was mare Edmund’s in delight her but pony;
the in receiving ever was it addition the and sort; the of pleasure
was sprung, pleasure her which from kindness that of consideration
example an as cousin her regarded She express. to words her all beyond
but one no which worth possessing as great, and good everything of
from gratitude such to entitled as and appreciate, ever could herself
towards sentiments Her pay. to enough strong be could feelings no as her
and confiding, grateful, respectful, was that all of compounded were him
tender.

Edmund, of property the fact, as well as name, in continued horse the As
Lady had and use; Fanny’s for being its tolerate could Norris Mrs.
have might he again, objection own her about thought ever Bertram
in return Thomas’s Sir till waiting not for eyes her in excused been
and abroad, still was Thomas Sir came September when for September,
Unfavourable business. his finishing of prospect near any without
to beginning was he when moment a at arisen suddenly had circumstances
uncertainty great very the and England; towards thoughts his all turn
his home sending on him determined involved then was everything which in
safely, arrived Tom himself. by arrangement final the waiting and son,
little very to but health; father’s his of account excellent an bringing
away sending Thomas’s Sir concerned. was Norris Mrs. as far as purpose,
a of influence the under care, parent’s a like so her to seemed son his
dreadful feeling help not could she that himself, to evil of foreboding
so was on, came autumn of evenings long the as and presentiments;
cottage, her of solitariness sad the in ideas, these by haunted terribly
Park. the of dining-room the in refuge daily take to obliged be to as
effect; its without not was however, engagements, winter of return The
pleasantly so became mind her progress, their of course the in and
as niece, eldest her of fortunes the superintending in occupied
to never fated were Thomas Sir poor “If nerves. her quiet to tolerably
well Maria dear their see to consoling peculiarly be would it return,
company the in were they when always thought; often very she married,”
man young a of introduction the on particularly and fortune, of men of
finest and estates largest the of one to succeeded recently had who
country. the in places

Bertram, Miss of beauty the with struck first the from was Rushworth Mr.
was He love. in himself fancied soon marry, to inclined being and,
was there as but sense; common than more not with man, young heavy a
well was lady young the address, or figure his in disagreeable nothing
Maria year, twenty-first her in now Being conquest. her with pleased
with marriage a as and duty; a matrimony think to beginning was Bertram
her than income larger a of enjoyment the her give would Rushworth Mr.
prime a now was which town, in house the her ensure as well as father’s,
evident her obligation, moral of rule same the by became, it object,
zealous most was Norris Mrs. could. she if Rushworth Mr. marry to duty
to likely contrivance and suggestion every by match, the promoting in
by means, other among and, party; either to desirableness its enhance
lived present at who mother, gentleman’s the with intimacy an seeking
ten through go to Bertram Lady forced even she whom to and him, with
before long not was It visit. morning a pay to road indifferent of miles
Mrs. herself. and lady this between place took understanding good a
marry, should son her that desirous very herself acknowledged Rushworth
Miss seen, ever had she ladies young the all of that declared and
best the accomplishments, and qualities amiable her by seemed, Bertram
compliment, the accepted Norris Mrs. happy. him make to adapted
well so could which character of discernment nice the admired and
them of delight and pride the indeed was Maria merit. distinguish
by surrounded so course, of and, angel; faultless--an all--perfectly
Mrs. as far as yet, but choice: her in difficult be must admirers,
Mr. acquaintance, an short so on decide to herself allow could Norris
her. attach and deserve to man young the precisely appeared Rushworth

young the balls, of number proper a at other each with dancing After
reference due a with engagement, an and opinions, these justified people
satisfaction the to much into, entered was Thomas, Sir absent the to
the of lookers-on general the of and families, respective their of
Mr. of expediency the felt past, weeks many for had, who neighbourhood,
Bertram. Miss marrying Rushworth’s

but, received; be could consent Thomas’s Sir before months some was It
pleasure cordial most his of doubt a felt one no as meanwhile, the in
carried was families two the of intercourse the connexion, the in
Mrs. than secrecy at made attempt other no and restraint, without on
at of talked be to not matter a as everywhere it of talking Norris’s
present.

the in fault a see could who family the of one only the was Edmund
find to him induce could aunt’s his of representation no but business;
be to sister his allow could He companion. desirable a Rushworth Mr.
her that pleased not was he but happiness, own her of judge best the
from refrain he could nor income; large a in centre should happiness
had man this company--“If Rushworth’s Mr. in himself, to saying often
fellow.” stupid very a be would he year, a thousand twelve not

alliance an of prospect the in happy truly was however, Thomas, Sir
the but nothing heard he which of and advantageous, unquestionably so
right the of exactly connexion a was It agreeable. and good perfectly
hearty most his interest--and same the and county, same the sort--in
that conditioned only He possible. as soon as conveyed was concurrence
again was he which return, his before place take not should marriage the
hopes strong had and April, in wrote He to. forward eagerly looking
Antigua leaving and satisfaction, entire his to everything settling of
summer. the of end the before

just had Fanny and July; of month the in affairs of state the was Such
received village the of society the when year, eighteenth her reached
Miss and Mr. a Grant, Mrs. of sister and brother the in addition an
were They marriage. second a by mother her of children the Crawford,
the Norfolk, in estate good a had son The fortune. of people young
been had sister their children, As pounds. thousand twenty daughter
soon been had marriage own her as but, them; of fond very always
the to them left which parent, common their of death the by followed
she nothing, knew Grant Mrs. whom of father, their of brother a of care
a found had they house uncle’s their In since. them seen scarcely had
else, nothing in agreeing though Crawford, Mrs. and Admiral home. kind
no were least, at or, children, these for affection in united were
to favourite, their had each that than feelings their in adverse farther
delighted Admiral The two. the of fondness greatest the showed they whom
death lady’s the was it and girl; the on doted Crawford Mrs. boy, the in
at trial further months’ some after _protegee_, her obliged now which
of man a was Crawford Admiral home. another find to house, uncle’s her
his bring to niece, his retaining of instead chose, who conduct, vicious
her for indebted was Grant Mrs. this to and roof; own his under mistress
one on welcome as quite measure a her, to coming of proposal sister’s
by having Grant, Mrs. for other; the on expedient be could it as side
the in residing ladies of resources usual the through run time this
her filled than more children--having of family a without country
choice a made and furniture, pretty with sitting-room favourite
variety some of want in much very poultry--was and plants of collection
loved, always had she whom sister a of therefore, arrival, The home. at
was single, remained she as long as her with retain to hoped now and
not should Mansfield lest was anxiety chief her and agreeable; highly
London. to used mostly been had who woman young a of habits the satisfy

though apprehensions, similar from free entirely not was Crawford Miss
and living of style sister’s her of doubts from principally arose they
to vain in tried had she after till not was it and society; of tone
house, country own his at her with settle to brother her persuade
To relations. other her among herself hazard to resolve could she that
Henry society, of limitation or abode, of permanence a like anything
his accommodate not could he dislike: great a unluckily, had, Crawford
the with her, escorted he but importance; such of article an in sister
fetch to engaged readily as and Northamptonshire, into kindness, utmost
the of weary were she whenever notice, hour’s an half at again, away her
place.

a found Crawford Miss side. each on satisfactory very was meeting The
looked who husband sister’s a rusticity, or preciseness without sister
Grant Mrs. and up; fitted well and commodious house a and gentleman, the
man young a ever than better love to hoped she whom those in received
remarkably was Crawford Mary appearance. prepossessing very of woman and
manners the countenance; and air had handsome, not though Henry, pretty;
them gave immediately Grant Mrs. and pleasant, and lively were both of
was Mary but each, with delighted was She else. everything for credit
her of beauty in glory to able been never having and object; dearest her
sister’s. her of proud being of power the enjoyed thoroughly she own,
her: for match suitable a for out look to arrival her waited not had She
too not was baronet a of son eldest the Bertram; Tom on fixed had she
elegance the all with pounds, thousand twenty of girl a for good
a being and her; in foresaw Grant Mrs. which accomplishments and
the in hours three been not had Mary woman, unreserved warm-hearted,
planned. had she what her told she before house

near very so consequence such of family a find to glad was Crawford Miss
or care, early sister’s her at either displeased all at not and them,
she provided object, her was Matrimony on. fallen had it choice the
that knew she town, in Bertram Mr. seen having and well: marry could
in situation his to than person his to made be more no could objection
to forget not did she therefore, joke, a as it treated she While life.
Henry. to repeated soon was scheme The seriously. it of think

it make to something of thought have “I Grant, Mrs. added now,” “And
and country; this in both you settle to love dearly should I complete.
nice, a Bertram, Miss youngest the marry shall you Henry, therefore,
very you make will who girl, accomplished good-humoured, handsome,
happy.”

her. thanked and bowed Henry

anything into him persuade can you “if Mary, said sister,” dear “My
myself find to me to delight of matter fresh a be will it sort, the of
have you that regret only shall I and clever, so anybody to allied
Henry persuade can you If of. dispose to daughters dozen a half not
English that All Frenchwoman. a of address the have must you marry, to
particular very three have I already. tried been has do can abilities
pains the and turn; their in him for dying all been have who friends
aunt dear my as well as women), clever (very mothers their they, which
is marrying, into him trick or coax, reason, to taken have myself, and
If imagined. be can that flirt horrible most the is He inconceivable!
them let broke, hearts their have to like not do Bertrams Miss your
Henry.” avoid

you.” of this believe not will I brother, dear “My

You Mary. than kinder be will You good. too are you sure am I “No,
cautious a of am I inexperience. and youth of doubts the for allow will
can Nobody hurry. a in happiness my risk to unwilling and temper,
the consider I myself. than state matrimonial the of highly more think
of lines discreet those in described justly most as wife a of blessing
gift.’” best _last_ poet--‘Heaven’s the

look only and word, one on dwells he how see you Grant, Mrs. “There,
lessons Admiral’s the detestable; very is he you assure I smile. his at
him.” spoiled quite have

person young any what “to Grant, Mrs. said regard,” little very pay “I
for disinclination a profess they If marriage. of subject the on says
person.” right the seen yet not have they that down it set only I it,

no feeling on Crawford Miss congratulated laughingly Grant Dr.
herself. state the to disinclination

if marry everybody have would I it. of ashamed all at not am I yes! “Oh
themselves throw people have to like not do I properly: it do can they
to it do can they as soon as marry should everybody but away;
advantage.”



V CHAPTER

each On first. the from other each with pleased were people young The
as promised soon acquaintance their and attract, to much was there side
beauty Crawford’s Miss warrant. would manners good as intimacy an early
handsome too were They Bertrams. Miss the with disservice no her did
as almost were and too, so being for woman any dislike to themselves
brown clear eye, dark lively her with brothers their as charmed much
and formed, full tall, been she Had prettiness. general and complexion,
be could there was, it as but trial: a of more been have might it fair,
while girl, pretty sweet, a allowably most was she and comparison; no
country. the in women young finest the were they

was he him saw first they when no, handsome: not was brother Her
with gentleman, the was he still but plain; and black plain, absolutely
plain: very so not him proved meeting second The address. pleasing a
his and countenance, much so had he then but sure, be to plain, was he
was he forgot soon one that made, well so was he and good, so were teeth
at him with company in dining after interview, third a after and plain;
He anybody. by so called be to allowed longer no was he Parsonage, the
known, ever had sisters the man young agreeable most the fact, in was,
made engagement Bertram’s Miss him. with delighted equally were they and
and aware; fully was Julia which of Julia, of property the equity in him
fallen be to ready quite was she week, a Mansfield at been had he before
with. love in

She indistinct. and confused more were subject the on notions Maria’s
liking her in harm no be could “There understand. or see to want not did
take must Crawford situation--Mr. her knew man--everybody agreeable an
the danger! any in be to mean not did Crawford Mr. himself.” of care
he and pleased; be to ready were and pleasing, worth were Bertrams Miss
them want not did He him. like them making of but object no with began
him made have to ought which temper and sense with but love; of die to
points. such on latitude great himself allowed he better, feel and judge

returned he as he, said sister,” exceedingly, Bertrams Miss your like “I
“they visit; dinner said the after carriage their to them attending from
girls.” agreeable elegant, very are

like you But it. say you hear to delighted am I and indeed, are they “So
best.” Julia

best.” Julia like I yes! “Oh

the thought general in is Bertram Miss for really? you do “But
handsomest.”

I and feature, every in advantage the has She suppose. should I “So
certainly is Bertram Miss best; Julia like I but countenance; her prefer
shall I but agreeable, most the her found have I and handsomest, the
me.” order you because best, Julia like always

at best her like _will_ you know I but Henry, you, to talk not shall “I
last.”

_first_?” _at_ best her like I that you tell I not “Do

brother. dear my that, Remember engaged. is Bertram Miss besides, “And
made.” is choice Her

more always is woman engaged An it. for better the her like I and “Yes,
cares Her herself. with satisfied is She disengaged. a than agreeable
pleasing of powers her all exert may she that feels she and over, are
be can harm no engaged: lady a with safe is All suspicion. without
done.”

it and man, young of sort good very a is Rushworth Mr. that, to as “Why,
her.” for match great a is

your is _that_ him; for straws three care not does Bertram Miss “But
sure am I it. to subscribe not do _I_ friend. intimate your of opinion
in it see could I Rushworth. Mr. to attached much very is Bertram Miss
to Bertram Miss of well too think I mentioned. was he when eyes, her
heart.” her without hand her give ever would she suppose

him?” manage we shall how “Mary,

will He good. no does Talking believe. I himself, to him leave must “We
last.” at in taken be

I duped; him have not would I _in_; _taken_ him have not would I “But
honourable.” and fair all it have would

as just do will It in. taken be and chance his stand him let dear! “Oh
other.” or period some at in taken is Everybody well.

Mary.” dear marriage, in always “Not

present the of such to respect due all With especially. marriage “In
in one not is there Grant, Mrs. dear my married, be to chance as company
where Look marry. they when in taken not is who sex either of hundred a
I when so, be _must_ it that feel I and so; _is_ it that see I will, I
expect people which in one the transactions, all of is, it that consider
themselves.” honest least are and others, from most

Street.” Hill in matrimony, for school bad a in been have You “Ah!

but, state; the love to cause little certainly had aunt poor “My
business. manoeuvring a is it observation, own my from speaking however,
confidence and expectation full the in married have who many so know I
or accomplishment, or connexion, the in advantage particular one some of
deceived, entirely themselves found have who person, the in quality good
a but this is What reverse. the exactly with up put to obliged been and
in?” take

your beg I here. imagination little a be must there child, dear “My
but see you it, upon Depend you. believe quite cannot I but pardon,
will There consolation. the see not do you but evil, the see You half.
to apt all are we and everywhere, disappointments and rubs little be
human fails, happiness of scheme one if then, but much; too expect
make we wrong, is calculation first the if another; to turns nature
evil-minded those somewhere--and comfort find we better: second a
in taken more are little, a of much make who Mary, dearest observers,
themselves.” parties the than deceived and

a am I When _corps_. _du_ _esprit_ your honour I sister! done, “Well
in friends my wish I and myself; staunch as just be to mean I wife,
heartache.” a many me save would It too. so be would general

both. you cure will we but Mary; brother, your as bad as are “You
us, with Stay in. taking any without and both, you cure shall Mansfield
you.” cure will we and

stay. to willing very were cured, be to wanting without Crawfords, The
Henry and home, present a as Parsonage the with satisfied was Mary
spend to intending come, had He visit. his lengthen to ready equally
was there and well, promised Mansfield but them; with days few a only
both them keep to Grant Mrs. delighted It elsewhere. him call to nothing
a so: it have to contented well exceedingly was Grant Dr. and her, with
society pleasant always is Crawford Miss like woman young pretty talking
was guest his being Crawford’s Mr. and man; stay-at-home indolent, an to
day. every claret drinking for excuse an

than rapturous more was Crawford Mr. of admiration Bertrams’ Miss The
She feel. to likely her made habits Crawford’s Miss which anything
men, young fine very were Bertrams Mr. the that however, acknowledged,
and London, in even together seen often not were men young such two that
good. very were eldest, the of those particularly manners, their that
than gallantry and liveliness more had and London, in much been had _He_
the being his indeed, and, preferred; be therefore, must, and Edmund,
that presentiment early an felt had She claim. strong another was eldest
way. her was it knew She best. eldest the like _should_ she

was he rate; any at indeed, pleasant, thought been have must Bertram Tom
of was agreeableness his liked, generally be to man young of sort the
higher a of endowments some than agreeable found oftener be to kind the
acquaintance, large a spirits, excellent manners, easy had he for stamp,
a and Park, Mansfield of reversion the and say; to deal great a and
and he that felt soon Crawford Miss this. all to harm no did baronetcy,
and consideration, due with her about looked She do. might situation his
miles five park, real a park, a favour: his in everything almost found
screened well and placed well so house, modern-built spacious a round,
gentlemen’s of engravings of collection any in be to deserve to as
new completely be to only wanting and kingdom, the in seats
man agreeable an and mother, quiet a sisters, furnished--pleasant
present at gaming much from up tied being of advantage the himself--with
It hereafter. Thomas Sir being of and father, his to promise a by
began she and him; accept should she believed she well; very do might
to had he which horse the about little a herself interest to accordingly
races. B---- the at run

acquaintance their after long not away him call to were races These
goings usual his from not, did family the that appeared it as and began;
to passion his bring would it weeks, many for again back him expect on,
the attend to her induce to side his on said was Much proof. early an
the all with them, to party large a for made were schemes and races,
of. talked be to do only would it but inclination, of eagerness

what and while? this all thinking and doing _she_ was what Fanny, And
could eighteen of ladies young Few newcomers? the of opinion _her_ was
way, quiet a In Fanny. than opinion their speak to on called less be
Miss to admiration of tribute her paid she to, attended little very
Crawford Mr. think to continued still she as but beauty; Crawford’s
the proved repeatedly having cousins two her of spite in plain, very
excited she which notice, The _him_. mentioned never she contrary,
all, you understand to now begin “I effect. this to was herself,
Mr. the with walking was she as Crawford, Miss said Price,” Miss except
at dined She puzzled. am I not? she is or out, she is “Pray, Bertrams.
and _out_; being like seemed which you, of rest the with Parsonage, the
_is_.” she suppose hardly can I that little, so says she yet

know I believe “I replied, addressed, chiefly was this whom to Edmund,
My question. the answer to undertake not will I but mean, you what
outs the but woman, a of sense and age the has She up. grown is cousin
me.” beyond are outs not and

The ascertained. easily more be can nothing general, in yet, “And
generally are, appearance as well as Manners broad. so is distinction
it supposed have not could I now, Till different. totally so speaking,
out not girl A not. or out being girl’s a to as mistaken be to possible
looks instance; for bonnet, close a dress: of sort same the always has
I so, is it but smile, may You word. a says never and demure, very
far, too little a carried sometimes is it that except and you; assure
most The modest. and quiet be should Girls proper. very all is it
being on manners of alteration the that is, part objectionable
in pass sometimes They sudden. too frequently is company into introduced
confidence! opposite--to the quite to reserve from time little very such
to like not does One system. present the of part faulty the is _That_
thing--and every to up immediately so nineteen or eighteen of girl a see
Mr. before. year the speak to able hardly her seen has one when perhaps
changes.” such with met sometimes have _you_ say dare I Bertram,

You at. are you what see I fair; hardly is this but have, I believe “I
Anderson.” Miss and me quizzing are

am I mean. you what or who know not do I Anderson! Miss indeed. “No,
pleasure, of deal great a with you quiz _will_ I But dark. the in quite
about.” what me tell will you if

imposed far so quite be cannot I but well, very off it carry you “Ah!
an describing in eye, your in Anderson Miss had have must You on.
exactly was It mistake. for accurately too paint You lady. young altered
other the them of speaking were We Street. Baker of Andersons The so.
Anderson. Charles mention me heard have you Edmund, know. you day,
When it. represented has lady this as precisely was circumstance The
his ago, years two about family, his to me introduced first Anderson
sat I me. to speak to her get not could I and _out_, not was sister
a and her only with Anderson, for waiting morning one hour an there
away, run or sick being governess the room, the in two or girl little
I and business, of letters with moment every out and in mother the and
a like lady--nothing young the from look a or word a get hardly could
an such with me from turned and mouth, her up screwed answer--she civil
I _out_. then was She twelvemonth. a for again her see not did I air!
me, to up came She her. recollect not did and Holford’s, Mrs. at her met
talked and countenance; of out me stared acquaintance, an as me claimed
must I that felt I look. to way which know not did I till laughed and
has plain, is it Crawford, Miss and time, the at room the of jest the be
story.” the heard

say, dare I it, in truth more with and is, it story pretty very a “And
Mothers fault. a common too is It Anderson. Miss to credit does than
their managing of way right the quite got yet not have certainly
set to pretend not do I lies. error the where know not do I daughters.
wrong.” often are they that see do I but right, people

said be,” _should_ manners female what world the showing are who “Those
right.” them set to deal great a doing “are gallantly, Bertram Mr.

girls “such Edmund; courteous less the said enough,” plain is error “The
beginning. the from notions wrong given are They up. brought ill are
more no is there and vanity, of motives upon acting always are They
than public in appear they _before_ behaviour their in modesty real
afterwards.”

cannot I “Yes, hesitatingly. Crawford Miss replied know,” not do “I
the of part modestest the certainly is It there. you with agree
the themselves give out not girls have to worse much is It business.
seen have I which were, they if as liberties same the take and airs same
disgusting!” anything--quite than worse is That done.

leads “It Bertram. Mr. said indeed,” inconvenient very is _that_ “Yes,
demure and bonnet close The do. to what know not does one astray; one
what one tell juster), ever was nothing (and well so describe you air
of want the from year last scrape dreadful a into got I but expected; is
September, last friend a with week a for Ramsgate to down went I them.
have Sneyd--you friend My Indies. West the from return my after just
sisters, and mother, and father, Edmund--his Sneyd, of speak me heard
out; were they Place Albion reached we When me. to new all there, were
Miss two the and Mrs. pier: the on them found and them, after went we
and form; in bow my made I acquaintance. their of others with Sneyds,
her of one to myself attached men, by surrounded was Sneyd Mrs. as
as myself made and home, way the all side her by walked daughters,
and manners, her in easy perfectly lady young the could; I as agreeable
be could I that suspicion a not had I listen. to as talk to ready as
with well-dressed, both same: the just looked They wrong. anything doing
had I that found afterwards I but girls; other like parasols and veils
and _out_, not was who youngest, the to attention my all giving been
have to not ought Augusta Miss eldest. the offended excessively most had
has believe, I Sneyd, Miss and months; six next the for noticed been
me.” forgiven never

younger no have I Though Sneyd. Miss Poor indeed. bad was “That
very be must time one’s before neglected be To her. for feel I sister,
should Augusta Miss fault. mother’s the entirely was it but vexatious;
prosper. never doings half-and-half Such governess. her with been have
Does balls? to go she Does Price. Miss about satisfied be must I now But
sister’s?” my at as well as where, every out dine she

My ball. a to been ever has she think not do “I Edmund; replied “No,”
Mrs. with but nowhere dines and herself, company into goes seldom mother
_her_.” with home at stays Fanny and Grant,

out.” not is Price Miss clear. is point the then “Oh!



VI CHAPTER

to prepared was Crawford Miss and for--------, off set Bertram Mr.
the in decidedly him miss to and society, their in chasm great a find
families; the between daily almost becoming now were which meetings
she going, his after soon Park the at together dining all their on and
to expecting fully table, the of bottom the near place chosen her retook
would It masters. of change the in difference melancholy most a feel
brother, his with comparison In sure. was she business, flat very a be
most a in round sent be would soup The say. to nothing have would Edmund
trifling, agreeable or smiles any without drank wine manner, spiritless
any of anecdote pleasant one supplying without up cut venison the and
a such friend “my about story, entertaining single a or haunch, former
upper the at passing was what in amusement find to try must She one.”
his making now was who Rushworth, Mr. observing in and table, the of end
arrival. Crawfords’ the since time first the for Mansfield at appearance
that and county, neighbouring the in friend a visiting been had He
Mr. improver, an by out laid grounds his had recently having friend
eager very and subject, the of full head his with returned was Rushworth
saying not though and way; same the in place own his improving be to
had subject The else. nothing of talk could purpose, the to much
the in revived was it drawing-room; the in handled already been
his evidently was opinion and attention Bertram’s Miss dining-parlour.
superiority conscious rather showed deportment her though and aim; chief
Court, Sotherton of mention the him, oblige to solicitude any than
which complacency, of feeling a her gave it, to attached ideas the and
ungracious. very being from her prevented

thing! complete most the is “it he; said Compton,” see could you wish “I
know not did I Smith told I life. my in altered so place a saw never I
the in things finest the of one is _now_, approach The was. I where
declare, I manner. surprising most the in house the see you country:
a prison--quite a like looked it yesterday, Sotherton to back got I when
prison.” old dismal

is Court Sotherton indeed? prison “A Norris. Mrs. cried shame!” for “Oh,
world.” the in place old noblest the

that place a saw never I anything. beyond ma’am, improvement, wants “It
do I that forlorn so is it and life; my in improvement much so wanted
it.” with done be can what know not

Mrs. said present,” at so think should Rushworth Mr. that wonder “No
will Sotherton it, upon depend “but smile; a with Norris, Mrs. to Grant
desire.” can heart his which time in improvement _every_ have

not do I “but Rushworth, Mr. said it,” with something do to try must “I
me.” help to friend good some have shall I hope I what. know

calmly, Bertram Miss said occasion,” an such upon friend best “Your
imagine.” I Repton, Mr. be “would

I Smith, by well so done has he As of. thinking was I what is “That
day.” a guineas five are terms His once. at him have better had I think

need _you_ sure am “I Norris, Mrs. cried _ten_,” were they if and “Well,
you, were I If impediment. any be not need expense The it. regard not
the in done everything have would I expense. the of think not should I
Sotherton as place a Such possible. as nice as made and style, best
to space have You do. can money and taste that everything deserves Court
part, own my For you. reward well will that grounds and there, upon work
I Sotherton, of size the of part fiftieth the within anything had I if
excessively am I naturally for improving, and planting always be should
where anything attempt to me for ridiculous too be would It it. of fond
But burlesque. a quite be would It acre. half little my with now, am I
and improving in delight prodigious a take should I room, more had I if
it made we Parsonage: the at way that in deal vast a did We planting.
young You it. had first we when was it what from place different a quite
were Thomas Sir dear if but perhaps; it, about much remember not do ones
more deal great a and made: we improvements what you tell could he here,
health. of state sad Norris’s Mr. poor for but done, been have would
_that_ and anything, enjoy to man, poor out, get ever hardly could He
to used I and Thomas Sir that things several doing from me disheartened
the on carried have should we _that_, for been not had it If of. talk
just churchyard, the out shut to plantation the made and wall, garden
was It was. it as something doing always were We done. has Grant Dr. as
the in put we that death Norris’s Mr. before twelvemonth spring the only
tree, noble a such grown now is which wall, stable the against apricot
Dr. to then herself addressing sir,” perfection, such to getting and
Grant.

“The Grant. Dr. replied madam,” doubt, a beyond well, thrives tree “The
fruit the that regretting without it pass never I and good; is soil
gathering.” of trouble the worth little so be should

cost it and Park, Moor a as it bought we Park, Moor a is it “Sir,
I bill--and the saw I but Thomas, Sir from present a was it is, us--that
Park.” Moor a as charged was and shillings, seven cost it know

as have potatoes “these Grant: Dr. replied ma’am,” on, imposed were “You
It tree. that from fruit the as apricot Park Moor a of flavour the much
which eatable, is apricot good a but best; the at fruit insipid an is
are.” garden my from none

across whisper to pretending Grant, Mrs. said ma’am,” is, truth “The
natural the what knows hardly Grant Dr. “that Norris, Mrs. to table the
it for one, with indulged ever scarcely is he is: apricot our of taste
a such is ours and assistance, little a with fruit; a valuable so is
preserves, and tarts early with what that sort, fair large, remarkably
all.” them get to contrives cook my

little a for and, appeased; was redden, to begun had who Norris, Mrs.
Dr. Sotherton. of improvements the of place took subjects other while,
had acquaintance their friends; good seldom were Norris Mrs. and Grant
dissimilar. totally were habits their and dilapidations, in begun

place “Smith’s again. began Rushworth Mr. interruption short a After
before nothing mere a was it and country; the all of admiration the is
Repton.” have shall I think I hand. in it took Repton

a have would I you, were I “if Bertram, Lady said Rushworth,” “Mr.
fine in shrubbery a into out get to likes One shrubbery. pretty very
weather.”

and acquiescence, his of ladyship her assure to eager was Rushworth Mr.
submission his between but, complimentary; something out make to tried
with himself, same the intended always having his and taste, _her_ to
ladies of comfort the to attention professing of objects superadded the
was he whom only one was there that insinuating of and general, in
end an put to glad was Edmund and puzzled, grew he please, to anxious
not though however, Rushworth, Mr. wine. of proposal a by speech his to
his next subject the on say to more still had talker, great a usually
his in altogether acres hundred a above much not has “Smith heart.
the that surprising more it makes and enough, little is which grounds,
seven good a have we Sotherton at Now, improved. so been have can place
so if think, I that so meadows; water the reckoning without hundred,
two been have There despair. not need we Compton, at done be could much
and house, the near too grew that down, cut trees old fine three or
or Repton, that think me makes which amazingly, prospect the opens it
down: Sotherton at avenue the have certainly would sort, that of anybody
hill, the of top the to front west the from leads that avenue the
Miss But spoke. he as particularly Bertram Miss to turning know,” you
reply-- to becoming most it thought Bertram

of little very know really I it. recollect not do I Oh! avenue! “The
Sotherton.”

opposite exactly Edmund, of side other the on sitting was who Fanny,
at looked now listening, attentively been had who and Crawford, Miss
voice-- low a in said and him,

Cowper? of think you make not it Does pity! a What avenue! an down “Cut
unmerited.’” fate your mourn I more once avenues, fallen ‘Ye

chance, bad a stands avenue the afraid am “I answered, he as smiled He
Fanny.”

place the see to down, cut is it before Sotherton see to like should “I
shall.” I suppose not do I but state; old its in now, is it as

out is it unluckily, and, can; never you No, there? been never you “Have
it.” contrive could we wish I ride. a for distance of

it how me tell will you it, see do I Whenever signify. not does it “Oh!
altered.” been has

a and place, old an is Sotherton “that Crawford, Miss said collect,” “I
building?” of style particular any In grandeur. some of place

brick regular, large, a is and time, Elizabeth’s in built was house “The
It rooms. good many has and looking, respectable but heavy, building;
that in park; the of spots lowest the of one in stands It placed. ill is
and fine, are woods the But improvement. for unfavourable respect,
Mr. of. deal good a made be might say, dare I which, stream, a is there
dress, modern a it give to meaning in think, I right, quite is Rushworth
well.” extremely done all be will it that doubt no have I and

a is “He herself, to said and submission, with listened Crawford Miss
it.” of best the makes he man; well-bred

I had “but, continued; he Rushworth,” Mr. influence to wish not do “I
an of hands the into myself put not should I fashion, new to place a
own my of beauty, of degree inferior an have rather would I improver.
own my by abide rather would I progressively. acquired and choice,
his.” by than blunders

not would that but course; of about, were you what know would “_You_
are they as but matters, such for ingenuity or eye no have I _me_. suit
most be should I country, the in own my of place a I had and me; before
much as me give and it, undertake would who Repton Mr. any to thankful
it till it at look never should I and money; my for could he as beauty
complete.” was

said all,” it of progress the see to _me_ to delightful be would “It
Fanny.

and education; my of part no was It it. to up brought been have you “Ay,
favourite first the not by administered being had, ever I dose only the
the as _hand_ _in_ improvements consider me made has world, the in
uncle, honoured my Admiral, the ago years Three nuisances. of greatest
in; summers our spend to all us for Twickenham at cottage a bought
being it but raptures; in quite it to down went I and aunt my and
for and improved, be to necessary found soon was it pretty, excessively
to walk gravel a without confusion, and dirt all were we months three
complete as everything have would I use. for fit bench a or on, step
rustic and flower-gardens, and shrubberies country, the in possible as
is Henry care. my without done be all must it but innumerable: seats
doing.” be to loves he different;

to disposed much was he whom Crawford, Miss hear to sorry was Edmund
of sense his suit not did It uncle. her of freely so speak admire,
and smiles further by induced till silenced, was he and propriety,
present. the for by matter the put to liveliness

am I last. at harp my of tidings have “I she, said Bertram,” “Mr.
been probably has it there and Northampton; at safe is it that assured
often so have we assurances solemn the of spite in days, ten these
surprise. and pleasure his expressed Edmund contrary.” the to received
servant, a sent we direct; too were inquiries our that is, truth “The
this but London; from miles seventy do not will this ourselves: went we
and farmer, some by seen was It way. right the in it of heard we morning
butcher’s the and butcher, the told miller the and miller, the told he
shop.” the at word left son-in-law

hope and means, whatever by it, of heard have you that glad very am “I
delay.” further no be will there

conveyed? be to is it think you do how but to-morrow; it have to am “I
in hired be could kind that of nothing no! oh cart: or wagon a by Not
handbarrow.” a and porters for asked have well as might I village. the

a of middle the in now, just say, dare I difficult, it find would “You
cart?” and horse a hire to harvest, hay late very

want To it! of made was work of piece a what find to astonished was “I
to maid my told I so impossible, seemed country the in cart and horse a
dressing-closet my of out look cannot I as and directly; one for speak
passing without shrubbery the in walk nor farmyard, one seeing without
grieved rather was and have, and ask only be would it thought I another,
when surprise, my Guess all. to advantage the give not could I that
impossible most unreasonable, most the asking been had I that found I
labourers, the all farmers, the all offended had world; the in thing
had I believe I bailiff, Grant’s Dr. for As parish! the in hay the all
all is who himself, brother-in-law my and way; _his_ of out keep better
I what found he when me upon black rather looked general, in kindness
at.” been had

but before; subject the on thought have to expected be not could “You
in getting of importance the see must you it, of think _do_ you when
you as easy so be not might time any at cart a of hire The grass. the
in but, out; them letting of habit the in not are farmers our suppose:
horse.” a spare to power their of out quite be must it harvest,

the with down coming but, time; in ways your all understand shall “I
a was I money, with got be to is everything that maxim, London true
country your of independence sturdy the by first at embarrassed little
is who Henry, to-morrow. fetched harp my have to am I However, customs.
not it Will barouche. his in it fetch to offered has itself, good-nature
conveyed?” honourably be

be to hoped and instrument, favourite his as harp the of spoke Edmund
and all, at harp the heard never had Fanny her. hear to allowed soon
much. very it for wished

“at Crawford; Miss said both,” you to play to happy most be shall “I
for longer, much probably listen: to like can you as long as least
the equal is taste natural the where and myself, music love dearly I
than ways more in gratified is she for off, best be always must player
to you entreat I brother, your to write you if Bertram, Mr. Now, one.
it. about misery my of much so heard he come: is harp my that him tell
plaintive most my prepare shall I that please, you if say, may you And
his know I as feelings, his to compassion in return, his against airs
lose.” will horse

present, at not, do I but me; wish you whatever say will I write, I “If
writing.” for occasion any foresee

ever you would twelvemonth, a gone be to were he if nor say, dare I “No,
would occasion The helped. be could it if you, to he nor him, to write
not would You are! brothers creatures strange What foreseen. be never
and world; the in necessity urgent most the upon but other each to write
such or ill, is horse a such that say to pen the up take to obliged when
but have You words. possible fewest the in done is it dead, relation a
other every in is who Henry, perfectly. it know I you. among style one
me, consults me, loves who be, should brother a what exactly respect
never has together, hour the by me to talk will and me, in confides
more nothing is it often very and letter; a in page the turned yet
everything and full, seems Bath arrived. just am I Mary, than--‘Dear
a is that style; manly true the is That sincerely.’ Yours usual. as
letter.” brother’s complete

Fanny, said family,” their all from distance a at are they “When
letters.” long write can “they sake, William’s for colouring

a as excellence “whose Edmund, said sea,” at brother a has Price “Miss
us.” upon severe too you think her makes correspondent

course?” of service, king’s the In she? has sea, “At

determined his but story, the tell Edmund had have rather would Fanny
was voice her situation: brother’s her relate to her obliged silence
had he stations foreign the and profession, his of speaking in animated
been had he that years of number the mention not could she but on; been
an him wished civilly Crawford Miss eyes. her in tears without absent
promotion. early

“Captain Edmund; said captain?” cousin’s my of anything know you “Do
conclude?” I navy, the in acquaintance large a have You Marshall?

know “we grandeur, of air an with but,” enough; large admirals, “Among
sort good very be may Post-captains ranks. inferior the of little very
tell could I admirals various Of _us_. to belong not do they but men, of
their of gradation the and flags, their and them of deal: great a you
assure can I general, in But, jealousies. and bickerings their and pay,
my Certainly, used. ill very all and over, passed all are they that you
Of admirals. of circle a with acquainted me brought uncle’s my at home
pun, a of me suspecting be not do Now enough. saw I _Vices_ and _Rears_
entreat.” I

profession.” noble a is “It replied, only and grave, felt again Edmund

make it if circumstances: two under enough well is profession the “Yes,
it short, in but, it; spending in discretion be there and fortune, the
form amiable an worn never has It mine. of profession favourite a not is
_me_.” to

of prospect the in happy very again was and harp, the to reverted Edmund
play. her hearing

under still was meanwhile, grounds, improving of subject The
addressing help not could Grant Mrs. and others; the among consideration
Julia Miss from attention his calling was it though brother, her
Bertram.

improver an been have You say? to nothing _you_ have Henry, dear “My
place any with vie may it Everingham, of hear I what from and yourself,
Everingham, great. are sure, am I beauties, natural Its England. in
of fall happy a such estimation: my in perfect was be, to _used_ it as
again?” it see to give not I would What timber! such and ground,

it,” of opinion your hear to as me to gratifying so be could “Nothing
you disappointment: some be would there fear I “but answer; his was
mere a is it extent, In ideas. present your to equal it find not would
for as and, insignificance; its at surprised be would you nothing;
should I little: do--too to me for little very was there improvement,
longer.” much busy been have to like

Julia. said thing?” of sort the of fond are “You

which ground, the of advantages natural the with what but “Excessively;
done, be to remained little what eye, young very a to even out, pointed
three age of been not had I resolutions, consequent own my and
laid was plan My now. is it that all was Everingham before months
at and Cambridge, at perhaps, altered, little a Westminster, at
having for Rushworth Mr. envy to inclined am I executed. one-and-twenty
own.” my of devourer a been have I him. before yet happiness much so

quickly,” act and quickly, resolve will quickly, see who “Those
Mr. envying of Instead employment. want never can “_You_ Julia. said
opinion.” your with him assist should you Rushworth,

warmly, it enforced speech, this of part latter the hearing Grant, Mrs.
as and brother’s; her to equal be could judgment no that persuaded
support, full her it gave and likewise, idea the at caught Bertram Miss
consult to better infinitely was it opinion, her in that, declaring
the throw to immediately than advisers, disinterested and friends with
very was Rushworth Mr. man, professional a of hands the into business
Mr. and assistance; Crawford’s Mr. of favour the request to ready
at quite was abilities, own his depreciating properly after Crawford,
to began then Rushworth Mr. useful. be could that way any in service his
Sotherton, to over coming of honour the him doing Crawford’s Mr. propose
two her in reading if as Norris, Mrs. when there; bed a taking and
Mr. take to was which plan a of approbation little their minds nieces’
amendment. an with interposed away, Crawford

not should why but willingness; Crawford’s Mr. of doubt no be can “There
that many are Here party? little a make we not should Why go? us of more
and Rushworth, Mr. dear my improvements, your in interested be would
that and spot, the on opinion Crawford’s Mr. hear to like would that
my for and, opinions; _their_ with you to use small some of be might
again; mother good your upon wait to wishing long been have I part, own
but remiss; so me made have could own my of horses no having but nothing
rest the while Rushworth, Mrs. with hours few a sit and go could I now
return all could we then and things, settled and about walked you of
most be might as just Sotherton, at dine or here, dinner late a to
moonlight. by home drive pleasant a have and mother, your to agreeable
barouche, his in me and nieces two my take would Crawford Mr. say dare I
at stay will Fanny and sister, know, you horseback, on go can Edmund and
you.” with home

going the in concerned one every and objection; no made Bertram Lady
who Edmund, excepting concurrence, ready their expressing in forward was
nothing. said and all it heard



VII CHAPTER

the Edmund said _now_?” Crawford Miss like you do how and Fanny, “Well,
you did “How himself. subject the on time some thinking after day, next
yesterday?” her like

and me; entertains She talk. her hear to like I much. well--very “Very
at looking in pleasure great have I that pretty, extremely so is she
her.”

play wonderful a has She attractive. so is that countenance her is “It
you, struck that conversation her in nothing there was But feature! of
right?” quite not as Fanny,

was I did. she as uncle her of spoken have to not ought she yes! “Oh
years, many so living been has she whom with uncle An astonished. quite
brother, her of fond very so is be, may faults his whatever who, and
it!” believed have not could I son. a like quite say, they him, treating

indecorous.” very wrong; very was It struck. be would you thought “I

think.” I ungrateful, very “And

claim any has uncle her that know not do I word. strong a is “Ungrateful
her of warmth the is it and had; certainly wife his _gratitude_; her to
awkwardly is She here. her misleads which memory aunt’s her for respect
be must it spirits lively and feelings warm such With circumstanced.
without Crawford, Mrs. for affection her to justice do to difficult
most was which know to pretend not do I Admiral. the on shade a throwing
conduct present Admiral’s the though disagreements, their in blame to
amiable and natural is it but wife; his of side the to one incline might
her censure not do I entirely. aunt her acquit should Crawford Miss that
public.” them making in impropriety _is_ certainly there but _opinions_;

this “that consideration, little a after Fanny, said think,” you not “Do
has niece her as Crawford, Mrs. upon itself reflection a is impropriety
notions right her given have cannot She her? by up brought entirely been
Admiral.” the to due was what of

niece the of faults the suppose must we Yes, remark. fair a is “That
the of sensible more one makes it and aunt; the of those been have to
must home present her think I But under. been has she disadvantages
She be. to ought they what just are manners Grant’s Mrs. good. her do
affection.” pleasing very a with brother her of speaks

me made She letters. short such her writing his to as except “Yes,
good-nature or love the highly very so rate cannot I but laugh; almost
anything writing of trouble the himself give not will who brother a of
William sure am I separated. are they when sisters, his to reading worth
right what And circumstances. any under so, _me_ used have never would
were you when letters long write not would _you_ that suppose to she had
absent?”

contribute may whatever seizing Fanny, mind, lively a of right “The
when allowable, perfectly others; of that or amusement own its to
of shadow a not is there and roughness; or ill-humour by untinctured
or sharp, nothing Crawford: Miss of manner or countenance the in either
we instances the in except feminine, perfectly is She coarse. or loud,
saw you glad am I justified. be cannot she There of. speaking been have
did.” I as all it

chance good a had he affections, her gained and mind her formed Having
subject, this on and period, this at though him; like thinking her of
line a in was he for dissimilarity, of danger some be to now began there
Fanny where him lead might which Crawford, Miss of admiration of
harp The lessen. not did attractions Crawford’s Miss follow. not could
she for good-humour; and wit, beauty, her to added rather and arrived,
taste and expression an with obligingness, greatest the with played
be to clever something was there and becoming, peculiarly were which
day, every Parsonage the at was Edmund air. every of close the at said
an secured morning one instrument: favourite his with indulged be to
a have to unwilling be not could lady the for next; the for invitation
train. fair a in soon was thing every and listener,

and herself, as elegant as harp a with lively, pretty, woman, young A
a on opening and ground, the to down cut window, a near placed both
was summer, of foliage rich the in shrubs by surrounded lawn, little
were air, the scene, the season, The heart. man’s any catch to enough
tambour her and Grant Mrs. sentiment. and tenderness to favourable all
as and harmony; in all was it use: their without not were frame
the even going, set once is love when account to turn will everything
looking worth were it, of honours the doing Grant Dr. and tray, sandwich
was he what knowing or however, business, the studying Without at.
intercourse, such of week a of end the at beginning, was Edmund about,
added be may it lady the of credit the to and love; in deal good a be to
without brother, elder an or world the of man a being his without that,
to began he talk, small of gaieties the or flattery of arts the of any
foreseen, not had she though so, be to it felt She her. to agreeable be
common any by pleasant not was he for it; understand hardly could and
opinions his compliments; no paid he nonsense; no talked he rule:
charm, a was There simple. and tranquil attentions his unbending, were
Miss which integrity, his steadiness, his sincerity, his in perhaps,
with discuss to equal not though feel, to equal be might Crawford
her pleased he however: it, about much very think not did She herself.
enough. was it her; near him have to liked she present; the for

morning; every Parsonage the at was Edmund that wonder not could Fanny
uninvited in gone have she might too, there been have gladly would she
the when that, wonder she could neither harp; the hear to unnoticed, and
should he again, parted families two the and over, was stroll evening
while home, their to sister her and Grant Mrs. attend to right it think
it thought she but Park; the of ladies the to devoted was Crawford Mr.
and wine the mix to there not were Edmund if and exchange; bad very a
little a was She not. than it without go rather would her, for water
and Crawford, Miss with hours many so spend could he that surprised
of and observed, already had he which fault of sort the of more see not
nature same the of something a by reminded always almost was _she_ which
of fond was Edmund was. it so but company; her in was she whenever
that enough it think to seemed he but Crawford, Miss of her to speaking
own her out point to scrupled she and spared; been since had Admiral the
actual first The ill-nature. like appear should it lest him, to remarks
an of consequence the was her occasioned Crawford Miss which pain
her after soon caught, former the which ride, to learn to inclination
the at ladies young the of example the from Mansfield, at settled being
to led increased, her with acquaintance Edmund’s when which, and Park,
the for mare quiet own his of offer the and wish, the encouraging his
that beginner a for fitted best the as attempts, first her of purpose
designed was however, injury, no pain, No furnish. could stable either
day’s a lose to not was _she_ offer: this in cousin his to him by
half Parsonage the to down taken be to only was mare The it. by exercise
first being its on Fanny, and begin; to were ride her before hour an
with over-powered almost was slighted, feeling from far so proposed,
it. for leave her asking be should he that gratitude

no and herself, to credit great with essay first her made Crawford Miss
presided and mare the down taken had who Edmund, Fanny. to inconvenience
or Fanny either before time, excellent in it with returned whole, the at
without rode she when her attended always who coachman, old steady the
not was trial day’s second The forward. set to ready were cousins, her
did she that such was riding of enjoyment Crawford’s Miss guiltless. so
small, rather though and fearless, and Active off. leave to how know not
pure the to and horsewoman; a for formed seemed she made, strongly
in added probably was something exercise, the of pleasure genuine
the in more something and instructions, and attendance Edmund’s
early her by general in sex her surpassing much very of conviction
and ready was Fanny dismount. to unwilling her make to progress,
gone, being not for her scold to beginning was Norris Mrs. and waiting,
aunt, her avoid To appeared. Edmund no announced, was horse no still and
out. went she him, for look and

of sight within not were apart, mile a half scarcely though houses, The
could she door, hall the from yards fifty walking by but, other; each
its all and Parsonage the of view a command and park, the down look
Grant’s Dr. in and road; village the beyond rising gently demesnes,
on both Crawford Miss and group--Edmund the saw immediately she meadow
Crawford, Mr. and Grant, Mrs. and Dr. side, by side riding horse-back,
party happy A on. looking and about standing grooms, three or two with
a beyond cheerful object: one in interested all her, to appeared it
sound a was It her. to even ascended merriment of sound the for doubt,
should Edmund that wondered she cheerful; _her_ make not did which
the from eyes her turn not could She pang. a felt and her, forget
Miss first At passed. that all watching help not could she meadow;
not was which field, the of circuit the made companion her and Crawford
rose they suggestion, apparent _her_ at then, pace; foot’s a at small,
to astonishing most was it nature timid Fanny’s to and canter; a into
Edmund entirely. stopped they minutes few a After sat. she well how see
her directing evidently was he her; to speaking was he her; to close was
the or it, saw she hand; her of hold had he bridle; the of management
wonder not must She reach. not could eye the what supplied imagination
be should Edmund that than natural more be could what this; all at
could She one? any by good-nature his proving and useful, himself making
him saved have well as might Crawford Mr. that indeed, think, but not
becoming and proper particularly been have would it that trouble; the
his all with Crawford, Mr. but himself; it done have to brother a in
nothing knew probably coachmanship, his all and good-nature, boasted
She Edmund. of comparison in kindness active no had and matter, the of
if duty; double such have to mare the upon hard rather it think to began
remembered. be should mare poor the forgotten, were she

tranquillised little a soon were other the and one for feelings Her
on still Crawford Miss and disperse, meadow the in party the seeing by
the into gate a through pass foot, on Edmund by attended but horseback,
stood. she where spot the towards make and park, the into so and lane,
walked and impatient; and rude appearing of afraid be to then began She
suspicion. the avoid to anxiety great a with them meet to

all at was she as soon as Crawford, Miss said Price,” Miss dear “My
you keeping for apologies own my make to come am “I hearing, within
it knew myself--I for say to world the in nothing have I but waiting;
if therefore, and ill; extremely behaving was I that and late, very was
forgiven, be always must Selfishness me. forgive must you please, you
cure.” a of hope no is there because know, you

that conviction his added Edmund and civil, extremely was answer Fanny’s
my for enough time than more is there “For hurry. no in be could she
have you “and he, said goes,” ever she as far as twice ride to cousin
an half off setting from her preventing by comfort her promoting been
the from suffer not will she and up, coming now are clouds sooner: hour
so by fatigued be not may _you_ wish I then. done have would she as heat
home.” walk this yourself saved had you wish I exercise. much

you,” assure I horse, this off getting but me fatigues it of part “No
Nothing strong. very am “I help; his with down sprang she as she, said
to way give I Price, Miss like. not do I what doing but me fatigues ever
pleasant a have will you hope sincerely I but grace; bad very a with you
dear, this of hear to good but nothing have may I that and ride,
animal.” beautiful delightful,

now horse, own his with about waiting been had who coachman, old The
another across off set they and hers, on lifted was Fanny them, joining
as seeing, by lightened not discomfort of feelings her park; the of part
to together hill the down walking were others the that back, looked she
on comments his by good much her do attendant her did nor village; the
been had he which horse-woman, a as cleverness great Crawford’s Miss
own. her to equal almost interest an with watching

riding!” for heart good a such with lady a see to pleasure a is “It
have to seem not did She better. horse a sit one see never “I he. said
began, first you when miss, you, from different Very fear. of thought a
when tremble did you how you! bless Lord Easter. next come ago years six
on!” put you had first Thomas Sir

in merit Her celebrated. also was Crawford Miss drawing-room the In
appreciated fully was courage and strength with Nature by gifted being
her own; their like was riding in delight her Bertrams; Miss the by
pleasure great had they and own, their like was it in excellence early
it. praising in

it. for make the has “she Julia; said well,” ride would she sure was “I
brother’s.” her as neat as is figure Her

same the has she and good, as are spirits her “and Maria, added “Yes,”
a has horsemanship good that think but cannot I character. of energy
mind.” the with do to deal great

ride to meant she whether Fanny asked Edmund night at parted they When
day. next the

answer. her was mare,” the want you if know--not not do I “No,

are you whenever “but he; said myself,” for all at her want not do “I
to glad be would Crawford Miss think I home, at stay to inclined next
great a has She short. in morning, whole a time--for longer a her have
telling been has Grant Mrs. Common: Mansfield as far as get to desire
equal perfectly being her of doubt no have I and views, fine its of her
to sorry extremely be would She this. for do will morning any But it. to
only rides _She_ did. she if wrong very be would It you. with interfere
health.” for _you_ pleasure; for

out been have “I Fanny; said certainly,” to-morrow, ride not shall “I
strong am I know You home. at stay rather would and lately, often very
well.” very walk to now enough

to ride the and comfort, Fanny’s be must which pleased, looked Edmund
the all included party the morning: next the place took Common Mansfield
doubly and time, the at enjoyed much was and herself, but people young
this of scheme successful A discussion. evening the in again enjoyed
Mansfield to been having the and another; on brings generally sort
There after. day the else somewhere going for all them disposed Common
there hot, was weather the though and shewn; be to views other many were
always is party young A go. to wanted they wherever lanes shady were
spent were successively mornings fine Four lane. shady a with provided
the doing and country, the Crawfords the shewing in manner, this in
and gaiety all was it answered; Everything spots. finest its of honours
talked be to enough inconvenience supplying only heat the good-humour,
of one of happiness the when day, fourth the pleasure--till with of
and Edmund one. the was Bertram Miss clouded. exceedingly was party the
excluded. was _she_ and Parsonage, the at dine to invited were Julia
Mr. on good-humour, perfect with Grant, Mrs. by done and meant was It
day; that Park the at expected partly was who account, Rushworth’s
were manners good her and injury, grievous very a as felt was it but
home. reached she till anger and vexation her conceal to taxed severely
had she and increased, was injury the come, _not_ did Rushworth Mr. As
be only could she him; over power her shewing of relief the even not
as gloom a great as throw and cousin, and aunt, mother, her to sullen
dessert. and dinner their over possible

drawing-room, the into walked Julia and Edmund eleven and ten Between
reverse very the cheerful, and glowing air, evening the with fresh
would Maria for there, sitting ladies three the in found they what of
half-asleep; was Bertram Lady and book, her from eyes her raise scarcely
having and ill-humour, niece’s her by discomposed Norris, Mrs. even and
immediately not were which dinner, the about questions two or one asked
minutes few a For more. no say to determined almost seemed to, attended
and night the of praise their in eager too were sister and brother the
the when but themselves; beyond think to stars, the on remarks their
Is Fanny? is where “But said, around, looking Edmund, came, pause first
bed?” to gone she

moment a here was “she Norris; Mrs. replied of,” know I that not “No,
ago.”

was which room, the of end other the from speaking voice gentle own Her
began Norris Mrs. sofa. the on was she that them told one, long very a
scolding.

evening the all away idling be to Fanny, trick, foolish very a is “That
as yourself employ and here, sit and come you cannot Why sofa. a upon
the from you supply can I own, your of work no have you If do? _we_
week, last bought was that calico, new the all is There basket. poor
You out. it cutting by back my broke almost I sure am I yet. touched not
a is it it, for word my take and, people; other of think to learn should
sofa.” a upon lolling always be to person young a for trick shocking

table, the at seat her to returned was Fanny said, was this half Before
good-humour, high in was who Julia, and again; work her up taken had and
“I exclaiming, of justice the her did day, the of pleasures the from
the in anybody as sofa the upon little as is Fanny that ma’am, say, must
house.”

you sure am “I attentively, her at looking after Edmund, said “Fanny,”
headache.” the have

bad. very not was it said but it, deny not could She

How well. too looks your know “I replied; he you,” believe hardly can “I
it?” had you have long

heat.” the but nothing is It dinner. before little a “Since

heat?” the in out go you “Did

stay her have you “would Norris: Mrs. said did,” she sure be to out! “Go
mother your Even out? _all_ we not Were this? as day fine a such within
hour.” an above for to-day out was

thoroughly been had who ladyship, her added Edmund,” indeed, “Yes,
an above out was “I Fanny; to reprimand sharp Norris’s Mrs. by awakened
Fanny while flower-garden, the in hour an of three-quarters sat I hour.
It hot. very but you, assure I was, it pleasant very and roses; the cut
coming the dreaded quite I declare I but alcove, the in enough shady was
again.” home

she?” has roses, cutting been has “Fanny

_She_ thing! Poor year. this last the be will they afraid am I and “Yes,
not could one that full-blown so were they but enough; hot it found
wait.”

rather a in Norris, Mrs. rejoined certainly,” it, for help no was “There
caught be not might headache her whether question I “but voice; softened
and standing as it give to likely so nothing is There sister. _then_,
Suppose to-morrow. well be will it say dare I but sun; hot a in stooping
mine have to forget always I vinegar; aromatic your have her let you
filled.”

came she since ever it had has “she Bertram; Lady said it,” got has “She
time.” second the house your from back

roses; cutting as well as walking been she “has Edmund; cried “What!”
No ma’am? twice, it doing and house, your to park hot the across walking
aches.” head her wonder

hear. not did and Julia, to talking was Norris Mrs.

“but Bertram; Lady said her,” for much too be would it afraid was “I
then and them, have to wished aunt your gathered, were roses the when
home.” taken be must they know you

twice?” go to her oblige to enough roses there were “But

unluckily, and, dry; to room spare the into put be to were they but “No;
she so key, the away bring and room the of door the lock to forgot Fanny
again.” go to obliged was

be nobody could “And saying, room, the about walked and up got Edmund
a been has it ma’am, word, my Upon Fanny? but errand an such on employed
business.” ill-managed very

cried better,” done been have to was it how know not do I sure am “I
myself, gone had I “unless deaf; longer be to unable Norris, Mrs.
Mr. to talking was I and once; at places two in be cannot I but indeed;
desire, _her_ by dairymaid, mother’s your about time very that at Green
son, his about Jefferies Mrs. to write to Groom John promised had and
nobody think I hour. an half me for waiting was fellow poor the and
I really but occasion, any upon myself sparing of me accuse justly can
down stepping just Fanny’s for as And once. at everything do cannot
cannot mile--I a of quarter a above much not is me--it for house my to
a times three it pace I do often How it. ask to unreasonable was I think
about nothing say and too, weathers all in and ay, late, and early day,
it?”

ma’am.” strength, your half had Fanny wish “I

be not would she exercise, her in regular more be would Fanny “If
long this now horseback on out been not has She soon. so up knocked
to ought she ride, not does she when that, persuaded am I and while,
her. of it asked have not should I before, riding been had she If walk.
the among stooping being after good her do rather would it thought I But
fatigue a after walk a as refreshing so nothing is there for roses;
hot. very so not was it strong, was sun the though and kind; that of
was “it mother, his at significantly nodding Edmund,” ourselves, Between
the did that flower-garden, the in about dawdling and roses, the cutting
mischief.”

had who Bertram, Lady candid more the said indeed,” was, it afraid am “I
there, headache the caught she afraid much very am “I her; overheard
bear could I as much as was It anybody. kill to enough was heat the for
the from him keep to trying and Pug, to calling and Sitting myself.
me.” for much too almost was flower-beds,

table, another to quietly going but lady; either to more no said Edmund
to Madeira of glass a brought remained, yet supper-tray the which on
able be to wished She part. greater the drink to her obliged and Fanny,
made created, feelings of variety a which tears, the but it; decline to
speak. to than swallow to easier it

angry more still was he aunt, and mother his with was Edmund as Vexed
which anything than worse was her of forgetfulness own His himself. with
properly been she had happened have would this of Nothing done. had they
choice any without together days four left been had she but considered;
whatever avoiding for excuse any without and exercise, or companions of
that think to ashamed was He require. might aunts unreasonable her
very and riding, of power the had not had she together days four for
of pleasure a check to be must he unwilling however resolved, seriously
again. happen never should it that Crawford’s, Miss

her of evening first the on as full as heart her with bed to went Fanny
its had probably had spirits her of state The Park. the at arrival
been and neglected, feeling been had she for indisposition; her in share
leant she As past. days some for envy and discontent against struggling
the seen, be not might she that retreated had she which to sofa, the on
sudden the and head; her in that beyond much been had mind her of pain
know hardly her made occasioned, then had kindness Edmund’s which change
herself. support to how



VIII CHAPTER

pleasant a was it as and day; next very the recommenced rides Fanny’s
Edmund been, lately had weather the than hot less morning, fresh-feeling
made soon be would pleasure, and health of both losses, her that trusted
mother, his escorting arrived, Rushworth Mr. gone was she While good.
the urging in especially, civility her shew to and civil be to came who
a started been had which Sotherton, visiting for plan the of execution
absence subsequent her of consequence in which, and before, fortnight
all were nieces her and Norris Mrs. dormant. lain since had home, from
agreed and named was day early an and revival, its with pleased well
did ladies young the disengaged: be should Crawford Mr. provided to,
have willingly would Norris Mrs. though and stipulation, that forget not
nor liberty the authorise neither would they so, being his for answered
Rushworth Mr. Bertram, Miss from hint a on last, at and risk; the run
down walk to him for was done be to thing properest the that discovered
whether inquire and Crawford, Mr. on call and directly, Parsonage the to
not. or him suit would Wednesday

out been Having in. came Crawford Miss and Grant Mrs. return his Before
met not had they house, the to route different a taken and time, some
Mr. find would he that given were however, hopes, Comfortable him.
was It course. of mentioned was scheme Sotherton The home. at Crawford
of, talked be should else anything that indeed, possible, hardly
a Rushworth, Mrs. and it; about spirits high in was Norris Mrs. for
of nothing thought who woman, pompous prosing, civil, well-meaning,
concerns, son’s her and own her to related it as but consequence,
Lady party. the of be to Bertram Lady pressing over given yet not had
made refusal of manner placid her but it; declined constantly Bertram
more Norris’s Mrs. till come, to wished she think still Rushworth Mrs.
truth. the of her convinced tone louder and words numerous

I much, too deal great a sister, my for much too be would fatigue “The
you back, ten and there, miles Ten Rushworth. Mrs. dear my you, assure
our of accept and occasion, this on sister my excuse must You know.
that place only the is Sotherton her. without myself and girls dear two
will She indeed. be, cannot it but far, so go to _wish_ a her give could
well; very do all will it so know, you Price, Fanny in companion a have
answer will I himself, for speak to here not is he as Edmund, for as and
you horseback, on go can He party. the join to happy most being his for
know.”

home, at staying Bertram’s Lady to yield to obliged being Rushworth Mrs.
a be would company ladyship’s her of loss “The sorry. be only could
seen have to happy extremely been have should she and drawback, great
and yet, Sotherton at been never had who Price, Miss too, lady young the
place.” the see not should she pity a was it

Mrs. cried madam,” dear my kindness, all are you kind, very are “You
of plenty in opportunities have will she Fanny, to as “but Norris;
is now going her and her; before enough time has She Sotherton. seeing
her.” spare possibly not could Bertram Lady question. the of out quite

Fanny.” without do cannot I no! “Oh

must everybody that conviction the under next, proceeded Rushworth Mrs.
invitation; the in Crawford Miss include to Sotherton, see to wanting be
Mrs. visiting of trouble the at been not had who Grant, Mrs. though and
on it declined civilly neighbourhood, the into coming her on Rushworth,
sister; her for pleasure any secure to glad was she account, own her
accepting in long not was persuaded, and pressed properly Mary, and
Parsonage the from back came Rushworth Mr. civility. the of share her
learn to time in just appearance his made Edmund and successful;
her to Rushworth Mrs. attend to Wednesday, for settled been had what
ladies. other two the with park the down half-way walk and carriage,

to trying Norris Mrs. found he breakfast-room, the to return his On
were party the of being Crawford’s Miss whether to as mind her up make
full be not would barouche brother’s her whether or not, or desirable
that her assuring idea, the at laughed Bertrams Miss The her. without
on box, the of independent well, perfectly four hold would barouche the
him. with go might _one_ which

or carriage, Crawford’s “that Edmund, said necessary,” it is why “But
mother’s my of made be to use no is Why employed? be should _only_, his
other the mentioned first was scheme the when not, could I chaise?
the in made be to not were family the from visit a why understand day,
family.” the of carriage

weather, this in postchaise a in three up boxed “go Julia: cried “What!”
not will that Edmund, dear my No, barouche! a in seats have may we when
do.” quite

us. taking upon depends Crawford Mr. that know “I Maria, said “Besides,”
promise.” a as it claim would he first, at passed what After

carriages _two_ out “taking Norris, Mrs. added Edmund,” dear my “And,
between and, nothing; for trouble be would do, will _one_ when
and this between roads the of fond very not is coachman ourselves,
scratching lanes narrow the of bitterly complains always he Sotherton:
Thomas, Sir dear have to like not should one know you and carriage, his
off.” scratched varnish the all find home, comes he when

Crawford’s,” Mr. using for reason handsome very a be not would “That
and fellow, old stupid a is Wilcox that is, truth the “but Maria; said
no find shall we that it for answer will I drive. to how know not does
Wednesday.” on roads narrow from inconvenience

“in Edmund, said unpleasant,” nothing suppose, I hardship, no is “There
box.” barouche the on going

generally be would it believe I dear! “oh Maria: cried “Unpleasant!”
view one’s to as comparison no be can There seat. favourite the thought
barouche-box the choose will Crawford Miss Probably country. the of
herself.”

can there you; with going Fanny’s to then, objection, no be can “There
her.” for room having your of doubt no be

her of idea no is there Edmund, dear “my Norris; Mrs. repeated “Fanny!”
is She so. Rushworth Mrs. told I aunt. her with stays She us. with going
expected.” not

his addressing he, said madam,” imagine, I reason, no have can “You
relates it as but party, the of be to _not_ Fanny wishing “for mother,
would you her, without do could you If comfort. own your to yourself, to
home?” at her keep to wish not

her.” without do _cannot_ I but not, sure be “To

do.” to mean I as you, with home at stay I if can, “You

no is “there continued, he “Yes,” this. at out cry general a was There
great a has Fanny home. at stay to mean I and going, my for necessity
not has She much. very it wishes she know I Sotherton. see to desire
be would you ma’am, sure, am I and kind, the of gratification a often
now?” pleasure the her give to glad

objection.” no sees aunt your if glad, very yes! “Oh

could which objection only the with ready very was Norris Mrs.
could Fanny that Rushworth Mrs. assured positively having remain--their
in be consequently would there appearance strange very the and go, not
got be to impossible quite difficulty a her to seemed which her, taking
so something be would It appearance! strangest the have must It over.
whose Rushworth, Mrs. for disrespect on bordering so unceremonious, very
she that attention, and good-breeding of pattern a such were manners own
Fanny, for affection no had Norris Mrs. it. to equal feel not did really
to opposition her but time; any at pleasure her procuring of wish no and
it because scheme, own her for partiality from more arose _now_, Edmund
arranged had she that felt She else. anything from than own, her _was_
the for be must alteration any that and well, extremely everything
she when did he as reply, in her told therefore, Edmund, When worse.
Mrs. on herself distress not need she that hearing, the him give would
walked he as opportunity, the taken had he because account, Rushworth’s
would who one as Price Miss mentioning of hall, the through her with
sufficient very a received directly had and party, the of be probably
with submit to vexed much too was Norris Mrs. cousin, his for invitation
as just well, very well, “Very say, only would and grace, good very a
it.” about care not do I sure am I way, own your it settle chuse, you

home at staying be should you “that Maria, said odd,” very seems “It
Fanny.” of instead

Julia, added you,” to obliged much very be to ought she sure am “I
she that consciousness a from spoke, she as room the leaving hastily
herself. home at stay to offer to ought

was requires,” occasion the as grateful as quite feel will “Fanny
dropt. subject the and reply, only Edmund’s

greater much fact, in was, plan, the heard she when gratitude, Fanny’s
than more and all, with kindness Edmund’s felt She pleasure. her than
attachment, fond her of unsuspicious he, which sensibility the all,
her on enjoyment any forego should he that but of; aware be could
Sotherton seeing in satisfaction own her and pain, her gave account
him. without nothing be would

another produced families Mansfield two the of meeting next The
general with admitted was that one and plan, the in alteration
Lady to day the for companion as herself offered Grant Mrs. approbation.
dinner. at them join to was Grant Dr. and son, her of lieu in Bertram
ladies young the and so, it have to pleased well very was Bertram Lady
arrangement an for thankful very was Edmund Even again. spirits in were
it thought Norris Mrs. and party; the of share his to him restored which
point the on was and end, tongue’s her at it had and plan, excellent an
spoke. Grant Mrs. when it, proposing of

Mr. arrived, barouche the breakfast after soon and fine, was Wednesday
was there ready, was everybody as and sisters; his driving Crawford
take to others the and alight to Grant Mrs. for but done be to nothing
of post the seat, envied the places, all of place The places. their
While fall? to it was lot happy whose To unappropriated. was honour,
most the with and best, how meditating were Bertrams Miss the of each
settled was matter the it, secure to others, the obliging of appearance
are there “As carriage, the from stepped she as saying, Grant’s Mrs. by
as and Henry; with sit should one that better be will it you, of five
think I Julia, drive, could you wished you that lately saying were you
lesson.” a take to you for opportunity good a be will this

a in barouche-box the on was former The Maria! Unhappy Julia! Happy
and mortification; and gloom in within, seat her took latter the moment,
ladies, remaining two the of wishes good the amid off drove carriage the
arms. mistress’s his in Pug of barking the and

had rides whose Fanny, and country; pleasant a through was road Their
happy very was and knowledge, her beyond soon was extensive, been never
was She pretty. was that all admiring and new, was that all observing in
did nor others, the of conversation the in join to invited often not
her habitually were reflections and thoughts own Her it. desire she
the country, the of appearance the observing in and, companions; best
harvest, the of state the soil, of difference the roads, the of bearings
that entertainment found she children, the cattle, the cottages, the
she what of to speak to Edmund having by heightened been have only could
lady the and her between resemblance of point only the was That felt.
was Crawford Miss Edmund, for value a but everything in her: by sat who
of mind, of taste, of delicacy Fanny’s of none had She her. unlike very
observation; little with Nature, inanimate Nature, saw she feeling;
light the for talents her women, and men for all was attention her
any was there when however, Edmund, after back looking In lively. and
a ascending in them on gained he when or them, behind road of stretch
the at broke is” he “there a and united, were they hill, considerable
once. than more both, them from moment same

comfort: real little very had Bertram Miss miles seven first the For
by side sitting sister her and Crawford Mr. in ended always prospect her
expressive his only see to and merriment; and conversation of full side,
of laugh the catch to or Julia, to smile a with turned he as profile
sense own her which irritation, of source perpetual a was other, the
was it back, looked Julia When over. smooth just but could propriety of
in was it them, to spoke she whenever and delight, of countenance a with
wished she charming, was country the of view “her spirits: highest the
was exchange of offer only her but etc.; it,” see all could they
hill, long a of summit the gained they as Crawford, Miss to addressed
I country. of burst fine a is “Here this: than inviting more not was and
press me let it, take not will you say dare I but seat, my had you wish
they before answer hardly could Crawford Miss and much;” so ever you
pace. good a at again moving were

was it associations, Sotherton of influence the within came they When
her to strings two have to said be might who Bertram, Miss for better
in and feelings, Crawford and feelings, Rushworth had She bow.
Mr. effect. considerable had former the Sotherton of vicinity the
that Crawford Miss tell not could She hers. was consequence Rushworth’s
observe carelessly not could she Sotherton,” to belonged woods “those
each on property Rushworth’s Mr. all now was it that believed “she that
pleasure a was it and heart; of elation without road,” the of side
mansion, freehold capital the to approach their with increase to
of rights its all with family, the of residence manorial ancient and
court-baron. and court-leet

difficulties our Crawford; Miss road, rough more no have shall we “Now
Rushworth Mr. be. to ought it as such is way the of rest The over. are
village. the begins Here estate. the to succeeded he since it made has
reckoned is spire church The disgrace. a really are cottages Those
great the to close so not is church the glad am I handsome. remarkably
be must bells the of annoyance The places. old in happens often as house
understand I and house, tidy-looking a parsonage: the is There terrible.
almshouses, are Those people. decent very are wife his and clergyman the
he house; steward’s the is right the To family. the of some by built
we but lodge-gates; the to coming are we Now man. respectable very a is
at see, you ugly, not is It still. park the through mile a nearly have
is house the of situation the but timber, fine some is there end; this
for pity, a is it and mile, a half for it to hill down go We dreadful.
approach.” better a had it if place ill-looking an be not would it

Miss guessed well pretty she admire; to slow not was Crawford Miss
her promote to honour of point a it made and feelings, Bertram’s
and volubility; and delight all was Norris Mrs. utmost. the to enjoyment
with heard be might and admiration, in say to something had Fanny even
reach; her within everything in taking eagerly was eye Her complacency.
observing and house, the of view a get to pains some at being after and
with but at look not could she which building of sort a was “it that
the fronts house The avenue? the is where “Now, added, she respect,”
Mr. it. of back the at be must therefore, avenue, The perceive. I east,
front.” west the of talked Rushworth

and distance, little a at begins house; the behind exactly is it “Yes,
see may You grounds. the of extremity the to mile a half for ascends
oak is It trees. distant more the of here--something it of something
entirely.”

had she what of information decided with speak now could Bertram Miss
her and opinion; her asked had Rushworth Mr. when about nothing known
furnish, could pride and vanity as flutter a happy as in were spirits
principal the before steps stone spacious the to up drove they when
entrance.



IX CHAPTER

whole the and lady; fair his receive to door the at was Rushworth Mr.
they drawing-room the In attention. due with him by welcomed were party
all had Bertram Miss and mother, the by cordiality equal with met were
of business the After wish. could she that each with distinction the
were doors the and eat, to necessary first was it over, was arriving
the into rooms intermediate two or one through them admit to open thrown
abundance with prepared was collation a where dining-parlour, appointed
The well. went all and ate, was much and said, was Much elegance. and
Crawford Mr. would How considered. then was day the of object particular
grounds? the of survey a take to chuse, he would manner what in like,
greater the suggested Crawford Mr. curricle. his mentioned Rushworth Mr.
be “To two. than more convey might which carriage some of desirableness
judgments, other and eyes other of advantage the of themselves depriving
pleasure.” present of loss the beyond even evil an be might

this but also; taken be should chaise the that proposed Rushworth Mrs.
smiled neither ladies young the amendment: an as received scarcely was
them of such to house the shewing of proposition, next Her spoke. nor
Bertram Miss for acceptable, more was before, there been not had as
doing be to glad were all and displayed, size its have to pleased was
something.

guidance Rushworth’s Mrs. under and accordingly, rose party whole The
and large, many and lofty, all rooms, of number a through shewn were
floors, shining with back, years fifty of taste the in furnished amply
handsome each carving, and gilding, marble, damask, rich mahogany, solid
but good, few some and abundance, were there pictures Of way. its in
anybody to anything longer no portraits, family were part larger the
the that all learn to pains great at been had who Rushworth, Mrs. but
to qualified well equally almost now was and teach, could housekeeper
to chiefly herself addressed she occasion present the On house. the shew
willingness the in comparison no was there but Fanny, and Crawford Miss
great of scores seen had who Crawford, Miss for attention; their of
civilly of appearance the only had them, of none for cared and houses,
interesting as almost was everything whom to Fanny, while listening,
Mrs. that all to earnestness unaffected with attended new, was it as
and rise its times, former in family the of relate could Rushworth
anything connect to delighted efforts, loyal and visits regal grandeur,
the of scenes with imagination her warm or known, already history with
past.

prospect much of possibility the excluded house the of situation The
were others the of some and Fanny while and rooms; the of any from
shaking and grave looking was Crawford Henry Rushworth, Mrs. attending
across looked front west the on room Every windows. the at head his
iron tall beyond immediately avenue the of beginning the to lawn a
gates. and palisades

any of be to supposed be could than rooms more many visited Having
for employment find and window-tax, the to contribute to than use other
chapel, the to coming are “we Rushworth, Mrs. said “Now,” housemaids,
but upon; down look and above, from enter to ought we properly which
will you if way, this in you take will I friends, among quite are we as
me.” excuse

something for her prepared had imagination Fanny’s entered. They
of purpose the for up fitted room, oblong spacious, mere a than grander
profusion the than solemn more or striking more nothing with devotion:
of ledge the over appearing cushions velvet crimson the and mahogany, of
voice, low a in she, said disappointed,” am “I above. gallery family the
awful nothing is There chapel. a of idea my not is “This Edmund. to
arches, no aisles, no are Here grand. nothing melancholy, nothing here,
the by ‘blown be to cousin, banners, No banners. no inscriptions, no
below.’” sleeps monarch ‘Scottish a that signs No heaven.’ of wind night

how for and built, been has this all lately how Fanny, forget, “You
and castles of chapels old the with compared purpose, a confined
have They family. the of use private the for only was It monasteries.
for look must you _There_ church. parish the in suppose, I buried, been
achievements.” the and banners the

disappointed.” am I but that; all of think to not me of foolish was “It

see you as up fitted was chapel “This relation. her began Rushworth Mrs.
understand, I as period, that Before time. Second’s the James in it,
that think to reason some is there and wainscot; only were pews the
purple only were seat family and pulpit the of cushions and linings the
was and chapel, handsome a is It certain. quite not is this but cloth;
always were Prayers evening. and morning both use constant in formerly
the but many; of memory the within chaplain, domestic the by it in read
off.” it left Rushworth Mr. late

a with Crawford, Miss said improvements,” its has generation “Every
Edmund. to smile,

and Crawford; Mr. to lesson her repeat to gone was Rushworth Mrs.
together. cluster a in remained Crawford Miss and Fanny, Edmund,

been have should custom the “that Fanny, cried pity,” a is “It
something is There times. former of part valuable a was It discontinued.
house, great a with character in much so chaplain and chapel a in
family whole A be! should household a such what of ideas one’s with
fine!” is prayer of purpose the for regularly assembling

heads the do must “It laughing. Crawford, Miss said indeed,” fine “Very
and housemaids poor the all force to good of deal great a family the of
twice here prayers their say and pleasure, and business leave to footmen
away.” staying for themselves excuses inventing are they while day, a

“If Edmund. said assembling,” family a of idea Fanny’s hardly is “_That_
more be must there themselves, attend _not_ do mistress and master the
custom.” the in good than harm

such on devices own their to people leave to safer is it rate, any “At
time own their chuse way--to own their go to likes Everybody subjects.
the formality, the attendance, of obligation The devotion. of manner and
and thing, formidable a is it time--altogether of length the restraint,
in gape and kneel to used who people good the if and likes; nobody what
men when come ever would time the that foreseen have could gallery that
a with woke they when bed, in minutes ten another lie might women and
missed, was chapel because reprobation, of danger without headache,
what with imagine you Cannot envy. and joy with jumped have would they
did Rushworth of house the of belles former the feelings unwilling
Mrs. and Eleanors Mrs. young The chapel? this to repair time a many
of full heads with but piety, seeming into up Bridgets--starched
worth not were chaplain poor the if different--especially very something
even inferior very were parsons fancy I days, those in at--and, looking
now.” are they what to

looked and coloured Fanny unanswered. was she moments few a For
little a needed he and speech; for angry too felt but Edmund, at
be hardly can mind lively “Your say, could he before recollection
sketch, amusing an us given have You subjects. serious on even serious
_times_ _at_ feel all must We so. not was it say cannot nature human and
are you if but wish; could we as thoughts our fixing of difficulty the
a into grown weakness a say, to is that thing, frequent a it supposing
devotions _private_ the from expected be could what neglect, from habit
which suffered, are which minds the think you Do persons? such of
a in collected more be would chapel, a in wanderings in indulged are
closet?”

favour. their in least at chances two have would They likely. very “Yes,
would it and without, from attention the distract to less be would There
long.” so tried be not

_one_ under itself against struggle not does which mind “The
I _other_, the in it distract to objects find would circumstance,
rouse often may example of and place the of influence the and believe;
service, the of length greater The with. begun are than feelings better
One mind. the upon stretch a hard too sometimes be to admit I however,
to enough long Oxford left yet not have I but so; not were it wishes
are.” prayers chapel what forget

the about scattered being party the of rest the passing, was this While
saying, by sister, her to attention Crawford’s Mr. called Julia chapel,
as exactly side, by side standing Maria, and Rushworth Mr. at look “Do
the completely they not Have performed. be to going were ceremony the if
it?” of air

Maria, to forward stepping and acquiescence, his smiled Crawford Mr.
Miss see to like not do “I hear, could only she which voice a in said,
altar.” the near so Bertram

recovering but two, or step a moved instinctively lady the Starting,
not tone a in him, asked and laugh, to affected moment, a in herself
away?” her give would he “If louder, much

look a with reply, his was awkwardly,” very it do should I afraid am “I
meaning. of

joke. the on carried moment, the at them joining Julia,

place take not should it that pity a really is it word, my “Upon
altogether, are we here for licence, proper a but had we if directly,
she And pleasant.” and snug more be could world the in nothing and
the catch to as caution little so with it about laughed and talked
to sister her expose and mother, his and Rushworth Mr. of comprehension
spoke Rushworth Mrs. while lover, her of gallantries whispered the
her to event happy most a being its of dignity and smiles proper with
place. took it whenever

he where to running and Julia, cried orders!” in but were Edmund “If
in but were you if Edmund, dear “My Fanny: and Crawford Miss with stood
that unlucky How directly. ceremony the perform might you now, orders
ready.” quite are Maria and Rushworth Mr. ordained; not are you

a amused have might spoke, Julia as countenance, Crawford’s Miss
she idea new the under aghast almost looked She observer. disinterested
she what at be will she distressed “How her. pitied Fanny receiving. was
mind. her across passed now,” just said

clergyman?” a be to you are “what, Crawford; Miss said “Ordained!”

at return--probably father’s my after soon orders take shall I “Yes;
Christmas.”

complexion, her recovering and spirits, her rallying Crawford, Miss
the of spoken have would I before, this known had I “If only, replied
subject. the turned and respect,” more with cloth

stillness and silence the to left afterwards soon was chapel The
Miss year. the throughout interruptions, few with it, in reigned which
feel to seemed all and way, the led sister, her with displeased Bertram,
enough. long there been had they that

Mrs. and shewn, entirely now been had house the of part lower The
the towards proceeded have would cause, the in weary never Rushworth,
her if above, rooms the all through them taken and staircase, principal
“For enough. time being there of doubt a with interposed not had son
a many which proposition self-evident of sort the with he, said if,”
the over going long _too_ are “we avoid, always not does head clearer
is It doors. of out done be to is what for time have not shall we house,
five.” at dine to are we and two, past

grounds, the surveying of question the and submitted; Rushworth Mrs.
Mrs. and agitated, fully more be to likely was how, the and who the with
horses and carriages of junction what by arrange to beginning was Norris
door, outward an with meeting people, young the when done, be could most
and turf to immediately led which steps of flight a on open temptingly
one impulse, one by as pleasure-grounds, of sweets the all and shrubs,
out. walked all liberty, and air for wish

Rushworth, Mrs. said present,” the for here down turn we “Suppose
greatest the are “Here them. following and hint the taking civilly
pheasants.” curious the are here and plants, our of number

find not may we “whether him, round looking Crawford, Mr. said “Query,”
great of walls see I farther? go we before here us employ to something
lawn?” this on council a summon we shall Rushworth, Mr. promise.

wilderness the believe “I son, her to Rushworth Mrs. said “James,”
the seen never have Bertrams Miss The party. the all to new be will
yet.” wilderness

to inclination no seemed there time some for but made, was objection No
the by first at attracted were All distance. any to or plan, any in move
independence. happy in about dispersed all and pheasants, the or plants
capabilities the examine to forward move to first the was Crawford Mr.
wall, high a by side each on bounded lawn, The house. the of end that of
beyond and bowling-green, a area planted first the beyond contained
and palisades, iron by backed walk, terrace long a bowling-green the
wilderness the of trees the of tops the into them over view a commanding
Mr. fault-finding. for spot good a was It adjoining. immediately
when, and Rushworth; Mr. and Bertram Miss by followed soon was Crawford
three these parties, into form to began others the time, little a after
Crawford, Miss Edmund, by terrace the on consultation busy in found were
short a after who, and unite, to naturally as seemed who Fanny, and
walked and them left difficulties, and regrets their of participation
were Julia, and Norris, Mrs. Rushworth, Mrs. three, remaining The on.
prevailed, longer no star happy whose Julia, for behind; far still
her restrain and Rushworth, Mrs. of side the by keep to obliged was
fallen having aunt, her while pace, slow lady’s that to feet impatient
was pheasants, the feed to out come was who housekeeper, the with in
of out one only the Julia, Poor her. with gossip in behind lingering
of state a in now was lot, their with satisfied tolerably not nine the
as barouche-box the of Julia the from different as and penance, complete
to up brought been had she which politeness The imagined. be well could
the while escape; to her for impossible it made duty a as practise
of consideration just that self-command, of species higher that of want
which right, of principle that heart, own her of knowledge that others,
miserable her made education, her of part essential any formed not had
it. under

one taken had they when Crawford, Miss said hot,” insufferably is “This
the in door the to time second a drawing were and terrace, the on turn
being to object us of any “Shall wilderness. the to opened which middle
it. into get but can one if wood, little nice a is Here comfortable?
is; it course of but locked! be not should door the if happiness What
go can who people only the are gardeners the places great these in for
like.” they where

in agreed all were they and locked, be to not proved however, door, The
day of glare unmitigated the leaving and it, through joyfully turning
wilderness, the in them landed steps of flight considerable A behind.
of chiefly though and acres, two about of wood planted a was which
much too with out laid though and down, cut beech and laurel, and larch
with compared beauty, natural and shade, and darkness was regularity,
it, of refreshment the felt all They terrace. the and bowling-green the
short a after length, At admire. and walk only could time some for and
Mr. clergyman, a be to are you “So with, began Crawford Miss pause,
me.” to surprise a rather is This Bertram.

some for designed me suppose must You you? surprise it should “Why
a nor lawyer, a neither am I that perceive might and profession,
sailor.” a nor soldier,

there know you And me. to occurred not had it short, in but, true; “Very
second the to fortune a leave to grandfather a or uncle an generally is
son.”

universal. quite not “but Edmund, said practice,” praiseworthy very “A
for something do must one, _being_ and exceptions, the of one am I
myself.”

lot the always was _that_ thought I clergyman? a be to you are why “But
him.” before chuse to many were there where youngest, the of

then?” chosen, never itself church the think you “Do

which conversation, of _never_ the in yes, But word. black a is “_Never_
the in done be to is what For it. think do I _often_, _very_ _not_ means
other the of either in and themselves, distinguish to love Men church?
is clergyman A church. the in not but gained, be may distinction lines
nothing.”

as well as hope, I gradations, its has conversation of _nothing_ “The
must He fashion. or state in high be cannot clergyman A _never_. the
situation that call cannot I But dress. in ton the set or mobs, head not
importance first the of is that all of charge the has which nothing
and temporally considered, collectively or individually mankind, to
and morals, and religion of guardianship the has which eternally,
one No influence. their from result which manners the of consequently
it so, is it holds who man the If nothing. _office_ the call can here
and importance, just its foregoing by duty, his of neglect the by is
appear.” to not ought he what appear to place his of out stepping

been has one than clergyman the to consequence greater assign “_You_
see not does One comprehend. quite can I than or given, hear to used
be it can how and society, in importance and influence this of much
a sermons two can How themselves? seen seldom so are they where acquired
have to preacher the supposing hearing, worth them supposing even week,
govern of? speak you that all do own, his to Blair’s prefer to sense the
rest the for congregation large a of manners the fashion and conduct the
pulpit.” his of out clergyman a sees scarcely One week? the of

large.” at nation the of speaking am _I_ London, of speaking are “_You_

rest.” the of sample fair pretty a is imagine, I metropolis, “The

the throughout vice to virtue of proportion the of hope, should I “Not,
not is It morality. best our for cities great in look not do We kingdom.
and good; most do can denomination any of people respectable that there
most be can clergy the of influence the that there not is certainly it
fine in not is it but admired; and followed is preacher fine A felt.
and parish his in useful be will clergyman good a that only preaching
size a of are neighbourhood and parish the where neighbourhood, his
general his observing and character, private his knowing of capable
lost are clergy The case. the be rarely can London in which conduct,
largest the to known are They parishioners. their of crowds the in there
public influencing their to regard with And preachers. as only part
to mean I suppose or me, misunderstand not must Crawford Miss manners,
refinement of regulators the good-breeding, of arbiters the them call
I _manners_ The life. of ceremonies the of masters the courtesy, and
good of result the perhaps, _conduct_, called be rather might of speak
their is it which doctrines those of short, in effect, the principles;
everywhere be believe, I will, it and recommend; and teach to duty
are so be, to ought they what not are or are, clergy the as that found,
nation.” the of rest the

earnestness. gentle with Fanny, said “Certainly,”

Price Miss convinced quite have “you Crawford, Miss cried “There,”
already.”

too.” Crawford Miss convince could I wish “I

just am “I smile; arch an with she, said will,” ever you think not do “I
take to intend should you that first at was I as now surprised much as
your change do Come, better. something for fit are really You orders.
law.” the into Go late. too not is It mind.

this into go to told was I as ease much as With law! the into “Go
wilderness.”

wilderness worst the being law about something say to going are you “Now
you.” forestalled have I remember, you; forestall I but two, the of

a saying my prevent to only is object the when hurry not need “You
very a am I nature. my in wit least the not is there for _mot_, _bon_
a of borders the on blunder may and being, plain-spoken matter-of-fact,
out.” it striking without together hour an half for repartee

first the made Fanny thoughtful. was Each succeeded. silence general A
only with tired be should I that wonder “I saying, by interruption
it if seat, a to come we time next the but wood; sweet this in walking
little a for down sit to glad be should I you, to disagreeable not is
while.”

his, within arm her drawing immediately Edmund, cried Fanny,” dear “My
Perhaps,” tired. very not are you hope I been! have I thoughtless “how
of honour the me do may companion other “my Crawford, Miss to turning
arm.” an taking

she as however, it, took She tired.” all at not am I but you, “Thank
a such feeling of so, do her having of gratification the and spoke,
Fanny. of forgetful little a him made time, first the for connexion
a What use. any of me make not do “You he. said me,” touch scarcely “You
Oxford At man! a of that from arm woman’s a of weight the in difference
of length the for me on lean man a have to used deal good a been have I
comparison.” the in fly a only are you and street, a

have must we for at; wonder almost I which tired, not really am “I
have?” we think you not Do wood. this in mile a least at walked

in much so yet not was he for answer; sturdy his was mile,” a half “Not
lawlessness. feminine with time, reckon or distance, measure to as love

taken have We about. wound have we much how consider not do you “Oh!
mile a half be must itself wood the and course, serpentine very a such
since yet it of end the seen never have we for line, straight a in long
path.” great first the left we

saw we path, great first that left we before remember, you if “But
it saw and vista, whole the down looked We it. of end the to directly
in furlong a than more been have not could it and gates, iron by closed
length.”

long very a is it sure am I but furlongs, your of nothing know I “Oh!
into came we since ever out and in winding been have we that and wood,
must I it, in mile a walked have we that say I when therefore, and it;
compass.” within speak

taking Edmund, said here,” hour an of quarter a exactly been have “We
hour?” an miles four walking are we think you “Do watch. his out

too or fast too always is watch A watch. your with me attack not do “Oh!
watch.” a by to dictated be cannot I slow.

they walk very the of bottom the at out them brought farther steps few A
and sheltered, and shaded well back, standing and of; talking been had
on bench, comfortable-sized a was park, the into ha-ha a over looking
down. sat all they which

her; observing Edmund, said Fanny,” tired, very are you afraid am “I
for amusement day’s bad a be will This sooner? speak you not would “why
so her fatigues exercise of sort Every up. knocked be to are you if you
riding.” except Crawford, Miss soon,

all did I as horse her engross me let to then, you, in abominable “How
happen never shall it but myself, of and you of ashamed am I week! last
again.”

own my of sensible more me makes consideration and attentiveness “_Your_
me.” with than you with hands safer in seems interest Fanny’s neglect.

there for surprise; no me gives however, now, tired be should she “That
have we what as fatiguing so duties one’s of course the in nothing is
to room one from dawdling house, great a seeing morning: this doing been
does one what hearing attention, one’s and eyes one’s straining another,
generally is It for. care not does one what admiring understand, not
found has Price Miss and world, the in bore greatest the be to allowed
it.” know not did she though so, it

fine a on shade the in sit “to Fanny; said rested,” be soon shall “I
refreshment.” perfect most the is verdure, upon look and day,

move,” must “I again. up was Crawford Miss while little a sitting After
I till ha-ha the across looked have I me. fatigues “resting she; said
view, same the at gate iron that through look and go must I weary. am
well.” so it see to able being without

up look will you if Crawford, Miss “Now, likewise. seat the left Edmund
long, mile a half be cannot it that yourself convince will you walk, the
mile.” a half half or

glance.” a with _that_ see “I she; said distance,” immense an is “It

she calculate, not would She vain. in but her, with reasoned still He
degree greatest The assert. and smile only would She compare. not would
they and engaging, more been have not could consistency rational of
should they that agreed was it last At satisfaction. mutual with talked
little a walking by wood the of dimensions the determine to endeavour
were they line the in it, of end one to go would They it. about more
by bottom the along walk green straight a was there in--for then
other some in way little a turn perhaps ha-ha--and the of side the
few a in back be and them, assist to likely seemed it if direction,
this but too, moved have would and rested, was she said Fanny minutes.
an with was she where remaining her urged Edmund suffered. not was
to bench the on left was she and resist, not could she which earnestness
she that regret great with but care, cousin’s her of pleasure with think
and corner, the turned had they till them watched She stronger. not was
ceased. had them of sound all till listened



X CHAPTER

still was Fanny and away, passed minutes, twenty hour, an of quarter A
interruption without herself, and Crawford, Miss Edmund, of thinking
to and long, so left being at surprised be to began She one. any from
voices their and steps their hearing of desire anxious an with listen
feet and voices heard she heard; she length at and listened, She again.
those not was it that herself satisfied just had she but approaching;
issued Crawford Mr. and Rushworth, Mr. Bertram, Miss when wanted, she
her. before were and herself, trod had she which path same the from

the were this?” comes how Fanny, dear “My and alone” all Price “Miss
her cried Fanny,” dear “Poor story. her told She salutations. first
staid have better had You them! by used been have you ill “how cousin,
us.” with

resumed she side, each on gentleman a with herself seating Then
the discussed and before, them engaged had which conversation the
fixed was Nothing animation. much with improvements of possibility
generally and, projects, and ideas of full was Crawford Henry but on;
her, by first approved, immediately was proposed he whatever speaking,
to be to seemed business principal whose Rushworth, Mr. by then and
own his of thought original an risked scarcely who and others, the hear
place. Smith’s friend his seen had they that wish a beyond

iron the observing Bertram, Miss way, this in spent minutes some After
their that park, the into it through passing of wish a expressed gate,
thing very the was It comprehensive. more be might plans their and views
of way only the was it best, the was it wished, be to others all of
he and opinion; Crawford’s Henry in advantage, any with proceeding
exactly them give would which off, mile a half not knoll a saw directly
that to must they therefore Go house. the of command requisite the
Rushworth Mr. locked. was gate the but gate; that through and knoll,
he whether thinking near very been had he key; the brought had he wished
without come never would he determined was he key; the bring not should
They evil. present the remove not did this still but again; key the
doing so for inclination Bertram’s Miss as and through; get not could
outright declaring Rushworth’s Mr. in ended it lessen, means no by did
accordingly. off set He key. the fetch and go would he that

from far so are we as now, do can we thing best the undoubtedly is “It
gone. was he when Crawford, Mr. said already,” house the

you not do sincerely, now, But done. be to else nothing is there “Yes,
expected?” you than worse altogether place the find

in complete more grander, better, it find I otherwise. far indeed, “No,
the you tell to And best. the be not may style that though style, its
see ever shall _I_ that think not do “I lower, rather speaking truth,”
will summer Another now. do I as pleasure much so with again Sotherton
me.” to it improve hardly

a much too are “You replied, lady the embarrassment moment’s a After
people other If world. the of eyes the with see to not world the of man
will.” you that doubt no have I improved, Sotherton think

be might as world the of man the much so quite not am I afraid am “I
nor evanescent, so quite not are feelings My points. some in me for good
the be to finds one as dominion easy such under past the of memory my
world.” the of men with case

“You again. began Bertram Miss silence. short a by followed was This
to glad was I morning. this much very here drive your enjoy to seemed
way.” whole the laughing were Julia and You entertained. well so you see

recollection least the not have I but were; we believe I Yes, we? “Were
of stories ridiculous some her to relating was I believe I Oh! what. at
laugh.” to loves sister Your uncle’s. my of groom Irish old an

am?” I than light-hearted more her think “You

smiling, know,” you “consequently, replied; he amused,” easily “More
Irish with you entertain to hoped have not could I company. “better
drive.” miles’ ten a during anecdotes

think to more have I but Julia, as lively as am I believe, I “Naturally,
now.” of

high very which in situations are there and undoubtedly; have, “You
too are however, prospects, Your insensibility. denote would spirits
before scene smiling very a have You spirits. of want justify to fair
you.”

Yes, conclude. I Literally, figuratively? or literally mean you “Do
But cheerful. very looks park the and shines, sun the certainly,
and restraint of feeling a me give ha-ha, that gate, iron that unluckily
and spoke, she As said.” starling the as out,’ get cannot ‘I hardship.
“Mr. her. followed he gate: the to walked she expression, with was it
key!” this fetching long so is Rushworth

Mr. without and key the without out get not would you world the for “And
little with might you think I or protection, and authority Rushworth’s
assistance; my with here, gate, the of edge the round pass difficulty
and large, at more be to wished really you if done, be might it think I
prohibited.” not it think to yourself allow could

will. I and way, that out get can certainly I nonsense! “Prohibited!
of out be not shall we know; you moment, a in here be will Rushworth Mr.
sight.”

will he that him tell to as good so be will Price Miss are, we if “Or
knoll.” the on oak of grove the knoll: that near us find

to effort an making help not could wrong, be to this all feeling Fanny,
will “you cried; she Bertram,” Miss yourself, hurt will “You it. prevent
gown; your tear will you spikes; those against yourself hurt certainly
not better had You ha-ha. the into slipping of danger in be will you
go.”

spoken, were words these while side other the on safe was cousin Her
you, “Thank said, she success, of good-humour the all with smiling and,
good-bye.” so and well, and alive are gown my and I but Fanny, dear my

pleasant of increase no with and solitude, her to left again was Fanny
heard, and seen had she that all almost for sorry was she for feelings,
taking By Crawford. Mr. with angry and Bertram, Miss at astonished
unreasonable very her, to appeared it as and, route, circuitous a
some for and eye; her beyond soon were they knoll, the to direction
companion. any of sound or sight without remained she longer minutes
almost could She herself. to all wood little the have to seemed She
was it that but it, left had Crawford Miss and Edmund that thought have
entirely. so her forget to Edmund for impossible

footsteps: sudden by musings disagreeable from roused again was She
She walk. principal the down pace quick a at coming was somebody
breath, of out and hot who, Julia, was it but Rushworth, Mr. expected
“Heyday! her, seeing on out cried disappointment, of look a with and
you.” with were Crawford Mr. and Maria thought I others? the are Where

explained. Fanny

looking anywhere,” them see cannot I word! my upon trick, pretty “A
I think I and off, far very be cannot they “But park. the into eagerly
help.” without even Maria, as much as to equal am

Do key. the with moment a in here be will Rushworth Mr. Julia, “But,
Rushworth.” Mr. for wait

Why, morning. one for family the of enough had have I indeed. I, “Not
a Such mother. horrible his from escaped moment this but have I child,
composed so here sitting were you while enduring, been have I as penance
my in been had you if perhaps, well, as been have might It happy! so and
scrapes.” these of out keep to contrive always you but place,

let and it, for allow could Fanny but reflection, unjust most a was This
it that felt she but hasty; was temper her and vexed, was Julia pass: it
she if her asked only notice, no taking therefore, and last, not would
Rushworth. Mr. seen not had

death, and life upon if as away posting was He him. saw we yes, “Yes,
all you where and errand, his us tell to time spare just but could and
were.”

nothing.” for trouble much so have should he pity a is “It

for myself punish to obliged not am I concern. Maria’s Miss is “_That_
aunt tiresome my as long as avoid, not could I mother The sins. _her_
away get _can_ I son the but housekeeper, the with about dancing was
from.”

not away, walked and fence, the across scrambled immediately she And
of anything seen had she whether of question last Fanny’s to attending
of sat now Fanny which in dread of sort The Edmund. and Crawford Miss
continued their of much so thinking her prevented Rushworth Mr. seeing
been had he that felt She done. have might she as however, absence,
had what communicate to having in unhappy quite was and ill-used, very
and exit; Julia’s after minutes five within her joined He passed.
and mortified evidently was he story, the of best the made she though
his anything; said scarcely he first At degree. common no in displeased
to walked he and vexation, and surprise extreme his expressed only looks
do. to what know to seeming without there, stood and gate the

you that say to me charged Maria cousin stay--my to me desired “They
thereabouts.” or knoll, that at them find would

see “I sullenly; he said farther,” any go shall I believe not do “I
gone be may they knoll the to get I time the By them. of nothing
enough.” walking had have I else. somewhere

Fanny. by countenance gloomy most a with down sat he And

be to longed she And unlucky.” very is “it she; said sorry,” very am “I
purpose. the to more something say to able

for staid have well as might they think “I silence, of interval an After
he. said me,”

her.” follow would you thought Bertram “Miss

staid.” had she if her follow to had have not should “I

pause, another After silenced. was Fanny and denied, be not could This
Mr. this of admirer great a such you are Price, Miss on--“Pray, went he
him.” in nothing see can I part, my For are? people some as Crawford

handsome.” all at him think not do “I

not is He handsome. man undersized an such call can Nobody “Handsome!
foot five than more not is he if wonder not should I nine. foot five
these opinion, my In fellow. ill-looking an is he think I eight.
them.” without well very did We all. at addition no are Crawfords

contradict to how know not did she and here, Fanny escaped sigh small A
him.

have might there key, the fetching about difficulty any made had I “If
it.” wanted she said she moment very the went I but excuse, some been

dare I and sure, am I manner, your than obliging more be could “Nothing
you distance, some is it still but could; you as fast as walked you say
people when and house; the into quite house, the to spot this from know,
seems minute half every and time, of judges bad are they waiting, are
five.” like

key the had had he “wished and again, gate the to walked and up got He
standing his in discerned she thought Fanny time.” the at him about
another to her encouraged which relenting, of indication an there
join not should you pity a is “It therefore, said, she and attempt,
part that from house the of view better a have to expected They them.
of nothing and improved; be may it how thinking be will and park, the of
you.” without settled be can know, you sort, that

a retaining in than away sending in successful more herself found She
you “if he, said “Well,” on. worked was Rushworth Mr. companion.
key the bring to foolish be would it go: better had I think really
farther without off walked he out, himself letting And nothing.” for
ceremony.

so her left had who two the by engrossed all now were thoughts Fanny’s
search in go to resolved she impatient, quite getting and ago, long
just had and walk, bottom the along steps their followed She them. of
Crawford Miss of laugh the and voice the when another, into up turned
windings more few a and approached, sound the ear; her caught more once
wilderness the into returned just were They her. before them brought
very them tempted had fastened, not sidegate, a which to park, the from
the of portion a across been had they and her, leaving their after soon
morning whole the hoping been had Fanny which avenue very the into park
This trees. the of one under down sitting been had and last, at reach to
time their spending been had they that evident was It history. their was
Fanny’s absence. their of length the of aware not were and pleasantly,
her for wished had Edmund that assured being in was consolation best
she had her, for back come have certainly should he that and much, very
away do to sufficient quite not was this but already; tired been not
of talked had he when hour, whole a left been having of pain the with
know to felt she curiosity of sort the banish to nor minutes, few a only
of result the and time; that all about conversing been had they what
by prepared they as depression, and disappointment her to was whole the
house. the to return to agreement general

Rushworth Mrs. terrace, the to steps the of bottom the reaching On
the for ready just top, the at themselves presented Norris Mrs. and
the leaving their from half a and hour an of end the at wilderness,
Whatever faster. move to employed well too been had Norris Mrs. house.
nieces, her of pleasures the intercept to occurred had cross-accidents
housekeeper, the for enjoyment; complete of morning a found had she
her taken had pheasants, of subject the on courtesies many great a after
receipt the her given and cows, their about all her told dairy, the to
had they them leaving Julia’s since and cheese; cream famous a for
satisfactory most a made had she whom with gardener, the by met been
illness, grandson’s his to as right him set had she for acquaintance,
and it; for charm a him promised and ague, an was it that him convinced
and plants, of nursery choicest his all her shewn had return, in he,
heath. of specimen curious very a with her presented actually

there together, house the to returned all they _rencontre_ this On
and chit-chat, and sofas, with could they as time the away lounge to
of arrival the and others, the of return the till Reviews, Quarterly
came gentlemen two the and Bertrams Miss the before late was It dinner.
partially than more been have to appear not did ramble their and in,
the to regard with useful anything of productive all at or agreeable,
after walking all been had they accounts own their By day. the of object
to seemed, last at place taken had which junction the and other, each
re-establishing for late too much as been have to observation, Fanny’s
alteration. any on determining for been had confessedly it as harmony,
not was hers that Rushworth, Mr. and Julia at looked she as felt, She
of face the on gloom was there them: amongst bosom dissatisfied only the
thought she and gay, more much were Bertram Miss and Crawford Mr. each.
any away do to dinner, during pains, particular taking was he that
good-humour. general restore and two, other the of resentment little

home drive miles’ ten a coffee, and tea by followed soon was Dinner
to down sitting their of time the from and hours; of waste no allowed
came carriage the till nothings busy of succession quick a was it table,
a obtained and about, fidgeted having Norris, Mrs. and door, the to
made and housekeeper, the from cheese cream a and eggs pheasants’ few
the lead to ready was Rushworth, Mrs. to speeches civil of abundance
I hope “I said, Julia, approaching Crawford, Mr. moment same the At way.
air evening the of afraid is she unless companion, my lose to not am
very was but foreseen, been not had request The seat.” a exposed so in
as well as almost end to likely was day Julia’s and received, graciously
and different, something to mind her up made had Bertram Miss began. it
the really being of conviction her but disappointed; little a was
Mr. receive to her enabled and it, under her comforted preferred one
better certainly was He ought. she as attentions parting Rushworth’s
ascending in her assist to than barouche the into her hand to pleased
arrangement. the by confirmed seemed complacency his and box, the

said word,” my upon you, for day fine a been has this Fanny, “Well,
from pleasure but “Nothing park. the through drove they as Norris, Mrs.
your to obliged much very be to ought you sure am I end! to beginning
day’s good pretty A go. you let to contriving for me and Bertram aunt
had!” have you amusement

have _you_ think “I directly, say to enough discontented just was Maria
things, good of full seems lap Your ma’am. yourself, well pretty done
my knocking been has which us between something of basket a is here and
unmercifully.” elbow

old nice that which heath, little beautiful a only is it dear, “My
in it have will I way, your in is it if but take; me make would gardener
take me; for parcel that carry shall you Fanny, There, directly. lap my
like just cheese, cream a is it fall; it let not do it: of care great
old good that satisfy would Nothing dinner. at had we one excellent the
long as out stood I cheeses. the of one taking my but Whitaker, Mrs.
was it knew I and eyes, her into came almost tears the till could, I as
Whitaker Mrs. That with. delighted be would sister my that sort the just
was wine whether her asked I when shocked quite was She treasure! a is
for housemaids two away turned has she and table, second the at allowed
manage can I Now Fanny. cheese, the of care Take gowns. white wearing
well.” very basket the and parcel other the

that half-pleased Maria, said spunging?” been you have else “What
complimented. so be should Sotherton

pheasants’ beautiful those of four but nothing is It dear! my “Spunging,
take not would she me: upon force quite would Whitaker Mrs. which eggs,
understood she as me, to amusement an such be must it said She denial. a
and sort; that of creatures living few a have to alone, quite lived I
the under them set to dairymaid the get shall I will. it sure be to so
my to moved them have can I good to come they if and hen, spare first
in me to delight great a be will it and coop; a borrow and house own
mother your luck, good have I if And them. to attend to hours lonely my
some.” have shall

as was drive the and still, and mild evening, beautiful a was It
Norris Mrs. when but it; make could Nature of serenity the as pleasant
Their within. those to drive silent a altogether was it speaking, ceased
had day the whether determine to and exhausted; general in were spirits
almost of meditations the occupy might pain, or pleasure most afforded
all.



XI CHAPTER

Miss the afforded imperfections, its all with Sotherton, at day The
letters the from derived were than feelings agreeable more much Bertrams
much was It Mansfield. reached afterwards soon which Antigua, from
think to and father; their of than Crawford Henry of think to pleasanter
these which period, certain a within again England in father their of
exercise. unwelcome most a was do, to them obliged letters

of wrote Thomas Sir return. his for fixed month black the was November
His authorise. could anxiety and experience as decision much as with it
take to proposing in him justify to as concluded nearly so was business
forward looked consequently he and packet, September the in passage his
November. in early again family beloved his with being of hope the with

a brought father the her to for Julia; than pitied be to more was Maria
happiness her for solicitous most friend the of return the and husband,
happiness that chosen had she whom on lover, the to her unite would
to was do could she all and prospect, gloomy a was It depend. should
should she away cleared mist the when hope and it, over mist a throw
there November, in _early_ be hardly would It else. something see
favouring that _something_; or passage bad a delays, generally were
or look, they while eyes their shuts who everybody which _something_
would It of. comfort the feels reason, they while understandings their
November of middle the least; at November of middle the be probably
might Much weeks. thirteen comprised months Three off. months three was
weeks. thirteen in happen

that half of suspicion a by mortified deeply been have would Thomas Sir
have hardly would and return, his of subject the on felt daughters his
the in excited it interest the of knowledge a in consolation found
her with up walking on Crawford, Miss lady. young another of breast
and news; good the heard Park, Mansfield at evening the spend to brother
and politeness, beyond affair the in concern no have to seeming though
with it heard congratulation, quiet a in feelings her all vented have to
particulars the gave Norris Mrs. satisfied. easily so not attention an
Miss as tea, after but dropt; was subject the and letters, the of
looking Fanny and Edmund with window open an at standing was Crawford
Rushworth, Mr. Bertrams, Miss the while scene, twilight a on out
she pianoforte, the at candles with busy all were Crawford Henry and
“How saying, and group, the towards round turning by it revived suddenly
November.” of thinking is He looks! Rushworth Mr. happy

say. to nothing had but too, Rushworth Mr. at round looked Edmund

event.” interesting very a be will return father’s “Your

but long, only not absence an absence; an such after indeed, will, “It
dangers.” many so including

your events: interesting other of also forerunner the be will “It
orders.” taking your and marriage, sister’s

“Yes.”

of mind in me put does it “but laughing, she, said affronted,” be “Don’t
in exploits great performing after who, heroes, heathen old the of some
return.” safe their on gods the to sacrifices offered land, foreign a

serious a with Edmund, replied case,” the in sacrifice no is “There
own her entirely is “it again; pianoforte the at glancing and smile,
doing.”

than more no done has She joking. merely was I is. it know I yes “Oh
being her of doubt no have I and do; would woman young every what
understand.” not do you course, of sacrifice, other My happy. extremely

Maria’s as voluntary as quite is you, assure I orders, taking “My
marrying.”

convenience father’s your and inclination your that fortunate is “It
I you, for kept living good very a is There well. so accord should
hereabouts.” understand,

me?” biassed has suppose you “Which

Fanny. cried not,” has it sure am I _that_ “But

affirm would I than more is it but Fanny, word, good your for you “Thank
for provision a such was there that knowing the contrary, the On myself.
There should. it that wrong it think I can Nor me. bias did probably me
why reason no see I and overcome, be to disinclination natural no was
a have will he that knowing for clergyman worse a make should man a
have not should I hope I hands. safe in was I life. in early competence
too was father my sure am I and way, wrong a in myself influenced been
but biased, was I that doubt no have I it. allowed have to conscientious
blamelessly.” was it think I

for “as pause, short a after Fanny, said thing,” of sort same the is “It
be to general a of son the or navy, the into go to admiral an of son the
that wonders Nobody that. in wrong anything sees nobody and army, the in
or best, them serve can friends their where line the prefer should they
appear.” they than it in earnest in less be to them suspects

either profession, The good. reasons for and Price, Miss dear my “No,
favour: its in everything has It justification. own its is army, or navy
always are sailors and Soldiers fashion. bustle, danger, heroism,
and soldiers are men that wonder can Nobody society. in acceptable
sailors.”

of certainty the with orders takes who man a of motives the “But
be “To Edmund. said think?” you suspected, fairly be may preferment
uncertainty complete most the in it do must he eyes, your in justified
provision.” any of

indeed; madness is that No; living! a without orders take “What!
madness.” absolute

to neither is man a if filled, be to is church the how you ask I “Shall
not would certainly you for No; without? nor living a with orders take
from clergyman the to advantage some beg must I But say. to what know
which feelings those by influenced be cannot he As argument. own your
in sailor and soldier the to reward and temptation as highly rank you
are fashion, and noise, and heroism, as profession, a of choice their
wanting of suspicion the to liable less be to ought he him, against all
his.” of choice the in intentions good or sincerity

made, ready income an preferring in sincere very is he doubt no “Oh!
doing of intentions best the has and one; for working of trouble the to
is It fat. grow and drink, eat, but days his of rest the all nothing
of want a ease; of love and Indolence indeed. Bertram, Mr. indolence,
inclination of or company, good for taste of ambition, laudable all
clergymen. men make which agreeable, being of trouble the take to
the selfish--read and slovenly be but do to nothing has clergyman A
does curate His wife. his with quarrel and weather, the watch newspaper,
dine.” to is life own his of business the and work, the all

common so not are they think I but doubt, no clergymen, such are “There
I character. general their it esteeming in Crawford Miss justify to as
censure, commonplace say) I (may and comprehensive this in that suspect
whose persons, prejudiced from but yourself, from judging not are you
that impossible is It hearing. of habit the in been have you opinions
clergy. the of knowledge much you given have can observation own your
men of set a of few very with acquainted personally been have can You
at told been have you what speaking are You conclusively. so condemn you
table.” uncle’s your

opinion an where and opinion; general the me to appears what speak “I
of much seen not have _I_ Though correct. usually is it general, is
any leave to many too by seen is it clergymen, of lives domestic the
information.” of deficiency

are denomination, whatever of men, educated of body one any “Where
information, of deficiency a be must there indiscriminately, condemned
admirals, brother his and uncle, Your else. something of (smiling) or
bad, or good whom, chaplains the beyond clergymen of little knew perhaps
away.” wishing always were they

the of chaplain the from kindness great with met has He William! “Poor
purpose the to much very Fanny’s, of apostrophe tender a was Antwerp,”
conversation. the of not if feelings own her of

uncle,” my from opinions my take to addicted little so been have “I
so me push you since suppose--and hardly can I “that Crawford, Miss said
seeing of means the without entirely not am I that observe, must I hard,
own my of guest the time present this at being are, clergymen what
to obliging and kind most is Grant Dr. though And Grant. Dr. brother,
scholar good a say, dare I and, gentleman, a really is he though and me,
respectable, very is and sermons, good preaches often and clever, and
have must who _vivant_, _bon_ selfish indolent, an be to him see _I_
the for finger a stir not will who everything; in consulted palate his
blunder, a makes cook the if moreover, who, and one; any of convenience
and Henry truth, the own To wife. excellent his with humour of out is
a about disappointment a by evening very this out driven partly were I
was sister poor My of. better the get not could he which goose, green
it.” bear and stay to forced

great a is It word. my upon disapprobation, your at wonder not do “I
self-indulgence; of habit faulty very a by worse made temper, of defect
to painful exceedingly be must it from suffering sister your see to and
to attempt cannot We us. against goes it Fanny, yours. as feelings such
Grant.” Dr. defend

all for profession his up give not need we “but Fanny, replied “No,”
have would he chosen, had Grant Dr. profession whatever because, that;
navy the in either must, he as and it; into temper good a a--not taken
he than command his under people more many great a had have army, or
or sailor a as him by unhappy made been have would more think I now, has
whatever that suppose but cannot I Besides, clergyman. a as than soldier
greater a in been have would Grant Dr. in otherwise wish to be may there
where profession, worldly and active more a in worse becoming of danger
escaped have might he obligation--where and time less had have would he
knowledge that of least, at _frequency_, the himself, of knowledge that
sensible man--a A now. is he as escape should he impossible is it which
duty their others teaching of habit the in be cannot Grant, Dr. like man
very such preach and Sunday, every twice church to go cannot week, every
better the being without does, he as manner a good so in sermons good
he that doubt no have I and think; him make must It himself. it for
been had he if would he than himself restrain to endeavours oftener
clergyman.” a but anything

better a you wish I but sure; be to contrary, the to prove cannot “We
amiableness whose man a of wife the be to than Price, Miss fate,
a into himself preach may he though for sermons; own his upon depends
quarrelling him have to enough bad be will it Sunday, every good-humour
night.” Saturday till morning Monday from geese green about

Edmund said Fanny,” with quarrel often could who man the think “I
sermons.” any of reach the beyond be “must affectionately,

time only had Crawford Miss and window; the into farther turned Fanny
to used more been has Price Miss fancy “I manner, pleasant a in say, to
the by invited earnestly being when, it”; hear to than praise deserve
instrument, the to off tripped she glee, a in join to Bertrams Miss
her all of admiration of ecstasy an in her after looking Edmund leaving
graceful and light her to down manners obliging her from virtues, many
tread.

a goes “There presently. he said sure,” am I good-humour, goes “There
readily how and walks! she well How pain! give never would which temper
she moment the them joining others! of inclination the with in falls she
“that reflection, instant’s an after added, he pity,” a What asked. is
hands!” such in been have should she

the at continue him seeing of pleasure the had and it, to agreed Fanny
eyes his having of and glee; expected the of spite in her, with window
was that all where without, scene the towards hers, like turned, soon
an of brilliancy the in appeared lovely, and soothing, and solemn,
Fanny woods. the of shade deep the of contrast the and night, unclouded
Here’s repose! “here’s she; said harmony!” “Here’s feelings. her spoke
only poetry what and behind, music all and painting all leave may what
and care, every tranquillise may what Here’s describe! to attempt can
I this, as night a such on out look I When rapture! to heart the lift
world; the in sorrow nor wickedness neither be could there if as feel
Nature of sublimity the if both of less be would certainly there and
by themselves of out more carried were people and to, attended more were
scene.” a such contemplating

they and night, lovely a is It Fanny. enthusiasm, your hear to like “I
degree, some in feel, to taught been not have who pitied be to much are
in Nature for taste a given been least, at not, have who do; you as
deal.” great a lose They life. early

cousin.” subject, the on feel and think to me taught “_You_

bright.” very looking Arcturus There’s scholar. apt very a had “I

Cassiopeia.” see could I wish I Bear. the and “Yes,

afraid?” be you Should that. for lawn the on out go must “We

any had have we since while great a is It least. the in “Not
star-gazing.”

stay will “We began. glee The happened.” has it how know not do I “Yes;
window; the on back his turning he, said Fanny,” finished, is this till
too, advance him seeing of mortification the had she advanced, it as and
it when and instrument, the towards degrees gentle by forward moving
requesting in urgent most the among singers, the by close was he ceased,
again. glee the hear to

Norris’s Mrs. by away scolded till window the at alone sighed Fanny
cold. catching of threats



XII CHAPTER

to duties had son eldest his and November, in return to was Thomas Sir
Mr. of tidings brought September of approach The home. earlier him call
letter a in then and gamekeeper the to letter a in first Bertram,
gay, be to himself, arrived he August of end the by and Edmund; to
Crawford Miss or served, occasion as again gallant and agreeable,
to friends, and parties and Weymouth, and races of tell to demanded;
and interest, some with before weeks six listened have might she which
actual of power the by conviction, fullest the her give to altogether
brother. younger his preferring her of comparison,

was; it so but it; for sorry heartily was she and vexatious, very was It
want even not did she elder, the marry to meaning now from far so and
beauty conscious of claims simplest the what beyond him attract to
but anything without Mansfield, from absence lengthened his required:
clear perfectly it made consult, to will own his and view, in pleasure
more much so was indifference his and her; about care not did he that
of owner the forth step to now he were that own, her by equalled than
she time, in be to was he which complete, Thomas Sir the Park, Mansfield
him. accept could she believe not did

took Mansfield to back Bertram Mr. brought which duties and season The
the in him without do not could Everingham Norfolk. into Crawford Mr.
such of fortnight fortnight--a a for went He September. of beginning
their on both them put have to ought as Bertrams Miss the to dullness
the sister, her of jealousy her in admit, Julia even made and guard,
not him wishing and attentions, his distrusting of necessity absolute
of intervals the in leisure, sufficient of fortnight a and return; to
ought he that gentleman the convinced have to sleeping, and shooting
own his examining of habit the in more been he had away, longer keep to
was vanity idle his of indulgence the what to reflecting of and motives,
example, bad and prosperity from selfish and thoughtless but, tending;
handsome, sisters, The moment. present the beyond look not would he
and mind; sated his to amusement an were encouraging, and clever,
Mansfield, of pleasures social the equal to Norfolk in nothing finding
thither welcomed was and appointed, time the at it to returned gladly he
further. with trifle to came he whom those by gladly as quite

the to doomed and her, to attend to Rushworth Mr. only with Maria,
dogs, his of boast his bad, or good sport, day’s his of details repeated
qualifications, their of doubts his neighbours, his of jealousy his
to way their find not will which subjects poachers, after zeal his and
on attachment some or side one on talent some without feelings female
and unengaged Julia, and grievously; Crawford Mr. missed had other, the
sister Each more. much him missing of right the all felt unemployed,
by doing so in justified be might Julia favourite. the herself believed
Maria and wished, she what credit to inclined Grant, Mrs. of hints the
same the into returned Everything himself. Crawford Mr. of hints the by
and animated so each to being manners his absence; his before as channel
of short stopping just and either, with ground no lose to as agreeable
which warmth the and solicitude, the steadiness, the consistence, the
notice. general excite might

but dislike; to anything found who party the of one only the was Fanny
either with Crawford Mr. see never could she Sotherton, at day the since
and censure; or wonder without seldom and observation, without sister
it of exercise her to equal been judgment own her in confidence her had
clearly, seeing was she that sure been she had respect, other every in
important some made have probably would she candidly, judging and
only she however, was, it As confidant. usual her to communications
said surprised,” rather am “I lost. was hint the and hint, a hazarded
here being after soon, so again back come should Crawford Mr. “that she,
so was he understood had I for weeks; seven full before, long so
would something thought I that about, moving and change of fond very
is He elsewhere. him take to gone, once was he when occur, certainly
Mansfield.” than places gayer much to used

his gives it say dare I “and answer; Edmund’s was credit,” his to is “It
habits.” unsettled his like not does She pleasure. sister

cousins!” my with is he favourite a “What

I Grant, Mrs. please. must as such are women to manners his “Yes,
much seen never have I Julia; for preference a of him suspects believe,
a what but faults no has He so. be may it wish I but it, of symptom
remove.” would attachment serious

could “I cautiously, Fanny said engaged,” not were Bertram Miss “If
Julia.” than more her admired he that think almost sometimes

you, than best, Julia liking his of favour in more perhaps, is, “Which
before man, a that happens often it believe I for aware; be may Fanny,
or sister the distinguish will mind, own his up made quite has he
the than more of thinking really is he woman the of friend intimate
found he if here stay to sense much too has Crawford herself. woman
her, for afraid all at not am I and Maria; from danger any in himself
strong.” not are feelings her that given has she as proof a such after

think to meant and mistaken, been have must she supposed Fanny
could Edmund to submission that all with but future; in differently
she which hints and looks coinciding the of help the all and do,
that say to seemed which and others, the of some in noticed occasionally
She think. to what always not knew she choice, Crawford’s Mr. was Julia
subject, the on Norris aunt her of hopes the to evening, one privy, was
a on Rushworth, Mrs. of feelings the and feelings, her to as well as
listened; she as wondering help not could and similarity, some of point
was it for listen, to obliged be to not been have she would glad and
sitting, she and dancing, were people young other the all while
the for longing fire, the at chaperons the among unwillingly, most
partner a of hopes own her all whom on cousin, elder her of re-entrance
preparation the without though ball, first Fanny’s was It depended. then
only thought the being ball, first lady’s young a many of splendour or
in player violin a of acquisition late the on built afternoon, the of
with couple five raising of possibility the and hall, servants’ the
just Bertram’s Mr. of friend intimate new a and Grant Mrs. of help the
Fanny to one happy very a been however, had, It visit. a on arrived
a even losing be to grieved quite was she and dances, four through
at now looking wishing, and waiting While hour. an of quarter
two the between dialogue this door, the at now and dancers the
her-- on forced was ladies above-mentioned

Mr. towards directed eyes her Norris, Mrs. said ma’am,” think, “I
shall “we time, second the for partners were who Maria, and Rushworth
now.” again faces happy some see

“there simper, stately a with other, the replied indeed,” ma’am, “Yes,
rather was it think I and _now_, on looking in satisfaction some be will
their in folks Young part. to obliged been have should they pity a
my wonder I forms. common the with complying excused be should situation
it.” propose not did son

Maria dear But remiss. never is Rushworth Mr. ma’am. did, he say dare “I
delicacy true that of much so propriety, of sense strict a such has
of wish Rushworth--that Mrs. nowadays, with meets seldom one which
this at face her at look only ma’am, Dear particularity! avoiding
dances!” last two the was it what from different how moment;

with sparkling were eyes her happy, look indeed did Bertram Miss
her and Julia for animation, great with speaking was she and pleasure,
cluster a in all were they her; to close were Crawford, Mr. partner,
she for recollect, not could Fanny before, looked had she How together.
her. about thought not had and herself, Edmund with dancing been had

young see to ma’am, delightful, quite is “It continued, Norris Mrs.
I thing! the much so and suited, well so happy, properly so people
say, you do what And delight. Thomas’s Sir dear of think but cannot
good a set has Rushworth Mr. match? another of chance the to ma’am,
catching.” very are things such and example,

loss. a at quite was son, her but nothing saw who Rushworth, Mrs.

there?” symptoms no see you Do ma’am. above, couple “The

match. pretty very a indeed, Yes, Crawford. Mr. and Julia Miss dear! “Oh
property?” his is What

year.” a thousand “Four

they what with satisfied be must more not have who Those well. “Very
very a seems he and estate, pretty a is year a thousand Four have.
happy.” very be will Julia Miss hope I so man, young steady genteel,

among it of speak only We yet. ma’am, thing, settled a not is “It
growing is He be. _will_ it doubt little very have I But friends.
attentions.” his in particular extremely

all were wondering and Listening farther. no listen could Fanny
though and again; room the in was Bertram Mr. for time, a for suspended
it thought she him, by asked be to honour great a be would it feeling
asking of instead but circle; little their towards came He happen. must
the of account an her gave and her, near chair a drew dance, to her
from groom, the of opinion the and horse, sick a of state present
the in and be, to not was it that found Fanny parted. just had he whom
unreasonable been had she that felt immediately nature her of modesty
from newspaper a took he horse, his of told had he When it. expecting in
to want you “If way, languid a in said it, over looking and table, the
civility equal than more With you.” with up stand will I Fanny, dance,
it,” of glad am “I dance. to wish not did she declined; was offer the
again, newspaper the down throwing and tone, brisker much a in he, said
keep can people good the how wonder only I death. to tired am I “for
in amusement any find to love, in _all_ be need had They long. so up it
see may you them at look you If fancy. I are, they so and folly; such
Grant--and, Mrs. and Yates but lovers--all of couple many so are they
one any as much as lover a want must woman, poor she, ourselves, between
making doctor,” the with be must hers life dull desperate A them. of
proving, who latter, the of chair the towards spoke he as face sly a
of change a instantaneous so made elbow, his at close be to however,
everything, of spite in Fanny, as necessary, subject and expression
Dr. America, in this business strange “A at. laughing help hardly could
to am I what know to you to come always I opinion? your is What Grant!
matters.” public of think

dancing, not are you “as afterwards, soon aunt his cried Tom,” dear “My
shall rubber; a in us join to objection no have will you say dare I
proposal, the enforce to him to coming and seat, her leaving Then you?”
you Rushworth, Mrs. for table a make to want “We whisper, a in added
spare well very cannot but it, about anxious quite is mother Your know.
Dr. and I and you Now, fringe. her of because herself, down sit to time
you know, you half-crowns, but play _we_ though and do; just will Grant
_him_.” with half-guineas bet may

with up jumping and aloud, he replied happy,” most be should “I
am I that but pleasure; greatest the me give would “it alacrity,
be not “do hand, her taking Fanny, Come, dance.” to going moment this
over.” be will dance the or longer, any dawdling

to her for impossible was it though willingly, very off led was Fanny
certainly he as distinguish, or cousin, her towards gratitude much feel
own. his and person another of selfishness the between did,

they as exclaimed indignantly he word,” my upon request modest pretty “A
hours two next the for card-table a to me nail to want “To away. walked
poking that and quarrelling, always are who Grant, Dr. and herself with
good my wish I algebra. of than whist of more no knows who woman, old
too! way a such in me ask to And busy! less little a be would aunt
possibility no me leave to as so all, them before ceremony, without
my raises It particularly. most dislike I what is _That_ refusing. of
of asked, being of pretence the have to anything, than more spleen
as way a such in addressed time same the at and choice, a given being
luckily not had I If be! it whatever thing, very the do to one oblige to
is It it. of out got have not could I you with up standing of thought
head, her in fancy a got has aunt my when But bad. too deal great a
her.” stop can nothing



XIII CHAPTER

recommend to much not had friend, new this Yates, John Honourable The
of son younger the being and expense, and fashion of habits beyond him
probably would Thomas Sir and independence; tolerable a with lord a
Mr. desirable. means no by Mansfield at introduction his thought have
had they where Weymouth, at begun had him with acquaintance Bertram’s
if friendship, the and society, same the in together days ten spent
Mr. by perfected and proved been had called, be might it friendship
could, he whenever way, his in Mansfield take to invited being Yates’s
had than earlier rather come did he and come; to promising his by and
party large a of breaking-up sudden the of consequence in expected, been
left had he which friend, another of house the at gaiety for assembled
his with and disappointment, of wings the on came He join. to Weymouth
play the and party; theatrical a been had it for acting, of full head
representation, of days two within was part a borne had he which in
family the of connexions nearest the of one of death sudden the when
near so be To performers. the dispersed and scheme the destroyed had
the of praise in paragraph long the near so fame, near so happiness,
Lord Hon. Right the of seat the Ecclesford, at theatricals private
the immortalised have course of would which Cornwall, in Ravenshaw,
lose to near, so being and twelvemonth! a least at for party whole
of talk could Yates Mr. and felt, keenly be to injury an was all, it
and arrangements its with theatre, its and Ecclesford else. nothing
to and subject, never-failing his was jokes, and rehearsals dresses,
consolation. only his past the of boast

acting for itch an general, so is theatre the of love a him, for Happily
interest the out-talk hardly could he that people, young among strong so
it epilogue the to parts the of casting first the From hearers. his of
a been have to wish not did who few were there and bewitching, all was
play The skill. their try to hesitated have would or concerned, party
“A Cassel. Count been have to was Yates Mr. and Vows, Lovers’ been had
one a such and taste, my to all at not “and he, said part,” trifling
no make to determined was I but again; accept not would certainly I as
two only the appropriated had duke the and Ravenshaw Lord difficulties.
Lord though and Ecclesford; reached I before playing worth characters
you it, take to impossible was it me, to his resign to offered Ravenshaw
powers, his mistaken so have should he that _him_ for sorry was I know.
voice, weak a with man little Baron--a the to equal more no was he for
the injured have must It minutes. ten first the after hoarse always
Sir difficulties. no make to resolved was _I_ but materially; piece
because was that but Frederick, to equal not duke the thought Henry
best the in certainly was it whereas himself; part the wanted Henry Sir
Luckily stick. a such Henry Sir see to surprised was I two. the of hands
was Agatha Our him. upon depend not did piece the of strength the
the upon And many. by great very thought was duke the and inimitable,
wonderfully.” off gone have certainly would it whole,

much very were you think do “I and, word”; my upon case, hard a was “It
sympathy. listening of responses kind the were pitied,” be to

dowager old poor the sure be to but about; complaining worth not is “It
help to impossible is it and time; worse a at died have not could
days three the just for suppressed been have could news the that wishing
all and grandmother, a only being and days; three but was It wanted. we
great no been have would there think I off, miles hundred two happening
is suppose I who Ravenshaw, Lord but know; I suggested, was it and harm,
it.” of hear not would England, in men correct most the of one

Vows “Lovers’ Bertram. Mr. said comedy,” a of instead afterpiece “An
Grandmother My act to left Ravenshaw Lady and Lord and end, an at were
perhaps, and _him_; comfort may jointure the Well, themselves. by
the in lungs his and credit his for tremble to began he friends, between
I Yates, amends, _you_ make to and withdraw; to sorry not was and Baron,
our be to you ask and Mansfield, at theatre little a raise must we think
manager.”

for moment; the with end not did moment, the of thought the though This,
in than strongly more one no in and awakened, was act to inclination the
as leisure much so having who, and house; the of master now was who him
of degree a such likewise had good, certain a novelty any almost make to
novelty the to adapted exactly were as taste, comic and talents lively
Ecclesford the for “Oh again. and again returned thought The acting. of
the echo could sister Each with.” something try to scenery and theatre
gratifications his of riot the all in whom, to Crawford, Henry and wish;
really “I idea. the at alive quite was pleasure, untasted an yet was it
undertake to moment this at enough fool be could “I he, said believe,”
to down III Richard or Shylock from written, was ever that character any
feel I hat. cocked and coat scarlet his in farce a of hero singing the
storm, and rant could I if as everything; or anything be could I if as
language. English the in comedy or tragedy any in capers, cut or sigh or
what scene; a act, an play, a half only it Be something. doing be us Let
towards looking sure,” am I countenances, these Not us? prevent should
We theatre? a signifies what theatre, a for “and Bertrams; Miss the
suffice.” might house this in room Any ourselves. amusing only be shall

baize green of yards few “a Bertram; Tom said curtain,” a have must “We
enough.” be may that perhaps and curtain, a for

two or wing side a just only “with Yates, Mr. cried enough,” quite “Oh,
nothing down; let be to scenes four or three and flat, in doors up, run
among amusement mere For this. as plan a such on necessary be would more
more.” nothing want should we ourselves

would “There Maria. said _less_,” with satisfied be must we believe “I
adopt rather must We arise. would difficulties other and time, be not
our _theatre_, the not _performance_, the make and views, Crawford’s Mr.
scenery.” of independent are plays best our of parts Many object.

nothing do us “Let alarm. with listen to began who Edmund, said “Nay,”
fitted completely theatre a in be it let act, to are we If halves. by
from entire play a have us let and gallery, and boxes, pit, with up
good a with what, matter no play, German a be it as so end; to beginning
a and hornpipe, a and figure-dance, a and afterpiece, shifting tricking,
nothing.” do we Ecclesford, outdo not do we If acts. the between song

play a loves “Nobody Julia. said disagreeable,” be not do Edmund, “Now,
one.” see to farther much gone have can or do, you than better

hardly would I but acting; real hardened good acting, real see to “True,
who those of efforts raw the at look to next the to room this from walk
have who ladies, and gentlemen of set a trade: the to bred been not have
through.” struggle to decorum and education of disadvantages the all

was and continued, still subject the however, pause, short a After
increasing inclination one’s every eagerness, unabated with discussed
and rest; the of inclination the of knowledge a and discussion, the by
comedy, a prefer would Bertram Tom that but settled was nothing though
the in nothing that and tragedy, a Crawford Henry and sisters his and
all, them please would which piece a find to than easier be could world
to as decided so seemed other or something act to resolution the
if it, prevent to determined was He uncomfortable. quite Edmund make
which conversation the heard equally who mother, his though possible,
disapprobation. least the evince not did table, at passed

strength. his trying of opportunity an him afforded evening same The
billiard-room. the in were Yates Mr. and Crawford, Henry Julia, Maria,
was Edmund where drawing-room, the into them from returning Tom,
at sofa the on was Bertram Lady while fire, the by thoughtfully standing
thus work, her arranging her beside close Fanny and distance, little a
not is ours as billiard-table vile horribly a entered--“Such he as began
I and longer, no it stand can I ground. above believe, I with, met be to
one but again; it to me tempt ever shall nothing that say, may I think,
theatre, a for room very the is it ascertained: just have I thing good
farther the at doors the and it; for length and shape the precisely
five in do to made be may they as other, each with communicating end,
very the is room, father’s my in bookcase the moving merely by minutes,
and it; for wish to down sat had we if desired, have could we thing
the join to seems It greenroom. excellent an be will room father’s my
purpose.” on billiard-room

low a in Edmund, said act?” to meaning in Tom, serious, not are “You
fire. the approached brother his as voice,

you surprise to there is What you. assure I so, more never serious! “Not
it?” in

private light, _general_ a In wrong. very be would it think “I
circumstanced, are _we_ as but objections, some to open are theatricals
injudicious than more and injudicious, highly be would it think must I
feeling of want great shew would It kind. the of anything attempt to
constant of degree some in and is, he as absent account, father’s my on
whose Maria, to regard with think, I imprudent, be would it and danger;
extremely everything, considering one, delicate very a is situation
delicate.”

three act to going were we if as seriously! so thing a up take “You
But country. the all invite and return, father’s my till week a times
little a but nothing mean We sort. that of display a be to not is it
our exercise and scene, the vary to just ourselves, among amusement
be may We publicity. no audience, no want We new. something in powers
unexceptionable; perfectly most play some chusing in think, I trusted,
conversing in us of any to danger or harm greater no conceive can I and
in than author respectable some of language written elegant the in
And scruples. no and fears no have I own. our of words in chattering
I that objection, an from far so is it absent, being father’s my to as
must return his of expectation the for motive; a as rather it consider
of means the be can we if and mother; my to period anxious very a be
weeks, few next the for spirits her up keeping and anxiety, that amusing
It he. will sure, am I so, and spent, well very time our think shall I
her.” for period anxious _very_ a is

sunk Bertram, Lady mother. their towards looked each this, said he As
ease, wealth, health, of picture the sofa, the of corner one in back
was Fanny while doze, gentle a into falling just was tranquillity, and
her. for work her of difficulties few the through getting

head. his shook and smiled Edmund

with chair a into himself throwing Tom, cried do,” won’t this Jove! “By
unlucky was anxiety--I your mother, dear my sure, be “To laugh. hearty a
there.”

one of tone heavy the in ladyship, her asked matter?” the is “What
asleep.” not was “I half-roused;

continued, he Edmund,” Well, you! suspected nobody ma’am, no, dear, “Oh
Lady as soon as voice, and posture, subject, former the to returning
shall we that maintain, _will_ I _this_ “but again, nod to began Bertram
harm.” no doing be

totally would father my that convinced am I you; with agree cannot “I
it.” disapprove

exercise the of fonder is Nobody contrary. the to convinced am I “And
for and father, my than more, it promotes or people, young in talent of
a always has he think I kind, reciting spouting, acting, the of anything
time a many How boys. as us in it encouraged he sure am I taste. decided
and _be’d_ to and Caesar, Julius of body dead the over mourned we have
sure, am I And amusement? his for room, very this in _be’d_, _to_ not
one through life my of evening every _Norval_, _was_ _name_ _my_
holidays.” Christmas

My yourself. difference the see must You thing. different very a was “It
never would he but well, speak to schoolboys, as us, wished father
is decorum of sense His plays. acting be to daughters grown-up his wish
strict.”

as well as father my know “I displeased. Tom, said that,” all know “I
distress to nothing do daughters his that care take I’ll and do; you
of rest the of care take I’ll and Edmund, concerns, own your Manage him.
family.” the

must “I Edmund, persevering the replied acting,” on resolved are you “If
theatre a think I and way; quiet and small very a in be will it hope
father’s my with liberties taking be would It attempted. be to not ought
justified.” be not could which absence his in house

a in Tom, said answerable,” be will I nature that of everything “For
an great as quite have I hurt. be not shall house “His tone. decided
such to as and have; can you as house his of careful being in interest
or bookcase, a moving as such now, just suggesting was I as alterations
a of space the for billiard-room the using as even or door, a unlocking
suppose well as just might you it, in billiards at playing without week
the in less and room, this in more sitting our to object would he
sister’s my to or away, went he before did we than breakfast-room,
Absolute other. the to room the of side one from moved being pianoforte
nonsense!”

an as wrong be will innovation, an as wrong not if innovation, “The
expense.”

Perhaps prodigious! be would undertaking an such of expense the “Yes,
have must we theatre a of Something pounds. twenty whole a cost might it
a and curtain green a plan: simplest the on be will it but undoubtedly,
work carpenter’s the as and all; that’s and work, carpenter’s little
be will it himself, Jackson Christopher by home at done all be may
employed, is Jackson as long as and expense; of talk to absurd too
in nobody that imagine Don’t Thomas. Sir with right be will everything
do you if yourself, act Don’t yourself. but judge or see can house this
else.” everybody govern to expect don’t but it, like not

protest absolutely I “_that_ Edmund, said myself,” acting to as “No,
against.”

sit to left was Edmund and it, said he as room the of out walked Tom
vexation. thoughtful in fire the stir and down

feeling every in company Edmund borne and all, it heard had who Fanny,
suggest to anxiety her in say, to ventured now whole, the throughout
suit to play any find to able be not may they “Perhaps comfort, some
different.” very seem sisters’ your and taste brother’s Your them.

will they scheme, the in persist they If Fanny. there, hope no have “I
_them_, dissuade to try and sisters my to speak shall I something. find
do.” can I all is that and

side.” your on be would Norris aunt my think should “I

my or Tom either with influence no has she but would, she say dare “I
myself, them convince cannot I if and use; any of be could that sisters
through it attempting without course, their take things let shall I
do better had we and all, of evil greatest the is squabbling Family her.
ears.” the by altogether be than anything

morning, next the speaking of opportunity an had he whom to sisters, His
his to unyielding as quite advice, his of impatient as quite were
Tom. as pleasure, of cause the in determined as quite representation,
the in not were they and plan, the to objection no had mother Their
in harm no be could There disapprobation. father’s their of afraid least
women many so by and families, respectable many so in done been had what
that mad run scrupulousness be must it and consideration; first the of
only comprehending theirs, like plan a in censure to anything see could
be never would which and friends, intimate and sisters and brothers
that admit to inclined seem _did_ Julia themselves. beyond of heard
delicacy--but and caution particular require might situation Maria’s
evidently Maria and liberty; at was _her_--she to extend not could that
above more much so her raising only as engagement her considered
either consult to Julia than occasion less her leaving and restraint,
the urging still was he but hope, to little had Edmund mother. or father
Parsonage, the from fresh room, the entered Crawford Henry when subject
want No Bertram. Miss theatre, our in hands of want “No out, calling
admitted be to hopes and love, her desires sister my understrappers: of
duenna old any of part the take to happy be will and company, the into
yourselves.” do to like not may you that confidante, tame or

we Can now? you say “What meant, which glance, a Edmund gave Maria
silenced, Edmund, And same?” the feels Crawford Mary if wrong be
carry well might acting of charm the that acknowledge to obliged was
to love, of ingenuity the with and genius; of mind the to fascination
on than message the of purport accommodating obliging, the on more dwell
else. anything

he Norris, Mrs. to as and vain; was Opposition advanced. scheme The
no started She any. make to wish would she supposing in mistaken was
eldest her by minutes five in down talked not were that difficulties
whole the as and her; with all-powerful were who niece, and nephew
all at none and anybody, to expense little very bring to was arrangement
bustle, hurry, of comforts the all it in foresaw she as herself, to
herself fancying of advantage immediate the derived and importance, and
at month a living been had she where house, own her leave to obliged
be might hour every that theirs, in abode her up take and cost, own her
the with delighted exceedingly fact, in was, she service, their in spent
project.



XIV CHAPTER

business The supposed. had Edmund than right being nearer seemed Fanny
and trifle; no be to proved everybody suit would that play a finding of
had measurements, his taken and orders his received had carpenter the
made having and difficulties, of sets two least at removed and suggested
was evident, fully expense and plan of enlargement an of necessity the
preparations Other seek. to still was play a while work, at already
from arrived had baize green of roll enormous An hand. in also were
good her by saving a (with Norris Mrs. by out cut been and Northampton,
forming actually was and yard), a of three-quarters full of management
and wanting; was play the still and housemaids, the by curtain a into
to almost began Edmund manner, this in away passed days three or two as
found. be ever might none that hope

people many so to, attended be to things many so fact, in were, There
a such all, above and, required, characters best many so pleased, be to
there that comedy, and tragedy both once at be should play the that need
and youth by pursued anything as decision a of chance little as seem did
out. hold could zeal

Mr. and Crawford, Henry Bertrams, Miss the were side tragic the On
was it because alone, _quite_ not Bertram, Tom comic, the on Yates;
inclined back, kept politely though wishes, Crawford’s Mary that evident
make to seemed power his and determinateness his but way: same the
irreconcilable great this of independent and, unnecessary; allies
the in characters few very containing piece a wanted they difference,
All women. principal three and first-rate, character every but whole,
nor Macbeth, nor Hamlet, Neither vain. in over run were plays best the
could that anything presented Gamester, The nor Douglas, nor Othello,
Scandal, for School The Rivals, The and tragedians; the even satisfy
successively were cetera, et long a and Law, at Heir Fortune, of Wheel
that proposed be could piece No objections. warmer yet with dismissed
other the or side one on and difficulty, a with somebody supply not did
us Let do! never will _that_ no, “Oh of, repetition continual a was it
tolerable a Not characters. many Too tragedies. ranting no have
be would It Tom. dear my _that_, but Anything play. the in part woman’s
a such take to anybody expect not could One up. it fill to impossible
do, might _That_ end. to beginning from buffoonery but Nothing part.
have I opinion, my give _must_ I If parts. low the for but perhaps,
do _I_ language. English the in play insipid most the it thought always
I but use, any of be to happy be shall I objections; make to wish not
worse.” chuse not could we think

selfishness the observe to unamused not listened, and on looked Fanny
wondering and all, them govern to seemed disguised, less or more which,
that wished have could she gratification own her For end. would it how
but play, a half even seen never had she for acted, be might something
it. against was consequence higher of everything

time wasting are “We last. at Bertram Tom said do,” never will “This
that so what, matter No on. fixed be must Something abominably. most
many too characters few A nice. so be not must We chosen. is something
little. a descend must We them. _double_ must We us. frighten not must
of anything making in credit our greater the insignificant, is part a If
chuse you part any take I difficulties. no make I moment this From it.
for condition I comic, be but it Let comic. be it as so me, give to
more.” nothing

only doubting Law, at Heir the proposed then he time fifth the about For
very and himself; for Pangloss Dr. or Duberley Lord prefer to whether
that others the persuade to trying unsuccessfully, very but earnestly,
personae. dramatis the of rest the in parts tragic fine some were there

same the by ended was effort fruitless this followed which pause The
the on lay that plays of volumes many the of one up taking who, speaker,
why And Vows! exclaimed--“Lovers’ suddenly over, it turning and table,
How Ravenshaws? the for as well as _us_ for do Vows Lovers’ not should
do would it if as me strikes It before? of thought be to never it came
Yates for parts tragic capital two are Here all? you say What exactly.
else nobody if me, for Butler rhyming the is here and Crawford, and
dislike, not should I thing of sort the but part, trifling a it; wants
best. my do and anything take to determined am I before, said I as and,
Count only is It anybody. by up filled be may they rest, the for as And
Anhalt.” and Cassel

of weary growing was Everybody welcome. generally was suggestion The
been had nothing that was, everybody with idea first the and indecision,
particularly was Yates Mr. all. them suit to likely so before proposed
Ecclesford, at Baron the do to longing and sighing been had he pleased:
re-rant to forced been and Ravenshaw’s, Lord of rant every grudged had
the was Wildenheim Baron through storm The room. own his in all it
knowing of advantage the with and ambition; theatrical his of height
greatest the with now, did he already, heart by scenes the half
however, justice, him do To part. the for services his offer alacrity,
was there that remembering for it; appropriate to resolve not did he
equal an professed he Frederick, in ranting-ground good very some
Whichever either. take to ready was Crawford Henry that. for willingness
parley short a and him, satisfy perfectly would chuse not did Yates Mr.
an of interest the all feeling Bertram, Miss ensued. compliment of
Mr. to observing by it, decide to her on took question, the in Agatha
to ought figure and height which in point a was this that Yates
him fit to seemed tallest, the being _his_ that and considered, be
and right, quite be to acknowledged was She Baron. the for peculiarly
proper the of certain was she accordingly, accepted being parts two the
Rushworth, Mr. besides cast, now were characters the of Three Frederick.
when anything; do to willing as Maria by for answered always was who
on scrupulous be to began Agatha, be to sister, her like meaning, Julia,
account. Crawford’s Miss

women not are “Here she. said absent,” the by well behaving not is “This
nothing is here but me, and Maria for do may Agatha and Amelia enough.
Crawford.” Mr. sister, your for

sure very was he of: thought be not might _that_ desired Crawford Mr.
that and useful, be might she as but acting of wish no had sister his
But case. present the in considered be to herself allow not would she
of part the asserted who Bertram, Tom by opposed immediately was this
she if Crawford, Miss of property the respect every in be to Amelia
her,” to necessarily as naturally, as falls “It it. accept would
no be can It sisters. my of other or one to does Agatha “as he, said
comic.” highly is it for side, their on sacrifice

the felt each for anxious; looked sister Each followed. silence short A
the by her on pressed it have to hoping was and Agatha, to claim best
with and play, the up taken had meanwhile who Crawford, Henry rest.
the settled soon act, first the over turning was carelessness seeming
business.

the in engage to “not he, said Bertram,” _Julia_ Miss entreat must “I
must You solemnity. my all of ruin the be will it or Agatha, of part
your stand not could “I her). to (turning not” must you indeed not,
had have we laughs many The paleness. and woe in up dressed countenance
knapsack his and Frederick and me, across come infallibly would together
away.” run to obliged be would

the in lost was manner the but spoken; was it courteously, Pleasantly,
confirmed which Maria at glance a saw She feelings. Julia’s to matter
Maria slighted, was she trick; a scheme, a was it herself: to injury the
suppress to trying was Maria which triumph of smile the preferred; was
command could Julia before and understood; was it well how shewed
too, her against weight his gave brother her speak, to enough herself
Agatha. best the be will Maria Agatha. be must Maria yes! “Oh saying, by
it. in her trust not would I tragedy, prefers she fancies Julia Though
Her it. of look the not has She her. about tragedy of nothing is There
speaks and quick, too walks she and features, tragic not are features
old the do better had She countenance. her keep not would and quick, too
Cottager’s Julia. indeed, had, you wife; Cottager’s the countrywoman:
the relieves lady old The you. assure I part, pretty very a is wife
You spirit. of deal good a with husband her of benevolence high-flown
wife.” Cottager’s be shall

most The of? talking you are “What Yates. Mr. cried wife!” “Cottager’s
a not commonplace; merest the part; insignificant paltry, trivial,
insult an is It that! do sister Your whole. the in speech tolerable
We it. done have to was governess the Ecclesford At it. propose to
more little A else. anybody to offered be not could it that agreed all
if office, the deserve not do You please. you if Manager, Mr. justice,
better.” little a company your of talents the appreciate cannot you

really have company my and I till friend, good my _that_, to as “Why,
to disparagement no mean I but guesswork; some be must there acted
Cottager’s one have must we and Agathas, two have cannot We Julia.
being in myself moderation of example the her set I sure am I and wife;
have will she trifling is part the If Butler. old the with satisfied
bent desperately so is she if and it; of something making in credit more
of instead speeches Cottager’s take her let humorous, everything against
solemn is _he_ through; all parts the change so and wife’s, Cottager’s
play, the in difference no make could It sure. am I enough, pathetic and
_I_ speeches, wife’s his got has he when himself, Cottager for as and
heart.” my all with him undertake would

“it Crawford, Henry said wife,” Cottager’s for partiality your all “With
we and sister, your for fit it of anything make to impossible be will
_allow_ not must We on. imposed be to good-nature her suffer not must
complaisance. own her to left be not must She part. the accept to her
more character a is Amelia Amelia. in wanted be will talents Her
Amelia consider I Agatha. even than represented well be to difficult
great requires It piece. whole the in character difficult most the is
without simplicity and playfulness her give to nicety, great powers,
Simplicity, part. the in fail actresses good seen have I extravagance.
profession. by actress every almost of reach the beyond is indeed,
a requires It not. have they which feeling of delicacy a requires It
turning hope?” I it, undertake _will_ You Bertram. Julia gentlewoman--a
but little; a her softened which entreaty, anxious of look a with her to
Miss with interposed again brother her say, to what hesitated she while
claim. better Crawford’s

her. for part the all at not is It Amelia. be not must Julia no, “No,
and tall too is She well. do not would She it. like not would She
is It figure. skipping girlish, light, small, a be should Amelia robust.
I and part, the looks She only. Crawford Miss and Crawford, Miss for fit
admirably.” it do will persuaded am

supplication. his continued Crawford Henry this, to attending Without
studied have you When must. you “indeed he, said us,” oblige must “You
your be may Tragedy you. suit it feel will you sure am I character, the
You _you_. chuses comedy that appear certainly will it but choice,
will you provisions; of basket a with prison in me visit to be will
your with in coming you see I think I prison? in me visit to refuse not
basket.”

only he was but wavered; Julia felt. was voice his of influence The
previous the overlook her make and her, pacify and soothe to trying
He determined. most been had slight The him. distrusted She affront?
suspiciously looked She her. with play treacherous at but perhaps, was,
vexed were she if it: decide to was countenance Maria’s sister; her at
Julia and satisfaction, and serenity all looked Maria alarmed--but and
her at but happy be not could Maria ground this on that knew well
she voice, tremulous a and therefore, indignation, hasty With expense.
countenance your keeping not of afraid seem not do “You him, to said
have might one provisions--though of basket a with in come I when
overpowering!” so be to was I that Agatha as only is it supposed--but
not did he if as and foolish, rather looked Crawford stopped--Henry She
again-- began Bertram Tom say. to what know

Amelia.” excellent an be will She Amelia. be must Crawford “Miss

with Julia, cried character,” the wanting _my_ of afraid be not “Do
do will I sure am I and Agatha, be to _not_ am “I quickness: angry
the world the in parts all of is it Amelia, to as and else; nothing
pert, little, odious, An her. detest quite I me. to disgusting most
and comedy, against protested always have I girl. impudent unnatural,
hastily walked she saying, so And form.” worst its in comedy is this
exciting but one, than more to feelings awkward leaving room, the of out
of auditor quiet a been had who Fanny, except any in compassion small
of agitations the under as her of think not could who and whole, the
pity. great without _jealousy_

soon brother her but them; leaving her succeeded silence short A
over looking eagerly was and Vows, Lovers’ and business to returned
be would scenery what ascertain to help, Yates’s Mr. with play, the
an in together conversed Crawford Henry and Maria necessary--while
I sure am “I of, began she which with declaration the and under-voice,
shall I though that but willingly, most Julia to part the up give would
was worse,” it do would _she_ persuaded feel I ill, very it do probably
for. called it compliments the all receiving doubtless

completed was party the of division the time, some lasted had this When
in farther consult to together off walking Yates Mr. and Bertram Tom by
Bertram’s Miss and _Theatre_, _the_ called be to beginning now room the
Amelia of offer the with herself Parsonage the to down go to resolving
alone. remained Fanny and Crawford; Miss to

which volume the up take to was solitude her of made she use first The
play the with herself acquaint to begin and table, the on left been had
ran she and awake, all was curiosity Her much. so heard had she which of
of intervals by only suspended was which eagerness an with it through
it that instance, present the in chosen be could it that astonishment,
Amelia and Agatha theatre! private a in accepted and proposed be could
home for improper totally so ways different their in her to appeared
other, the of language the and one, of situation representation--the
hardly could she that modesty, of woman any by expressed be to unfit so
and in; engaging were they what of aware be could cousins her suppose
which remonstrance the by possible as soon as roused them have to longed
make. certainly would Edmund



XV CHAPTER

Miss after soon and readily; very part the accepted Crawford Miss
another and arrived, Rushworth Mr. Parsonage, the from return Bertram’s
Cassel Count of offer the had He cast. consequently was character
Miss wanted and chuse, to which know not did first at and Anhalt, and
different the understand to made being upon but him; direct to Bertram
he that recollecting and which, was which and characters, the of style
stupid very a Anhalt thought had and London, in play the seen once had
the approved Bertram Miss Count. the for decided soon he fellow,
could she though and better; the learn to had he less the for decision,
act to be might Agatha and Count the that wish his in sympathise not
the over turning slowly was he while patiently very wait nor together,
kindly very she scene, a such discovering still of hope the with leaves
being admitted that speech every curtailed and hand, in part his took
much very being his of necessity the out pointing besides shortened;
his of idea the liked Rushworth Mr. colours. his chusing and dressed,
much too was and it; despise to affecting though well, very finery
others, the of think to be would appearance own his what with engaged
which displeasure that of any feel or conclusions, those of any draw or
for. prepared half been had Maria

morning, the all out been had who Edmund, before settled was much Thus
before drawing-room the entered he when but matter; the of anything knew
Mr. and Maria, Tom, between high was discussion of buzz the dinner,
him tell to alacrity great with forward stepped Rushworth Mr. and Yates;
news. agreeable the

be to am I and Vows; Lovers’ be to is “It he. said play,” a got have “We
satin pink a and dress blue a with first in come to am and Cassel, Count
a of way by suit, fancy fine another have to am afterwards and cloak,
it.” like shall I how know not do I shooting-dress.

heard she as him for beat heart her and Edmund, followed eyes Fanny’s
be. must sensations his what felt and look, his saw and speech, this

reply only his was amazement, greatest the of tone a in Vows!” “Lovers’
if as sisters and brother his towards turned he and Rushworth, Mr. to
contradiction. a doubting hardly

we difficulties, and debatings our all “After Yates. Mr. cried “Yes,”
so nothing well, so altogether us suit will that nothing is there find
have not should it that is wonder The Vows. Lovers’ as unexceptionable,
have we here for abominable, was stupidity My before. of thought been
to useful so is it and Ecclesford; at saw I what of advantage the all
part.” every almost cast have We model! a of anything have

at looking and gravely, Edmund said women?” for do you do what “But
Maria.

part the take “I answered, she as herself of spite in blushed Maria
“Miss eye) bolder a (with and” done, have to was Ravenshaw Lady which
Amelia.” be to is Crawford

filled easily so be to play of sort the it thought have not should “I
sat where fire, the to away turning Edmund, replied _us_,” with up,
great of look a with himself seating and Fanny, and aunt, mother, his
vexation.

have and times, three in come “I say, to him followed Rushworth Mr.
much not do I But it? not is something, That’s speeches. two-and-forty
blue a in myself know hardly shall I fine. so being of idea the like
cloak.” satin pink a and dress

called was Bertram Mr. minutes few a In him. answer not could Edmund
being and carpenter; the of doubts some satisfy to room the of out
Rushworth, Mr. by afterwards soon followed and Yates, Mr. by accompanied
cannot, “I saying, of opportunity the took immediately almost Edmund
reflecting without play, this to as feel I what speak Yates, Mr. before
_you_, tell Maria, dear my now, must I but Ecclesford; at friends his on
I that and representation, private for unfit exceedingly it think I that
have you when _will_ you suppose but cannot I up. it give will you hope
your either to aloud act first the only Read over. carefully it read
necessary be not will It it. approve can you how see and aunt, or mother
convinced.” am I judgment, _father’s_ your to you send to

perfectly am “I Maria. cried differently,” very things see “We
omissions, few very a with and you; assure I play, the with acquainted
nothing see can I course, of made, be will which forth, so and
who find you woman young _only_ the not am _I_ and it; in objectionable
representation.” private for fit very it thinks

who _you_ is it matter this in “but answer; his was it,” for sorry am “I
it blundered, have others If example. the set must _You_ lead. to are
is. delicacy true what them shew and right, them put to place your is
the of rest the to law be must conduct _your_ decorum of points all In
party.”

better loved one no for effect, some had consequence her of picture This
am “I answered, she good-humour more far with and Maria; than lead to
still I but sure: am I well, very mean you Edmund; you, to obliged much
to undertake cannot really I and strongly; too things see you think
the be would _There_ kind. this of subject a upon rest the all harangue
think.” I indecorum, greatest

your let No; head? my in idea an such have could I that imagine you “Do
feel you part, the examining on that, Say harangue. only the be conduct
and exertion more requiring it find you that it; to unequal yourself
and firmness, with this Say have. to supposed be can you than confidence
your understand will distinguish can who All enough. quite be will it
it as honoured delicacy your and up, given be will play The motive.
ought.”

Thomas “Sir Bertram. Lady said dear,” my improper, anything act not “Do
be dinner.--To my have must I bell; the ring it.--Fanny, like not would
time.” this by dressed is Julia sure,

Thomas Sir “that Fanny, preventing Edmund, said madam,” convinced, am “I
it.” like not would

says?” Edmund what hear you do dear, my “There,

“Julia zeal, renewed with Maria, said part,” the decline to were I “If
it.” take certainly would

reasons!” your knew she “if Edmund, cried “What!”

our in difference us--the between difference the think might she “Oh!
feel might _I_ as scrupulous so be not need _she_ situations--that
I me; excuse must you No; so. argue would she sure am I necessary.
so be would everybody settled, far too is it consent; my retract cannot
we nice, very so are we if and angry; quite be would Tom disappointed,
anything.” act never shall

Norris. Mrs. said thing,” same very the say to going just was “I
the and nothing, act will you to, objected be to is play every “If
_that_ sure am I and away, thrown money much so all be will preparations
Maria as but, play; the know not do I all. us to discredit a be would
of most with so is it (and warm too little a anything is there if says,
As Edmund. over-precise, be not must We out. left easily be can it them)
had Tom wish only I harm. no be can there too, act to is Rushworth Mr.
loss the was there for began, carpenters the when mind own his known
good a be will curtain The side-doors. those about work day’s a half of
be shall we think I and well, very work their do maids The however. job,
put to occasion no is There rings. the of dozens some back send to able
preventing in hope, I use, some of _am_ I together. close very so them
one be always should There things. of most the making and waste
of Tom tell to forgot I ones. young many so superintend to head steady
me about looking been had I day. very this me to happened that something
but see I should who when out, coming just was and poultry-yard, the in
deal of bits two with hall-door servants’ the to up making Jackson Dick
had mother sure; be may you father, to them bringing hand, his in board
bid had father then and father, to message a of him send to chanced
without do how no not could he for board, of bits two them up bring him
dinner-bell servants’ the for meant, this all what knew I them.
such hate I as and heads; our over moment very the at ringing was
always have I encroaching, very are Jacksons (the people encroaching
boy the to said I can), they all get to people of sort the just so: said
ought who know, you old, years ten of fellow lubberly great (a directly
Dick, father, your to boards the take ‘_I’ll_ himself), of ashamed be to
silly, very looked boy The can.’ you as fast as again home you get so
speak might I believe I for word, a offering without away turned and
about marauding coming of him cure will it say dare I and sharp; pretty
father your as good greediness--so such hate I while. one for house the
round!” year the all man the employing family, the to is

and returned; soon others the answer; an of trouble the at was Nobody
only his be must right them set to endeavoured have to that found Edmund
satisfaction.

Dick over triumph her again related Norris Mrs. heavily. passed Dinner
talked much otherwise were preparation nor play neither but Jackson,
though brother, his by even felt was disapprobation Edmund’s for of,
animating Crawford’s Henry wanting Maria, it. owned have not would he
trying was who Yates, Mr. avoided. better subject the thought support,
on impenetrable less gloom her found Julia, to agreeable himself make to
company; their from secession her at regret his of that than topic any
his in dress own his and part own his only having Rushworth, Mr. and
either. of said be could that all away talked soon had head,

two: or hour an for only suspended were theatre the of concerns the But
evening of spirits the and settled; be to deal great a still was there
being their after soon Yates, Mr. and Maria, Tom, courage, fresh giving
a at committee in themselves seated drawing-room, the in reassembled
getting just were and them, before open play the with table, separate
the by given was interruption welcome most a when subject the in deep
it as dirty and dark and late who, Crawford, Miss and Mr. of entrance
grateful most the with received were and coming, help not could was,
joy.

we “Oh! and settled?” you have “What and on?” go you do how “Well,
Henry and salutations; first the followed you,” without nothing do can
his while table, the at three other the with seated soon was Crawford
was attention pleasant with and Bertram, Lady to way her made sister
said ladyship,” your congratulate really must “I _her_. complimenting
with it borne have you though for chosen; being play the “on she,
and noise our all of sick be must you sure am I patience, exemplary
be must bystanders the but glad, be may actors The difficulties.
you give sincerely do I and decision; a for thankful more infinitely
the in is who else everybody and Norris, Mrs. as well as madam, joy,
to Fanny beyond slyly, half fearfully, half glancing predicament,” same
Edmund.

nothing. said Edmund but Bertram, Lady by answered civilly very was She
chat in continuing After disclaimed. not was bystander a only being His
returned Crawford Miss minutes, few a fire the round party the with
to seemed them, by standing and table; the round party the to
sudden a by struck if as till, arrangements their in herself interest
composedly most are you friends, good “My exclaimed, she recollection,
let pray but out; and inside alehouses, and cottages these upon work at
gentleman What Anhalt? be to is Who meanwhile. the in fate my know me
to?” love making of pleasure the have to I am you among

same the tell to together spoke many then and spoke; one no moment a For
Rushworth “Mr. Anhalt. any got yet not had they that truth, melancholy
Anhalt.” undertaken yet had one no but Cassel, Count be to was

I thought I “but Rushworth; Mr. said parts,” the of choice my had “I
am I finery the relish much not do I though best, Count the like should
have.” to

a with Crawford, Miss replied sure,” am I wisely, very chose “You
part.” heavy a is “Anhalt look; brightened

Rushworth, Mr. returned speeches,” two-and-forty has _Count_ “_The_
trifle.” no is “which

pause, short a after Crawford, Miss said surprised,” all at not am “I
forward a Such better. no deserves Amelia Anhalt. an of want this “at
men.” the frighten well may lady young

possible,” were it if part, the taking in happy too but be should “I
I together. in are Anhalt and Butler the unluckily, “but, Tom; cried
done--I be can what try will I however; up, it give entirely not will
again.” over it look will

voice. low a in Yates, Mr. said part,” the take should _brother_ “Your
would?” he think you not “Do

manner. determined cold, a in Tom, replied him,” ask not shall “_I_

the rejoined afterwards soon and else, something of talked Crawford Miss
fire. the at party

puzzle only “I herself. seating she, said all,” at me want not do “They
as Bertram, Edmund Mr. speeches. civil make to them oblige and them,
and, adviser; disinterested a be will you yourself, act not do you
it Is Anhalt? an for do we shall What _you_. to apply I therefore,
advice?” your is What it? double to others the of any for practicable

play.” the change you that “is calmly, he said advice,” “My

not should I though “for replied; she objection,” no have should “_I_
if is, that supported, well if Amelia of part the dislike particularly
but inconvenience; an be to sorry be shall I well, went everything
(looking _table_” _that_ at advice your hear to chuse not do they as
taken.” be not will certainly “it round),

more. no said Edmund

Anhalt,” be would it suppose I act, to _you_ tempt could part _any_ “If
clergyman, a is he “for pause; short a after archly, lady the observed
know.” you

I “for replied, he me,” tempt means no by would circumstance “_That_
It acting. bad by ridiculous character the make to sorry be should
solemn formal, a appearing from Anhalt keep to difficult very be must
one perhaps, is, itself profession the chuses who man the and lecturer;
stage.” the on it represent to wish would who last the of

and resentment of feelings some with and silenced, was Crawford Miss
and tea-table, the nearer considerably chair her moved mortification,
there. presiding was who Norris, Mrs. to attention her all gave

conference the where table, other the from Bertram, Tom cried “Fanny,”
your want “we incessant, conversation the and on, carrying eagerly was
services.”

of habit the for errand; some expecting moment, a in up was Fanny
that all of spite in overcome, yet not was way that in her employing
do. could Edmund

your want not do We seat. your from you disturb to want not do we “Oh!
be must You play. our in you want only shall We services. _present_
wife.” Cottager’s

look. frightened most a with again down sitting Fanny, cried “Me!”
give to were you if anything act not could I me. excuse must you “Indeed
act.” cannot I indeed, No, world. the me

frighten not need It you. excuse cannot we for must, you but “Indeed,
dozen a half above not nothing, mere a part, a of nothing a is it you:
word a hears nobody if signify much not will it and altogether, speeches
you have must we but like, you as creep-mouse as be may you so say; you
at.” look to

“what Rushworth, Mr. cried speeches,” dozen a half of afraid are you “If
learn.” to forty-two have I mine? as part a such with do you would

shocked Fanny, said heart,” by learning of afraid am I that not is “It
feel to and room, the in speaker only the moment that at herself find to
act.” cannot really I “but her; upon was eye every almost that

we and part, your Learn _us_. for enough well act can you yes, “Yes,
shall I as and scenes, two only have You rest. the all you teach will
very it do will you and about, you push and in you put I’ll Cottager, be
it.” for answer I’ll well,

idea. an have cannot You me. excuse must you Bertram, Mr. indeed, “No,
I it, undertake to were I If me. for impossible absolutely be would It
you.” disappoint only should

Every well. very it do You’ll shamefaced. so be not Do Phoo! “Phoo!
must You perfection. expect not do We you. for made be will allowance
make must we and cap, mob a and apron, white a and gown, brown a get
your of corner the at crowsfoot the of little a and wrinkles, few a you
woman.” old little proper, very a be will you and eyes,

growing Fanny, cried me,” excuse must you indeed me, excuse must “You
distressfully looking and agitation, excessive from red more and more
exasperate to unwilling but her; observing kindly was who Edmund, at
Her smile. encouraging an only her gave interference, by brother his
said had he what again said only he Tom: on effect no had entreaty
by backed now was requisition the for Tom, merely not was it and before;
differed which urgency an with Yates, Mr. and Crawford, Mr. and Maria,
which and ceremonious, more or gentle more being in but his from
breathe could she before and Fanny; to overpowering quite was altogether
a in her addressing thus by whole the completed Norris Mrs. it, after
about is here work of piece a audible--“What and angry once at whisper
of difficulty a such make to Fanny, you, of ashamed quite am I nothing:
to are they as kind sort--so this of trifle a in cousins your obliging
the of more no hear us let and grace, good a with part the Take you!
entreat.” I matter,

her urge to fair not is “It Edmund. said madam,” her, urge not “Do
for chuse her Let act. to like not does she see You manner. this in
safely as quite be may judgment Her us. of rest the as well as herself,
more.” any her urge not Do trusted.

shall I “but sharply; Norris Mrs. replied her,” urge to going not am “I
her what do not does she if girl, ungrateful obstinate, very a her think
and who considering indeed, ungrateful, her--very wish cousins and aunt
is.” she what

moment a for looking Crawford, Miss but speak; to angry too was Edmund
were tears whose Fanny, at then and Norris, Mrs. at eyes astonished with
“I keenness, some with said, immediately themselves, shew to beginning
moved and me,” for hot too is _place_ this situation: my like not do
saying Fanny, to close table, the of side opposite the to chair her away
mind, “Never herself, placed she as whisper, low kind, a in her, to
and cross is everybody evening: cross a is this Price, Miss dear my
attention pointed with and them”; mind us let not do but teasing,
of spite in spirits, her raise to endeavour and her to talk to continued
any prevented she brother her at look a By herself. spirits of out being
feelings good really the and board, theatrical the from entreaty farther
to her restoring rapidly were governed purely almost was she which by
favour. Edmund’s in lost had she little the all

her to obliged much very felt she but Crawford; Miss love not did Fanny
work, her of notice taking from when, and kindness; present her for
and pattern, the for begging and well, as work could _she_ wishing and
she course of as _appearance_, her for preparing now was Fanny supposing
to proceeded Crawford Miss married, was cousin her when out come would
that said and sea, at brother her from lately heard had she if inquire
young fine very a him imagined and him, see to curiosity a quite had she
sea to went he before drawn picture his get to Fanny advised and man,
or flattery, agreeable very be to it admitting help not could again--she
intended. had she than animation more with answering and listening, help

Crawford’s Miss and on, went still play the upon consultation The
her, telling Bertram’s Tom by Fanny from called first was attention
to him for impossible absolutely it found he that regret, infinite with
most been had he Butler: the to addition in Anhalt of part the undertake
do; not would it but feasible, be to out it make to trying anxiously
in difficulty smallest the be not will there “But up. it give must he
and pick may we word; the speak to but have “We added. he it,” filling
six within men young six least at moment, this at name, could I chuse.
are there and company, our into admitted be to wild are who us, of miles
trust to afraid be not should I us: disgrace not would that two or one
clever very a is Oliver Tom Maddox. Charles or Olivers the of either
see will you as man a gentlemanlike as is Maddox Charles and fellow,
over ride and morning to-morrow early horse my take will I so anywhere,
them.” of one with settle and Stoke, to

full in Edmund at round apprehensively looking was Maria spoke, he While
this: as plan the of enlargement an such oppose must he that expectation
nothing. said Edmund but protestations; first their all to contrary so
I as far “As replied, calmly Crawford Miss thought, moment’s a After
think all you that anything to objection no have can I concerned, am
Charles Mr. Yes, gentlemen? the of either seen ever I Have eligible.
quiet-looking A Henry? he, not did day, one sister’s my at dined Maddox
for please, you if to, applied be _him_ Let him. remember I man. young
stranger.” perfect a have to than me to unpleasant less be will it

going of resolution his repeated Tom man. the be to was Maddox Charles
opened scarcely had who Julia, though and morrow; the on early him to
glance a with and manner, sarcastic a in observed, before, lips her
would theatricals Mansfield “the that Edmund, at then and Maria at first
his held still Edmund exceedingly,” neighbourhood whole the enliven
gravity. determined a by only feelings his shewed and peace,

an in Crawford, Miss said play,” our to as sanguine very not am “I
Mr. tell can I “and consideration; some after Fanny, to undervoice
of many great a and speeches, _his_ of some shorten shall I that Maddox
disagreeable, very be will It together. rehearse we before _own_, _my_
expected.” I what means no by and



XVI CHAPTER

real any into Fanny talk to power Crawford’s Miss in not was It
to went she over, was evening the When passed. had what of forgetfulness
attack an such of shock the by agitated still nerves her it, of full bed
spirits her and in, persevered so and public so Tom, cousin her from
called be To reproach. and reflection unkind aunt’s her under sinking
to prelude the but was it that hear to manner, a such in notice into
was what do must she that told be to worse, infinitely so something
and obstinacy of charge the have to then and act; to as impossible so
dependence the at hint a such with enforced it, follow ingratitude
the make to time the at distressing too been had situation, her of
the with especially so, less much alone was she when remembrance
the of continuation in produce might morrow the what of dread superadded
if and time; the for only her protected had Crawford Miss subject.
authoritative the all with themselves among again to applied were she
away, perhaps Edmund and of, capable were Maria and Tom that urgency
the answer could she before asleep fell She do? she should what
next the awoke she when puzzling as quite it found and question,
sleeping-room her continued had which attic, white little The morning.
suggest to incompetent proving family, the entering first her since ever
another to dressed, was she as soon as recourse, had she reply, any
thinking, and in about walking for meet more and spacious more apartment
It mistress. equally almost been time some for now had she which of and
not would Bertrams Miss the till called so school-room; their been had
later a to such as inhabited and longer, any so called be to it allow
written, and read had they there and lived, had Lee Miss There period.
had she when years, three last the within till laughed, and talked and
was time some for and useless, become then had room The them. quitted
wanted or plants, her visited she when Fanny, by except deserted, quite
the from there, keep to glad still was she which books, the of one
but above: chamber little her in accommodation and space of deficiency
added had she increased, it of comforts the for value her as gradually,
nothing having and there; time her of more spent and possessions, her to
it, into herself worked artlessly so and naturally so had her, oppose to
had it as room, East The hers. be to admitted generally now was it that
considered now was sixteen, was Bertram Maria since ever called been
the of smallness the attic: white the as decidedly as almost Fanny’s,
Miss the that reasonable evidently so other the of use the making one
own their which apartments own their in superiority every with Bertrams,
Mrs. and it; approving entirely were demand, could superiority of sense
Fanny’s on it in fire a being never there for stipulated having Norris,
nobody what of use the having her to resigned tolerably was account,
the of spoke sometimes she which in terms the though wanted, else
house. the in room best the was it that imply to seemed indulgence

habitable was it fire a without even that favourable so was aspect The
mind willing a such to morning autumn late and spring early an many in
be to not hoped she sunshine of gleam a was there while and Fanny’s; as
in it of comfort The came. winter when even entirely, it from driven
anything after there go could She extreme. was leisure of hours her
or pursuit, some in consolation immediate find and below, unpleasant
had she which books--of her plants, Her hand. at thought of train some
shilling--her a commanding her of hour first the from collector a been
within all were ingenuity, and charity of works her and writing-desk,
would musing but nothing if employment, for indisposed if or reach; her
an not had which room that in object an see scarcely could she do,
or friend, a was Everything it. with connected remembrance interesting
much sometimes been had there though and friend; a to thoughts her bore
misunderstood, been often had motives her though her; to suffering of
she though undervalued; comprehension her and disregarded, feelings her
almost yet neglect, and ridicule, of tyranny, of pains the known had
aunt her consolatory: something to led had either of recurrence every
what or, encouraging, been had Lee Miss or her, for spoken had Bertram
her and champion her been had Edmund dear, more or frequent more yet was
told had he meaning, her explained or cause her supported had he friend:
made which affection of proof some her given had or cry, to not her
so together, blended so now was whole the and delightful; tears her
The charm. its had affliction former every that distance, by harmonised
furniture its changed have not would she and her, to dear most was room
plain originally been had what though house, the in handsomest the for
elegancies greatest its and children; of ill-usage the all suffered had
done ill too work, Julia’s of footstool faded a were ornaments and
for rage a in made transparencies, three drawing-room, the for
Tintern where window, one of panes lower three the for transparencies,
in lake moonlight a and Italy in cave a between station its held Abbey
being of unworthy thought profiles, family of collection a Cumberland,
pinned and side, their by and mantelpiece, the over else, anywhere
the from ago years four sent ship a of sketch small a wall, the against
letters in bottom, the at Antwerp H.M.S. with William, by Mediterranean
mainmast. the as tall as

on influence its try to down walked now Fanny comforts of nest this To
profile Edmund’s at looking by if see to spirit, doubting agitated, an
geraniums her to air giving by or counsel, his of any catch could she
more had she But herself. strength mental of breeze a inhale might she
feel to begun had she remove: to perseverance own her of fears than
the round walked she as and _do_; _to_ _ought_ she what to as undecided
was what refusing in _right_ she Was increasing. were doubts her room
a to essential so be might for--what wished strongly so asked, warmly so
complaisance greatest the owed she whom to those of some which on scheme
of fear a and selfishness, ill-nature, not it Was hearts? their set had
of persuasion his would judgment, Edmund’s would And herself? exposing
a in her justify to enough be whole, the of disapprobation Thomas’s Sir
to horrible so be would It rest? the all of spite in denial determined
her of purity and truth the suspect to inclined was she that act to her
cousins her of claims the her, around looked she as and scruples; own
present upon present of sight the by strengthened were obliged being to
was windows the between table The them. from received had she that
at her given been had which netting-boxes and work-boxes with covered
the to as bewildered grew she and Tom; by principally times, different
at tap A produced. remembrances kind these all which debt the of amount
her to way her find to attempt this of midst the in her roused door the
one, of appearance the by answered was in” “Come gentle her and duty,
at brightened eyes Her laid. be to wont were doubts her all whom before
Edmund. of sight the

he. said minutes?” few a for Fanny, you, with speak I “Can

certainly.” “Yes,

opinion.” your want I consult. to want “I

it as highly compliment, a such from shrinking cried, she opinion!” “My
her. gratified

acting This do. to what know not do I opinion. and advice your “Yes,
a bad as almost chosen have They see. you worse, and worse gets scheme
ask to going are business, the complete to now, and could, they as play
the is This us. of any to known slightly very man young a of help the
first. at about talked was which propriety and privacy the all of end
which intimacy excessive the but Maddox; Charles of harm no know I
highly is manner this in us among admitted being his from spring must
cannot I familiarity. intimacy--the than _more_ the objectionable,
such of evil an me to appear does it and patience; any with it of think
in it see you not Do prevented. be _possible_, _if_ must, as magnitude
light?” same the

determined.” so is brother Your done? be can what but “Yes;

myself. Anhalt take must I Fanny. done, be to thing _one_ but is “There
Tom.” quiet will else nothing that aware well am I

him. answer not could Fanny

being like can man “No continued. he like,” I what all at not is “It
to known being After inconsistency. such of _appearance_ the into driven
of face the in absurdity is there beginning, the from scheme the oppose
every in plan first their exceeding are they when _now_, them joining my
Fanny?” you, Can alternative. other no of think can I but respect;

but--” immediately, “not slowly, Fanny said “No,”

over. little a it Think me. with not is judgment your see I what? “But
of _may_, that mischief the of am I as aware much so not are you Perhaps
received being man’s young a from arise _must_ that unpleasantness the
hours, all at come to authorised us; among domesticated manner: this in
To restraints. all away do must which footing a on suddenly placed and
It create. to tend must rehearsal every which licence the of only think
Consider Fanny. place, Crawford’s Miss in yourself Put bad! very all is
be to right a has She stranger. a with Amelia act to be would it what
of enough heard I herself. for feels evidently she because for, felt
be to unwillingness her understand to night last you to said she what
with part the in engaged probably she as and stranger; a with acting
enough subject the considering without expectations--perhaps different
be would it ungenerous, be would be--it to likely was what know to
respected. be to ought feelings Her it. to her expose to wrong really
hesitate.” You Fanny? so, you strike not it Does

in drawn you see to sorry more am I but Crawford; Miss for sorry am “I
think to known are you what and against, resolved had you what do to
the to triumph a such be will It uncle. my to disagreeable be will
others!”

I infamously how see they when triumph of cause much have not will “They
it. brave must I and be, will certainly there triumph however, But, act.
business, the of publicity the restraining of means the be can I if But
be shall I folly, our concentrating of exhibition, the limiting of
have I nothing: do can I influence, no have I now, am I As repaid. well
in them put have I when but me; hear not will they and them, offended
persuading of hopes without not am I concession, this by good-humour
than circle smaller much a within representation the confine to them
My gain. material a be will This for. road high the in now are they
this not Will Grants. the and Rushworth Mrs. to it confine to is object
gaining?” worth be

point.” great a be will it “Yes,

other any mention you Can approbation. your not has it still “But
good?” equal doing of chance a have I which by measure

else.” anything of think cannot I “No,

without comfortable not am I Fanny. then, approbation, your me “Give
it.”

cousin!” “Oh,

is it yet--But and myself, distrust to ought I me, against are you “If
the about riding way, this in on go Tom let to impossible absolutely
whom: matter act--no to persuaded be can who anybody of quest in country
have would _you_ thought I enough. be to is gentleman a of look the
feelings.” Crawford’s Miss into more entered

said her,” to relief great a be must It glad. very be will she doubt “No
manner. of warmth greater for trying Fanny,

last you to behaviour her in than amiable more appeared never “She
goodwill.” my on claim strong very a her gave It night.

spared”... her have to glad am I and indeed, kind, very _was_ “She

in her stopt conscience Her effusion. generous the finish not could She
satisfied. was Edmund but middle, the

sure am “and he, said breakfast,” after immediately down walk shall “I
you interrupt not will I Fanny, dear now, And there. pleasure giving of
had I till easy be not could I But reading. be to want You longer. any
has head my waking, or Sleeping decision. a to come and you, to spoken
certainly am I but evil, an is It night. all matter this of full been
him to go shall I up, is Tom If be. might it than less it making
all be shall we breakfast at meet we when and over, it get and directly
with together fool the acting of prospect the at good-humour high in
into trip a taking be will meanwhile, the in _You_, unanimity. such
on volume a on?”--opening go Macartney Lord does How suppose. I China,
Tales, Crabbe’s are here “And others. some up taking then and table the
I book. great your of tire you if you, relieve to hand at Idler, the and
am I as soon as and exceedingly; establishment little your admire
sit and acting, of nonsense this all of head your empty will you gone,
cold.” be to here stay not do But table. your to down comfortably

He Fanny. for composure no China, no reading, no was there but went; He
most the inconceivable, most the extraordinary, most the her told had
After acting! be To else. nothing of think could she and news; unwelcome
she that all After public! so and just so objections--objections his all
Could feeling. be to him known and look, him seen and say, him heard had
himself? deceiving not he Was inconsistent! so Edmund possible? be it
seen had She doing. Crawford’s Miss all was it Alas! wrong? not he Was
alarms and doubts The miserable. was and speech, every in influence her
and her, distressed previously had which conduct, own her to as
little of become were him, to listened she while slept all had which
should Things up. them swallowed anxiety deeper This now. consequence
attack, might cousins Her ended. it how not cared she course; their take
last at if and reach; their beyond was She her. tease hardly could but
now. misery all was matter--it yield--no to obliged



XVII CHAPTER

a Such Maria. and Bertram Mr. to day triumphant a indeed, was, It
was and hopes, their beyond been had discretion Edmund’s over victory
their in them disturb to anything longer no was There delightful. most
the on private in other each congratulated they and project, darling
glee the all with change, the attributed they which to weakness jealous
and grave, look still might Edmund way. every in gratified feelings of
play the disapprove must and general, in scheme the like not did he say
driven was he and act, to was he gained: was point their particular; in
descended had Edmund only. inclinations selfish of force the by it to
were they and before, maintained had he which elevation moral that from
descent. the for happier the as better the much as both

no betraying occasion, the on _him_ to however, well, very behaved They
seemed and mouth, the of corners the about lines the beyond exultation
Charles of intrusion the of quit be to escape an great as it think to
their against him admitting into forced been had they if as Maddox,
what was circle family own their in quite it have “To inclination.
the been have would them among stranger A wished. particularly had they
idea, that pursuing Edmund, when and comfort”; their all of destruction
were they audience, the of limitation the to as hope his of hint a gave
was It anything. promise to moment, the of complaisance the in ready,
his contrive to offered Norris Mrs. encouragement. and good-humour all
Baron the with scene last Anhalt’s that him assured Yates Mr. dress,
undertook Rushworth Mr. and emphasis, and action of deal good a admitted
speeches. his count to

now. us oblige to disposed more be may “Fanny Tom, said “Perhaps,”
_her_.” persuade may you Perhaps

act.” not will certainly She determined. quite is she “No,

herself felt Fanny but said; was word another not And well.” very “Oh!
to beginning was danger the to indifference her and danger, in again
already. her fail

this on Park the at than Parsonage the at smiles fewer not were There
entered and hers, in lovely very looked Crawford Miss Edmund; in change
whole the into cheerfulness of renewal instantaneous an such with
in right certainly was “He him. on effect one but have could as affair
the And it.” on determined had he glad was he feelings; such respecting
One sound. very not if sweet, very satisfactions in away wore morning
Miss of request earnest the at Fanny: to it from resulted advantage
to agreed good-humour, usual her with had, Grant Mrs. Crawford,
all was this and wanted; been had Fanny which for part the undertake
when this, even and day; the during heart _her_ gladden to occurred that
to Crawford Miss was it for it, with pang a brought Edmund, by imparted
to were exertions kind whose Crawford Miss was obliged--it was she whom
of spoken was them making in merit whose and gratitude, her excite
were safety and peace but safe; was She admiration. of glow a with
could She peace. from farther never been had mind Her here. unconnected
disquieted was she but herself, wrong done had she that feel not
against equally were judgment her and heart Her way. other every in
his and unsteadiness, his acquit not could she decision: Edmund’s
and jealousy of full was She wretched. her made it under happiness
an seemed which gaiety of looks with came Crawford Miss agitation.
hardly could she which herself towards expressions friendly with insult,
and prosperous busy, and gay was her around Everybody calmly. answer
dress, their part, their interest, of object their had each important;
finding were all confederates: and friends their scene, favourite their
playful the in diversion or comparisons, and consultations in employment
had she insignificant: and sad was alone She suggested. they conceits
midst the in be might she stay; or go might she anything; in share no
room, East the of solitude the to it from retreat or noise, their of
would anything think almost could She missed. or seen being without
_her_ consequence: of was Grant Mrs. this. to preferable been have
were time her and taste her mention; honourable had good-nature
attended, and for, sought was she wanted; was presence her considered;
the her envying of danger some in first at was Fanny and praised; and
and feelings, better brought reflection But accepted. had she character
never could which respect, to entitled was Grant Mrs. that her shewed
greatest, the even received she had that, and _her_; to belonged have
considering which, scheme a joining in easy been have never could she
altogether. condemn must she uncle, her only

them, amongst one saddened only the absolutely not was heart Fanny’s
too, sufferer a was Julia herself. to acknowledge to began soon she as
blamelessly. so quite not though

long very had she but feelings; her with trifled had Crawford Henry
so sister her of jealousy a with attentions, his sought even and allowed
conviction the that now and cure; their been have to ought as reasonable
it to submitted she her, on forced been had Maria for preference his of
rational at endeavour any or situation, Maria’s for alarm any without
in wrapt silence, gloomy in sat either She herself. for tranquillity
amuse; wit no touch, curiosity no subdue, could nothing as gravity such
gaiety forced with talking was Yates, Mr. of attentions the allowing or
others. the of acting the ridiculing and alone, him to

had Crawford Henry given, was affront the after two or day a For
and gallantry of attack usual the by away it do to endeavoured
a against persevere to it about enough cared not had he but compliment,
for time have to play his with busy too soon becoming and repulses; few
rather or quarrel, the to indifferent grew he flirtation, one than more
might what to end an putting quietly as occurrence, lucky a it thought
not was She Grant. Mrs. than more in expectations raised have long ere
disregarded; by sitting and play, the from excluded Julia see to pleased
Henry as happiness, her involved really which matter a not was it as but
a with her, assure did he as and own, his of judge best the be must
serious a had ever had Julia nor he neither that smile, persuasive most
to as caution former her renew only could she other, each of thought
too by tranquillity his risk to not him entreat sister, elder the
that anything in share her take gladly then and there, admiration much
so did that and general, in people young the to cheerfulness brought
her. to dear so two the of pleasure the promote particularly

observation her was Henry,” with love in not is Julia wonder rather “I
Mary. to

are.” sisters both imagine “I coldly. Mary replied is,” she say dare “I

of Think it. of hint a him give not Do be. not must that no, no, “Both!
Rushworth!” Mr.

may It Rushworth. Mr. of think to Bertram Miss tell better had “You
and property Rushworth’s Mr. of think often I good. some _her_ do
A him. of think never I but hands; other in them wish and independence,
a escape might man a estate; an such with county the represent might man
county.” the represent and profession

I comes, Thomas Sir When soon. parliament in be _will_ he say dare “I
to nobody been has there but borough, some for in be will he say dare
yet.” anything doing of way the in him put

said home,” comes he when things mighty many achieve to is Thomas “Sir
to ‘Address Browne’s Hawkins remember you “Do pause. a after Mary,
Pope?-- of imitation in Tobacco,’

dispense gales aromatic whose leaf! Blest
sense. Parsons to modesty, Templars To

them-- parody will I

dispense looks dictatorial whose Knight! Blest
sense. Rushworth to affluence, Children To

Sir upon depend to seems Everything Grant? Mrs. do, that not Will
return.” Thomas’s

him see you when reasonable and just very consequence his find will “You
him. without well so do we think not do I you. assure I family, his in
house, a such of head the suits which manner, dignified fine a has He
cipher a of more seems Bertram Lady place. their in everybody keeps and
in Norris Mrs. keep can else nobody and home; at is he when than now
I Henry. for cares Bertram Maria that fancy not do Mary, But, order.
last did she as flirted have not would she or not, does _Julia_ sure am
I friends, good very are Maria and he though and Yates; Mr. with night
inconstant.” be to well too Sotherton likes she think

in stept Henry if chance Rushworth’s Mr. for much give not would “I
signed.” were articles the before

as soon as and done; be must something suspicion, a such have you “If
know him make and seriously him to talk will we over, all is play the
he though off, him send will we nothing, means he if and mind; own his
time.” a for Henry, is

and not, it discerned Grant Mrs. though however, suffer, _did_ Julia
had She likewise. family own her of many of notice the escaped it though
warm a which suffering the all had she and still, love did she loved,
disappointment the under endure to likely were spirit high a and temper
ill-usage. of sense strong a with hope, irrational though dear, a of
angry of only capable was she and angry, and sore was heart Her
was terms easy on be to used was she whom with sister The consolations.
other; each from alienated were they enemy: greatest her become now
the to end distressing some of hope the to superior not was Julia and
to punishment some there, on carrying still were which attentions
Mr. towards as well as herself towards shameful so conduct for Maria
opinion, of difference or temper, of fault material no With Rushworth.
were interests their while friends good very being their prevent to
or affection not had this, as trial a such under sisters, the same, the
or honour them give to just, or merciful them make to enough principle
of careless purpose, her pursued and triumph, her felt Maria compassion.
Crawford Henry by distinguished Maria see never could Julia and Julia;
public a bring and jealousy, create would it that trusting without
last. at disturbance

outward no was there but Julia; in this of much pitied and saw Fanny
took Fanny and communication, no made Julia them. between fellowship
by only connected or sufferers, solitary two were They liberties. no
consciousness. Fanny’s

Julia’s to aunt the and brothers two the of inattention The
to imputed be must cause, true its to blindness their and discomposure,
was Tom preoccupied. totally were They minds. own their of fullness the
not did that nothing saw and theatre, his of concerns the by engrossed
real his and theatrical his between Edmund, it. to relate immediately
love between conduct, own his and claims Crawford’s Miss between part,
busy too was Norris Mrs. and unobservant; equally was consistency, and
company, the of matters little general the directing and contriving in
for expedient, economical with dresses various their superintending
half integrity, delighted with saving, and her, thanked nobody which
for leisure have to Thomas, Sir absent the to there and here crown a
daughters. his of happiness the guarding or behaviour, the watching



XVIII CHAPTER

and actresses, actors, theatre, train: regular a in now was Everything
impediments great other no though but forward; getting all were dresses,
all not was it that past, were days many before found, Fanny arose,
to not had she that and themselves, party the to enjoyment uninterrupted
almost been had as delight and unanimity such of continuance the witness
vexation. their have to began Everybody first. at her for much too
scene-painter a judgment, _his_ against Entirely many. had Edmund
the of increase the to much work, at was and town, from arrived
and proceedings; their of eclat the of worse, was what and, expenses,
of privacy the to as him by guided really being of instead brother, his
came who family every to invitation an giving was representation, the
slow scene-painter’s the over fret to began himself Tom way. his in
his learned had He waiting. of miseries the feel to and progress,
united be could that one trifling every took he for parts, his part--all
day every and acting; be to impatient be to began and Butler, the with
insignificance the of sense his increase to tending was unemployed thus
some that regret to ready more him make and together, parts his all of
chosen. been not had play other

only the often and listener, courteous very a always being Fanny,
of distresses the and complaints the for in came hand, at listener
rant to thought general in was Yates Mr. that knew _She_ them. of most
that Crawford; Henry in disappointed was Yates Mr. that dreadfully;
Grant Mrs. that unintelligible; be would he quick so spoke Bertram Tom
his with behindhand was Edmund that laughing; by everything spoiled
Rushworth, Mr. with do to anything have to misery was it that and part,
that also, knew, She speech. every through prompter a wanting was who
_his_ him: with rehearse to anybody get seldom could Rushworth Mr. poor
her to decided so and rest; the as well as her before came complaint
the often needlessly so and him, of avoidance Maria’s cousin her was eye
had she that Crawford, Mr. and her between scene first the of rehearsal
being from far So _him_. from complaints other of terror the all soon
something requiring everybody found she enjoying, all and satisfied all
Everybody others. the to discontent of occasion giving and not, had they
they as attend would nobody short; too or long too either part a had
nobody in; come to were they side which on remember would nobody ought;
directions. any observe would complainer the but

the from enjoyment innocent much as derive to herself believed Fanny
to pleasure a was it and well, acted Crawford Henry them; of any as play
first the of rehearsal the attend and theatre, the into creep to _her_
Maria. for speeches some in excited it feelings the of spite in act,
first the after and well; too well, acted thought, also she Maria,
sometimes and audience; only their be to began Fanny two, or rehearsal
as far As useful. very often was spectator, as sometimes prompter, as
he all: of actor best the considerably was Crawford Mr. judge, could she
and talent more Tom, than judgment more Edmund, than confidence more had
admit must she but man, a as him like not did She Yates. Mr. than taste
who many not were there point this on and actor, best the be to him
and tameness his against exclaimed indeed, Yates, Mr. her. from differed
her to turned Rushworth Mr. when last, at came day the and insipidity;
very so anything is there think you “Do said, and look, black a with
and, him; admire cannot I me, of soul and life the For this? all in fine
man, mean-looking little, undersized, an such see to ourselves, between
opinion.” my in ridiculous very is actor, fine a for up set

Maria, which jealousy, former his of return a was there moment this From
and remove; to pains little at was Crawford, of hopes increasing from
his of knowledge the to attaining ever Rushworth’s Mr. of chances the
anything making ever his to As less. much became speeches two-and-forty
except that of idea smallest the had nobody them, of _tolerable_
more not was part his that regretted indeed, _she_, mother; his
were they till Mansfield to over coming deferred and considerable,
the but scenes; his all comprehend to rehearsal their in enough forward
the and catchword, the remembering his beyond nothing at aspired others
through prompter the follow to able being and speech, his of line first
to pains great at was kindheartedness, and pity her in Fanny, rest. the
her in directions and helps the all him giving learn, to how him teach
every learning and him, for memory artificial an make to trying power,
forwarder. the much being his without but herself, part his of word

had; certainly she feelings apprehensive anxious, uncomfortable, Many
was she attention, and time her on claims other and these, all with but
them, amongst utility or employment without herself finding from far as
no having from far as quite uneasiness; in companion a without as
first her of gloom The compassion. her on as leisure her on demand
occasionally was She unfounded. been have to proved was anticipations
any. as peace at much as perhaps was she all; to useful

her which in moreover, done, be to needlework of deal great a was There
off well as quite her thought Norris Mrs. that and wanted; was help
it--“Come, claimed she which in manner the by evident was rest, the as
be not must you but you, for times fine are “these cried, she Fanny,”
at lookings-on the doing and other, the to room one from walking always
till myself slaving been have I here. you want I way; this in ease, your
sending without cloak Rushworth’s Mr. contrive to stand, hardly can I
putting in help your me give may you think I now and satin; more any for
It trice. a in them do may you seams; three but are There together. it
do. to part executive the but nothing had I if me for lucky be would
_you_, than more did nobody if but you: tell can I off, best are _You_
fast.” very on get not should we

but defence; any attempting without quietly, very work the took Fanny
behalf-- her on observed Bertram aunt kinder her

is it delighted: be _should_ Fanny that sister, wonder, cannot “One
play a of fond very be to used I and you know; you her, to new all
at more little a am I as soon as and still; I am so and ourselves,
play the is What too. rehearsals their at in look to mean _I_ leisure,
me.” told never have you Fanny? about,

who those of one not is Fanny for now; her ask not do pray sister, “Oh!
Vows.” Lovers’ about is It time. same the at work and talk can

acts three be will “there Bertram, aunt her to Fanny said believe,” “I
of opportunity an you give will that and evening, to-morrow rehearsed
once.” at actors the all seeing

Norris; Mrs. interposed hung,” is curtain the till stay better had “You
in sense little very is two--there or day a in hung be will curtain “the
it find not do you if mistaken much am I curtain--and a without play a
festoons.” handsome very into up draw

her share not did Fanny waiting. to resigned quite seemed Bertram Lady
the if for deal, great a morrow the of thought she composure: aunt’s
acting be then would Crawford Miss and Edmund rehearsed, were acts three
between scene a bring would act third the time; first the for together
longing was she which and particularly, most her interested which them
was it of subject whole The perform. would they how see to dreading and
very and gentleman, the by described be to was love of marriage love--a
lady. the by made be love of declaration a of short little

wondering many painful, many with again scene the read and read had She
a as it of representation their to forward looked and emotions,
yet had they _believe_ not did She interesting. too almost circumstance
private. in even it, rehearsed

Fanny’s and continued, evening the for plan the came, morrow The
very worked She agitated. less become not did it of consideration
her and diligence her but directions, aunt’s her under diligently
she noon about and mind; anxious absent, very a concealed silence
no have might she that room, East the to work her with escape her made
of rehearsal unnecessary most it, deemed she as and, another, in concern
at desirous proposing, just was Crawford Henry which act, first the
Mr. of sight the avoiding of and herself, to time her having of once
ladies two the of hall, the through passed she as glimpse, A Rushworth.
and retreat, of wish her in change no made Parsonage the from up walking
of quarter a for undisturbed, room, East the in meditated and worked she
of entrance the by followed was door the at tap gentle a when hour, an
Crawford. Miss

your beg I Price, Miss dear My room. East the is this Yes; right? I “Am
help.” your entreat to purpose on you to way my made have I but pardon,

room the of mistress herself shew to endeavoured surprised, quite Fanny,
with grate empty her of bars bright the at looked and civilities, her by
concern.

little a here stay to me Allow warm. very warm, quite am I you; “Thank
brought have I act. third my me hear to goodness the have do and while,
_so_ be should I me, with it rehearse but would you if and book, my
Edmund--by with it rehearse to intending to-day here came I obliged!
he if and way; the in not is he but evening, the ourselves--against
have I till _him_, with it through go could I think not do I _were_,
will You two. or speech a is there really for little; a myself hardened
you?” won’t good, so be

them give not could she though assurances, her in civil most was Fanny
voice. steady very a in

Miss continued mean?” I part the at look to happened ever you “Have
at it of much think not did I is. it “Here book. her opening Crawford,
and _that_, and speech, _that_ at look There, word. my upon first--but,
Could things? such say and face the in him look to ever I am How _that_.
difference. the all makes which cousin, your is he then But it? do you
by on get and him, _you_ fancy may I that me, with it rehearse must You
sometimes.” _his_ of look a _have_ You degrees.

must I but readiness; greatest the with best my do will I I? “Have
it.” of little very say can I for part, the _read_

for Now course. of book, the have to are You suppose. I it, of “_None_
the to forward bring to you for hand at chairs two have must We it.
a for made not chairs, school-room good There--very stage. the of front
kick and sit to girls little for fitted more much say; dare I theatre,
your would What lesson. a learning are they when against feet their
Could purpose? a such for used them see to say uncle your and governess
we for himself, bless would he now, just us upon in look Thomas Sir
the in away storming is Yates house. the over all rehearsing are
engaged is theatre the and upstairs, came I as him heard I dining-room.
If Frederick. and Agatha rehearsers, indefatigable those by course of
in looked I bye, the By surprised. be _shall_ I perfect, not are _they_
the of one at exactly be to happened it and ago, minutes five them upon
with was Rushworth Mr. and embrace, to _not_ trying were they when times
as off it turned I so queer, little a look to began he thought I me.
excellent an have shall ‘We him, to whispering by could, I as well
completely so manner, her in _maternal_ so something is there Agatha;
me? of done well that not Was countenance.’ and voice her in _maternal_
soliloquy.” my for Now directly. up brightened He

the which feeling modest the all with in joined Fanny and began, She
but inspire; to calculated strongly so was Edmund representing of idea
of picture good very no be to as feminine truly so voice and looks with
enough; courage had Crawford Miss however, Anhalt, an such With man. a
brought door the at tap a when scene, the half through got had they and
all. it suspended moment, next the Edmund, of entrance the and pause, a

three the of each in appeared pleasure and consciousness, Surprise,
same very the on come was Edmund as and meeting; unexpected this on
were pleasure and consciousness Crawford, Miss brought had that business
was and book, his had too He _them_. in momentary than more be to likely
prepare to him help and him, with rehearse to her ask to Fanny, seeking
house; the in be to Crawford Miss knowing without evening, the for
of together, thrown thus being of animation and joy the was great and
offices. kind Fanny’s of praise in sympathising and schemes, comparing

the under sank spirits _Her_ warmth. their in them equal not could _She_
to nothing nearly too becoming herself felt she and theirs, of glow
now must They either. by sought been having in comfort any have to both
lady, the till it, entreated urged, proposed, Edmund together. rehearse
was Fanny and longer, no refuse could first, at unwilling very not
with indeed, invested, was She them. observe and prompt to only wanted
and it exercise to desired earnestly and critic, and judge of office the
her within feeling every so doing from but faults; their all them tell
been she had it: attempt not dared not, would not, could shrank--she
restrained have must conscience her criticism, for qualified otherwise
too feel to herself believed She disapprobation. at venturing from her
To particulars. in safety or honesty for aggregate the in it of much
than _more_ sometimes was it and her; for enough be must them prompt
watching In book. the to attention pay always not could she for enough;
of spirit increasing the by agitated and, herself; forgot she them
he as exactly away turned and page the closed once had manner, Edmund’s
was she and weariness, reasonable very to imputed was It help. wanted
they hoped she than more pity their deserved she but pitied; and thanked
herself forced Fanny and over, was scene the last At surmise. ever would
when and other; the giving was each compliments the to praise her add to
believe to inclined was she whole, the recall to able and alone again
as it in feeling and nature such have indeed, would, performance their
to exhibition suffering very a it make and credit, their ensure must
brunt the stand must she however, effect, its be might Whatever herself.
day. very that again it of

to certainly was acts first three the of rehearsal regular first The
to engaged were Crawfords the and Grant Mrs. evening: the in place take
every and dinner; after could they as soon as purpose that for return
general a seemed There eagerness. with forward looking was concerned one
an such enjoying was Tom occasion. the on cheerfulness of diffusion
morning’s the from spirits in was Edmund end; the towards advance
All away. smoothed everywhere seemed vexations little and rehearsal,
soon gentlemen the soon, moved ladies the impatient; and alert were
and Norris, Mrs. Bertram, Lady of exception the with and them, followed
lighted having and hour; early an at theatre the in was everybody Julia,
the only waiting were admitted, state unfinished its as well as up it
begin. to Crawfords the and Grant Mrs. of arrival

Grant. Mrs. no was there but Crawfords, the for long wait not did They
he which for indisposition, an professing Grant, Dr. come. not could She
wife. his spare not could sister-in-law, fair his with credit little had

ever ill been has “He solemnity. mock with she, said ill,” is Grant “Dr.
tough, it fancied He today. pheasant the of any eat not did he since
since”. ever suffering been has and plate, his away sent

indeed. sad was non-attendance Grant’s Mrs. disappointment! was Here
valuable always her made conformity cheerful and manners pleasant Her
not could They necessary. absolutely was she _now_ but them; amongst
The her. without satisfaction any with rehearse not could they act,
as Tom, done? be to was What destroyed. was evening whole the of comfort
began eyes some perplexity, of pause a After despair. in was Cottager,
Price Miss “If say, to two or voice a and Fanny, towards turned be to
surrounded immediately was She part.” the _read_ to as good so be would
if Fanny, “Do, said, Edmund even it; asked everybody supplications; by
you.” to disagreeable _very_ not is it

was Why it. of idea the endure not could She back. hung still Fanny But
rather she not had why Or well? as to applied be to Crawford Miss not
attending of instead safest, be to felt had she as room, own her to gone
her; distress and irritate would it known had She all? at rehearsal the
punished. properly was She away. keep to duty her it known had she

renewed with Crawford, Henry said part,” the _read_ to only have “You
entreaty.

she “for Maria, added it,” of word every say can she believe do I “And
am I Fanny, places. twenty in day other the right Grant Mrs. put could
part.” the know you sure

as persevered, all they as and _not_; did she say not could Fanny
on dependence fond even of look a with and wish, his repeated Edmund
was Everybody best. her do would She yield. must she good-nature, her
heart, palpitating most a of tremors the to left was she and satisfied;
begin. to prepared others the while

be to noise own their in engaged much too being and begin; _did_ They
proceeded had house, the of part other the in noise unusual an by struck
appearing Julia, and open, thrown was room the of door the when way some
in is He come! is father “My exclaimed, aghast, all face a with it, at
moment.” this at hall the



XIX CHAPTER

greater the To described? be to party the of consternation the is How
All house! the in Thomas Sir horror. absolute of moment a was it number
mistake or imposition of hope a Not conviction. instantaneous the felt
that fact the of evidence an were looks Julia’s anywhere. harboured was
a not exclamations, and starts first the after and indisputable; it made
was countenance altered an with each minute: a half for spoken was word
most the stroke a it feeling was each almost and other, some at looking
consider might Yates Mr. appalling! most ill-timed, most unwelcome,
Rushworth Mr. and evening, the for interruption vexatious a as only it
under sinking was heart other every but blessing; a it imagine might
heart other every alarm, undefined or self-condemnation of degree some
It now?” done be to is what us? of become will “What suggesting, was
corroborating the were ear every to terrible and pause; terrible a was
footsteps. passing and doors opening of sounds

bitterness and Jealousy again. speak and move to first the was Julia
the at but cause; common the in lost was selfishness suspended: been had
devotion of looks with listening was Frederick appearance, her of moment
soon as and heart; his to hand her pressing and narrative, Agatha’s to
her of shock the of spite in that, see and this, notice could she as
her hand, sister’s her retained and station his kept still he words,
had she as red as looking and injury, with again swelled heart wounded
be not need “_I_ saying, room, the of out turned she before, white been
him.” before appearing of afraid

brothers two the moment same the at and rest; the roused going Her
few very A something. doing of necessity the feeling forward, stepped
of difference no admitted case The sufficient. were them between words
them joined Maria directly. drawing-room the to go must they opinion:
the for three; the of stoutest the then just intent, same the with
sweetest the her to was away Julia driven had which circumstance very
moment a moment, a such at hand her retaining Crawford’s Henry support.
and doubt of ages worth was importance, and proof peculiar such of
determination, serious most the of earnest an as it hailed She anxiety.
utterly off, walked They father. her encounter to even equal was and
Had too? go I “Shall of, question repeated Rushworth’s Mr. of heedless
they but too?” go to me for right be it not Will too? go better I not
answer to undertook Crawford Henry than door the through sooner no were
his pay to means all by him encouraging and, inquiry, anxious the
with others the after him sent delay, without Thomas Sir to respects
haste. delighted

quite been had She Yates. Mr. and Crawfords the only with left was Fanny
Sir on claims her of opinion own her as and cousins; her by overlooked
classing of idea any her give to humble too much was affection Thomas’s
a gain and behind remain to glad was she children, his with herself
was that all exceeded alarm and agitation Her breathing-time. little
even not which disposition a of right the by rest, the by endured
her all fainting: nearly was She suffering. from keep could innocence
compassion it with and returning, was uncle her of dread habitual former
before development the on party the of one every almost for and him for
found had She indescribable. account Edmund’s on solicitude with him,
fearful these all enduring was she trembling excessive in where seat, a
were restraint, any under longer no three, other the while thoughts,
an such over lamenting vexation, of feelings their to vent giving
without and event, untoward most a as arrival premature unlooked-for
or passage, his on long as twice been had Thomas Sir poor wishing mercy
Antigua. in still were

better from Yates, Mr. than subject the on warm more were Crawfords The
that mischief the of clearly more judging and family, the understanding
felt they certainty: a them to was play the of ruin The ensue. must
Mr. while hand; at inevitably be to scheme the of destruction total the
the for disaster a interruption, temporary a as only it considered Yates
being rehearsal the of possibility the suggest even could and evening,
over, were Thomas Sir receiving of bustle the when tea, after renewed
laughed Crawfords The it. by amused be to leisure at be might he and
walking their of propriety the on agreed soon having and idea; the at
Yates’s Mr. proposed themselves, to family the leaving and home quietly
Mr. But Parsonage. the at evening the spending and them accompanying
claims, parental of much thought who those with been never having Yates,
was kind the of anything that perceive not could confidence, family or
remaining preferred “he said, them, thanking therefore, and necessary;
gentleman old the to respects his pay might he that was, he where
would it think not did he besides, and come; _was_ he since handsomely
away.” run everybody have to others the by fair be

she if that feel to and herself, collect to beginning just was Fanny
was point this when disrespectful, seem might it behind longer staid
apology, sister’s and brother the with commissioned being and settled,
the perform to herself room the quitted she as go to preparing them saw
uncle. her before appearing of duty dreadful

after and door; drawing-room the at herself find she did soon Too
which courage a for come, not would knew she what for moment a pausing
in lock the turned she her, to supplied ever had door no of outside the
collected the all and drawing-room, the of lights the and desperation,
ear. her caught name own her entered, she As her. before were family,
where “But saying, and him, round looking moment that at was Thomas Sir
her, perceiving on Fanny?”--and little my see I not do Why Fanny? is
her, penetrated and astonished which kindness a with forward came
observing and affectionately, her kissing Fanny, dear his her calling
to how not knew Fanny grown! was she much how pleasure decided with
so been never had He oppressed. quite was She look. to where nor feel,
his changed, seemed manner His life. his in her to kind _very_ so kind,
awful been had that all and joy; of agitation the from quick was voice
light the nearer her led He tenderness. in lost seemed dignity his in
and health, her after particularly again--inquired her at looked and
for inquire, not need he that observed himself, correcting then,
having blush fine A point. that on sufficiently spoke appearance her
his in justified was he face, her of paleness previous the succeeded
next inquired He beauty. and health in improvement equal her of belief
was altogether kindness his and William: especially family, her after
thinking and little, so him loving for herself reproach her made as such
to eyes her lift to courage having on when, and misfortune; a return his
fagged, burnt, the had and thinner, grown was he that saw she face, his
was feeling tender every climate, hot a and fatigue of look worn
unsuspected much how considering in miserable was she and increased,
him. on burst to ready probably was vexation

suggestion his at who party, the of life the indeed was Thomas Sir
the be to right best the had He fire. the round themselves seated now
own his in again being in sensations his of delight the and talker;
him made separation, a such after family, his of centre the in house,
to ready was he and degree; unusual very a in chatty and communicative
question every answer and voyage, his to as information every give
had Antigua in business His put. was it before almost sons two his of
Liverpool, from directly came he and rapid, prosperously been latterly
private a in thither passage his making of opportunity an had having
little the all and packet; the for waiting of instead vessel,
departures, and arrivals his events, and proceedings his of particulars
with looked and Bertram Lady by sat he as delivered, promptly most were
himself him--interrupting around faces the on satisfaction heartfelt
them finding in fortune good his on remark to however, once, than more
together collected did--all he as unexpectedly home--coming at all
Rushworth Mr. on. depend not dared but wished, have could he as exactly
hand-shaking of warmth and reception friendly most a forgotten: not was
in included now was he attention pointed with and him, met already had
nothing was There Mansfield. with connected intimately most objects the
liking was Thomas Sir and appearance, Rushworth’s Mr. in disagreeable
already. him

unbroken, such with to listened he was circle the of one not By
to happy extremely really was who wife, his by as enjoyment unalloyed
to as arrival sudden his by warmed so were feelings whose and him, see
years. twenty last the for been had she than agitation nearer her place
so remained still and minutes, few a for fluttered _almost_ been had She
and side, her from Pug move work, her away put to as animated sensibly
She husband. her to sofa her of rest the all and attention her all give
had time own her pleasure: _her_ cloud to anybody for anxieties no had
great a done had she absence: his during spent irreproachably been
have would she and fringe; of yards many made and carpet-work, of deal
all of pursuits useful and conduct good the for freely as answered
see to her to agreeable so was It own. her for as people young the
whole her and amused ear her have to talk, him hear and again, him
particularly began she that narratives, his by filled comprehension
it impossible how and him, missed have must she dreadfully how feel to
absence. lengthened a bear to her for been have would

her to happiness in compared be to means no by was Norris Mrs.
Thomas’s Sir of fears many by incommoded was _she_ that Not sister.
for known, be should house his of state present the when disapprobation
caution instinctive the by except that, blinded so been had judgment her
her as cloak satin pink Rushworth’s Mr. away whisked had she which with
of sign any shew to said be hardly could she entered, brother-in-law
her left had It return. his of _manner_ the by vexed was she but alarm;
seeing and room, the of out for sent being of Instead do. to nothing
Sir house, the through news happy the spread to having and first, him
his of nerves the on perhaps, dependence, reasonable very a with Thomas,
been had and butler, the but confidant no sought had children, and wife
Norris Mrs. drawing-room. the into instantaneously almost him following
depended, always had she which on office an of defrauded herself felt
was and unfolded; thing the be to were death his or arrival his whether
about, bustle to anything having without bustle a in be to trying now
tranquillity but wanted was nothing where important be to labouring and
gone have might she eat, to consented have Thomas Sir Would silence. and
footmen the insulted and directions, troublesome with housekeeper the to
all declined resolutely Thomas Sir but despatch; of injunctions with
rather would came--he tea till nothing nothing, take would he dinner:
something urging intervals at was Norris Mrs. Still tea. for wait
England, to passage his of moment interesting most the in and different;
burst she height, the at was privateer French a of alarm the when
Sir dear my “Sure, soup. of proposal the with recital his through
tea. than you for thing better much a be would soup of basin a Thomas,
soup.” of basin a have Do

for anxiety same the “Still provoked. be not could Thomas Sir
I indeed “But answer. his was Norris,” Mrs. dear my comfort, everybody’s
tea.” but nothing have rather would

suppose directly; tea for speak you suppose Bertram, Lady then, “Well,
carried She to-night.” behindhand seems he little; a Baddeley hurry you
proceeded. narrative Thomas’s Sir and point, this

were communications immediate His pause. a was there length At
now him, around joyfully looking be to enough seemed it and exhausted,
not was pause the but circle; beloved the of another at now one, at
and talkative, became Bertram Lady spirits her of elation the in long:
“How say, her hearing upon children her of sensations the were what
Sir lately, themselves amusing been have people young the think you do
acting.” with alive all been have We acting. been have They Thomas?

acting?” been you have what and “Indeed!

it.” about all you tell they’ll “Oh!

affected with and hastily, Tom cried told,” be soon will _all_ “The
You now. it with father my bore to while worth not is it “but unconcern;
way by trying, been just have We sir. to-morrow, it of enough hear will
week, last the within just mother, my amusing and something, doing of
rains incessant such had have We trifle. mere a scenes, few a up get to
the to confined nearly been have we that began, October since almost
3rd. the since gun a out taken hardly have I together. days for house
attempting no been has there but days, three first the sport Tolerable
Edmund and Wood, Mansfield over went I day first The since. anything
between brace six home brought we and Easton, beyond copses the took
your respect we but many, as times six killed have each might and us,
not do I desire. could you as much as you, assure I sir, pheasants,
they than stocked worse means any by woods your find will you think
life my in pheasants of full so Wood Mansfield saw never _I_ were.
sir, yourself, there sport day’s a take will you hope I year. this as
soon.”

subsided; feelings sick Fanny’s and over, was danger the present the For
up, getting Thomas, Sir and in, brought afterwards soon was tea when but
without house the in longer any be not could he that found he that said
He returning. was agitation every room, dear own his into looking just
he change the for him prepare to said been had anything before gone was
Edmund disappearance. his followed alarm of pause a and there; find must
speak-- to first the was

he. said done,” be must “Something

her feeling still Maria, said visitors,” our of think to time is “It
anything for little caring and heart, Crawford’s Henry to pressed hand
Fanny?” Crawford, Miss leave you did “Where else.

message. their delivered and departure, their of told Fanny

He him. fetch and go will “I Tom. cried alone,” all is Yates poor “Then
out.” comes all it when assistant bad no be will

first the witness to time in just it reached and went, he theatre the To
deal good a been had Thomas Sir friend. his and father his of meeting
eye his casting on and room; his in burning candles find to surprised
air general a and habitation recent of symptoms other see to it, round
before from bookcase the of removal The furniture. the in confusion of
more scarcely had he but especially, him struck door billiard-room the
from sounds were there before this, all at astonished feel to time than
talking was one Some farther. still him astonish to billiard-room the
than voice--more the know not did he accent; loud very a in there
that at rejoicing door, the to stepped He hallooing. talking--almost
it, opening and, communication, immediate of means the having in moment
young ranting a to opposed and theatre, a of stage the on himself found
moment very the At backwards. down him knock to likely appeared who man,
start best very the perhaps giving and Thomas, Sir perceiving Yates of
Bertram Tom rehearsals, his of course whole the in given ever had he
greater found he had never and room; the of end other the at entered
solemnity of looks father’s His countenance. his keeping in difficulty
gradual the and stage, any on appearance first his this on amazement and
and well-bred the into Wildenheim Baron impassioned the of metamorphosis
was Bertram, Thomas Sir to apology and bow his making Yates, Mr. easy
have not would he as acting, true of piece a such exhibition, an such
probability--the all last--in the be would It account. any upon lost
finer. a be not could there sure was he but stage; that on scene last
eclat. greatest the with close would house The

of images any of indulgence the for however, time, little was There
assist and too, forward, step to him for necessary was It merriment.
Sir best. his did he sensations awkward many with and introduction, the
which cordiality of appearance the all with Yates Mr. received Thomas
pleased from far as really was but character, own his to due was
its of manner the with as acquaintance the of necessity the with
known sufficiently were connexions and family Yates’s Mr. commencement.
of another friend,” “particular the as introduction his render to him to
it and unwelcome; exceedingly son, his of friends particular hundred the
forbearance the all and home, at again being of felicity the all needed
thus himself finding on anger from Thomas Sir save to supply, could it
in exhibition ridiculous a of part making house, own his in bewildered
to moment a untoward so in forced and nonsense, theatrical of midst the
disapproving, of sure felt he whom man young a of acquaintance the admit
first the of course the in volubility and indifference easy whose and
two. the of home at most the him mark to seemed minutes five

be might he wishing heartily and thoughts, father’s his understood Tom
to began expression, partial but them give to disposed well as always
some be might there that before, done ever had he than clearly more see,
his glance the for reason some be might there that offence, of ground
he when that and room; the of stucco and ceiling the towards gave father
was he billiard-table, the of fate the after gravity mild with inquired
were minutes few A curiosity. allowable very a beyond proceeding not
Sir and side; each on sensations unsatisfactory such for enough
of words few a speak to as far so himself exerted having Thomas
the to as Yates, Mr. of appeal eager an to reply in approbation calm
the to returned gentlemen three the arrangement, the of happiness
was which gravity of increase an with Thomas Sir together, drawing-room
all. on lost not

found “I down; sat he as composedly, he said theatre,” your from come “I
in room--but own my to vicinity Its unexpectedly. rather it in myself
smallest the not had I as surprise, by me took it indeed, respect, every
It character. a serious so assumed having acting your of suspicion
candlelight, by judge could I as far as however, job, neat a appears
would he then And credit.” Jackson Christopher friend my does and
domestic over peace in coffee his sipped and subject, the changed have
Sir catch to discernment without Yates, Mr. but hue; calmer a of matters
to enough discretion or delicacy, or diffidence, or meaning, Thomas’s
with others the among mingled he while discourse the lead to him allow
the of topic the on him keep would himself, obtrusiveness least the
it, to relative remarks and questions with him torment would theatre,
disappointment his of history whole the hear him make would finally and
to much found but politely, most listened Thomas Sir Ecclesford. at
Yates’s Mr. of ill-opinion his confirm and decorum, of ideas his offend
when and story; the of end the to beginning the from thinking, of habits
a what than sympathy of assurance other no him give could over, was it
conveyed. bow slight

after Tom, said acting,” _our_ of origin the fact, in was, “This
from infection the brought Yates friend “My thought. moment’s a
know, you spread, always things those spread--as it and Ecclesford,
the encouraged often so having _your_ from probably, faster, sir--the
again.” ground old treading like was It formerly. us in thing of sort

and possible, as soon as friend his from subject the took Yates Mr.
were and done had they what of account an Thomas Sir gave immediately
happy the views, their of increase gradual the of him told doing:
of state promising present and difficulties, first their of conclusion
not him made as interest an blind so with everything relating affairs;
his of many of movements uneasy the of unconscious totally only
of hem! the fidget, the countenance, of change the sat, they as friends
the of expression the seeing from even him prevented but unquietness,
dark Thomas’s Sir seeing fixed--from were eyes own his which on face
daughters his at earnestness inquiring with looked he as contract brow
a speaking and latter, the on particularly dwelling Edmund, and
Not heart. his at felt _he_ which reproof, a remonstrance, a language,
behind chair her back edged had who Fanny, by felt it was acutely less
all saw herself, notice from screened and, sofa, the of end aunt’s her
his from Edmund at reproach of look a Such her. before passing was that
it that feel to and witness; to expected have never could she father
Thomas’s Sir indeed. aggravation an was deserved degree any in was
you have what depended; I Edmund, judgment, your “On implied, look
to swelled bosom her and uncle, her to spirit in knelt She about?” been
_him_!” to not but others, the all to so Look _him_! to not “Oh, utter,

in were we Thomas, Sir truth, the own “To talking. still was Yates Mr.
going were We evening. this arrived you when rehearsal a of middle the
Our whole. the upon unsuccessfully not and acts, first three the through
that home, gone being Crawfords the from dispersed, so now is company
of honour the us give will you if but to-night; done be can more nothing
We result. the of afraid be not should I evening, to-morrow company your
bespeak we performers; young as understand, you indulgence, your bespeak
indulgence.” your

“but gravely, Thomas Sir replied sir,” given, be shall indulgence “My
“I added, he smile, relenting a with And rehearsal.” other any without
any towards away turning Then indulgent.” and happy be to home come
were Crawford Miss and “Mr. said, tranquilly he rest, the of all or
agreeable them find you Do Mansfield. from letters last my in mentioned
acquaintance?”

entirely being he but answer, an with ready all at one only the was Tom
love in either jealousy without either, for regard particular without
a was Crawford “Mr. both. of handsomely very speak could acting, or
elegant, pretty, sweet, a sister his man; gentleman-like pleasant, most
girl.” lively

not is he say not do “I longer. no silent be could Rushworth Mr.
not is he father your tell should you but considering; gentleman-like,
man.” well-looking a expecting be will he or eight, feet five above

surprise some with looked and this, understand quite not did Thomas Sir
speaker. the at

it opinion my “in Rushworth, Mr. continued think,” I what say must I “If
a of much too having is It rehearsing. always be to disagreeable very is
are we think I first. at was I as acting of fond so not am I thing. good
ourselves, among here comfortably sitting employed, better deal great a
nothing.” doing and

am “I smile, approving an with replied then and again, looked Thomas Sir
gives It same. the much so subject this on sentiments our find to happy
quick-sighted, and cautious be should I That satisfaction. sincere me
perfectly is feel, _not_ do children my which scruples many feel and
a for tranquillity, domestic for value my that so equally and natural;
at But theirs. exceed much should pleasures, noisy out shuts which home
circumstance favourable most a is this, all feel to life of time your
of sensible am I and you; with connected everybody for and yourself, for
weight.” such of ally an having of importance the

words better in opinion Rushworth’s Mr. giving be to meant Thomas Sir
a expect not must he that aware was He himself. find could he than
with man, young steady well-judging, a as but Rushworth; Mr. in genius
to intended he to, justice do would elocution his than notions better
to not others the of many for impossible was It highly. very him value
by but meaning; much so with do to what knew hardly Rushworth Mr. smile.
Thomas’s Sir with pleased exceedingly most felt, really he as looking,
towards best his did he anything, scarcely saying and opinion, good
longer. little a opinion good that preserving



XX CHAPTER

and alone, father his see to was morning next the object first Edmund’s
own his defending scheme, acting whole the of statement fair a him give
his feel moment, soberer a in then, could he as only far as it in share
that ingenuousness, perfect with acknowledging, and deserve, to motives
his make to as good partial such with attended been had concession his
himself, vindicating while anxious, was He doubtful. very it in judgment
amongst one only was there but others: the of unkind nothing say to
defence of necessity some without mention could he conduct whose them
“every he, said blame,” to less or more been all have “We palliation. or
rightly judged has who one only the is Fanny Fanny. excepting us, of one
steadily been have feelings _Her_ consistent. been has who throughout;
due was what of think to ceased never She last. to first from it against
wish.” could you everything Fanny find will You you. to

party, a such among scheme a such of impropriety the all saw Thomas Sir
he must; he supposed ever had son his as strongly as time, a such at and
with hands shaken having and words; many for indeed, much, too it felt
how forget and impression, disagreeable the lose to try to meant Edmund,
house the after could, he as soon as himself forgotten been had he much
restored and remembrance, the enforcing object every of cleared been had
his with remonstrance any into enter not did He state. proper its to
error their felt they believe to willing more was he children: other
immediate an of reproof The investigation. of risk the run to than
be would preparation, every of sweep the everything, of conclusion
sufficient.

leave not could he whom house, the in however, person, one was There
help not could He conduct. his through merely sentiments his learn to
might advice her that hoped having his of hint a Norris Mrs. giving
have certainly must judgment her what prevent to interposed been have
the forming in inconsiderate very been had people young The disapproved.
themselves; decision better a of capable been have to ought they plan;
unsteady of believed, he Edmund, excepting and, young; were they but
her regard must he therefore, surprise, greater with and characters;
unsafe their of countenance her measures, wrong their in acquiescence
have should amusements such and measures such that than amusements,
nearly as and confounded little a was Norris Mrs. suggested. been
to ashamed was she for life; her in been had she ever as silenced being
glaring so was which impropriety the of any seen never having confess
was influence her that admitted have not would and Thomas, Sir to
was resource only Her vain. in talked have might she insufficient--that
current the turn and possible, as fast as subject the of out get to
to deal great a had She channel. happier a into ideas Thomas’s Sir of
interest the to attention _general_ to as praise own her in insinuate
glance to sacrifices many and exertion much family, his of comfort and
own her from removals sudden and walks hurried of form the in at
Lady to economy and distrust of hints excellent many and fireside,
had saving considerable most a whereby detail, to Edmund and Bertram
her But detected. been servant bad one than more and arisen, always
was glory and support greatest Her Sotherton. in lay strength chief
she _There_ Rushworths. the with connexion the formed having in
Mr. bringing of credit the all herself to took She impregnable. was
been not had I “If effect. any to Maria of admiration Rushworth’s
mother, his to introduced being of point a made “and she, said active,”
certain as am I visit, first the pay to sister my on prevailed then and
Rushworth Mr. for it; of come have would nothing that here sit I as
of deal great a wants who man young modest amiable of sort the is
we if him for catch the on enough girls were there and encouragement,
heaven move to ready was I unturned. stone no left I But idle. been had
You her. persuade did I last at and sister, my persuade to earth and
the and winter, of middle the in was it Sotherton; to distance the know
her.” persuade did I but impassable, almost roads

Bertram Lady with is influence your great, justly how great, how know “I
have not should it that concerned more the am and children, her and
been.”

day! _that_ roads the of state the seen had you if Thomas, Sir dear “My
four the had we though them, through got have never should we thought I
his of out us, attend would coachman old poor and course; of horses
on box the sit to able hardly was he though kindness, and love great
since ever for him doctoring been had I which rheumatism the of account
winter--and the all bad very was he but last; at him cured I Michaelmas.
before room his in up him to going help not could I day, a such was this
so wig; his on putting was he venture: to not him advise to off set we
be shall I and Lady your go; not better much had you ‘Coachman, said, I
the upon been has Charles and is, Stephen steady how know you safe; very
I however, But, fear.’ no is there sure am I that now, often so leaders
be to hate I as and going, upon bent was he do; not would it found soon
him for ached quite heart my but more; no said I officious, and worrying
where, Stoke, about lanes rough the into got we when and jolt, every at
anything than worse was it stones, of beds upon snow and frost with what
poor the then And him. about agony an in quite was I imagine, can you
for feel always I how know You away! straining them see To too! horses
you do what Hill, Sandcroft of bottom the to got we when And horses. the
did I up. walked and out got I but me; at laugh will You did? I think
I and something, was it but much, them saving be not might It indeed.
of expense the at up dragged be and ease my at sit to bear not could
not did I _that_ but cold, dreadful a caught I animals. noble those
visit.” the in accomplished was object My regard.

that trouble any worth acquaintance the think always shall we hope “I
Mr. in striking very nothing is There it. establish to taken be might
to appeared what with night last pleased was I but manners, Rushworth’s
family quiet a of preference decided his subject: one on opinion his be
exactly feel to seemed He acting. of confusion and bustle the to party
wish.” could one as

him. like will you better the him of know you more the and indeed, “Yes,
and qualities; good thousand a has he but character, shining a not is He
it, about at laughed quite am I that you, to up look to disposed so is
Norris,’ Mrs. word, my ‘Upon doing. my as it considers everybody for
own, your of son a were Rushworth Mr. ‘if day, other the Grant Mrs. said
respect.’” greater in Thomas Sir hold not could he

her by disarmed evasions, her by foiled point, the up gave Thomas Sir
that conviction the with satisfied rest to obliged was and flattery;
kindness her stake, at was loved she those of pleasure present the where
judgment. her overpower sometimes did

occupied them of any with Conversation him. with morning busy a was It
wonted the all in himself reinstate to had He it. of part small a but
to bailiff; his and steward his see to life: Mansfield his of concerns
into walk to business, of intervals the in and, compute, and examine
and active but plantations; nearest and gardens, his and stables his
as seat his resumed he before this all done only not had he methodical,
in work to carpenter the set also had he dinner, at house the of master
billiard-room, the in up put lately so been had what down pulling
the justify to enough long dismissal his scene-painter the given and
Northampton. as off far as least at then being his of belief pleasing
room, one of floor the only spoilt having gone, was scene-painter The
under-servants the of five made and sponges, coachman’s the all ruined
or day another that hopes in was Thomas Sir and dissatisfied; and idle
been, had what of memento outward every away wipe to suffice would two
the in Vows Lovers’ of copy unbound every of destruction the to even
eye. his met that all burning was he for house,

intentions, Thomas’s Sir understand to now beginning was Yates Mr.
friend his and He source. their understanding from ever as far as though
taken had Tom and morning, the of chief the guns their with out been had
father’s his for apologies proper with explaining, of opportunity the
as acutely as it felt Yates Mr. expected. be to was what particularity,
was way same the in disappointed time second a be To supposed. be might
such, was indignation his and ill-luck; severe very of instance an
friend’s his and friend, his towards delicacy for been not it had that
baronet the attack certainly should he believed he sister, youngest
more little a into him argue and proceedings, his of absurdity the on
Mansfield in was he while stoutly very this believed He rationality.
Thomas, Sir in something a was there but home; way the all and Wood,
it think Yates Mr. made which table, same the round sat they when
without it of folly the feel and way, own his pursue him let to wiser
often and before, fathers disagreeable many known had He opposition.
in never, but occasioned, they inconveniences the with struck been
so class that of one seen he had life, his of course whole the
was He Thomas. Sir as tyrannical infamously so moral, unintelligibly
be might he and sake, children’s his for but endured be to man a not
stay to mean yet did Yates Mr. that Julia daughter fair his to thankful
roof. his under longer days few a

every almost though smoothness, external with passed evening The
his from for called Thomas Sir which music the and ruffled; was mind
a in was Maria harmony. real of want the conceal to helped daughters
that her to consequence utmost the of was It agitation. of deal good
was she and himself, declaring in time no lose now should Crawford
advance to seeming without by gone be should day a even that disturbed
and morning, whole the him see to expecting been had She point. that
off set had Rushworth Mr. him. expecting still was too, evening, the all
for hoped fondly had she and Sotherton; for news great the with early
of trouble the him save might as _eclaircissement_ immediate an such
Parsonage, the from one no seen had they But again. back coming ever
of note friendly a beyond tidings no heard had and creature, a not
the was It Bertram. Lady to Grant Mrs. from inquiry and congratulation
wholly been had families the which in weeks, many many, for day first
August since before, passed never had hours Four-and-twenty divided.
a was It other. or way some in together them bringing without began,
evil, of sort the in differing though morrow, the and day; anxious sad,
were enjoyment feverish of moments few A less. bring means no by did
the in again was Crawford Henry suffering. acute of hours by followed
respects his pay to anxious was who Grant, Dr. with up walked he house:
the into ushered were they hour early an rather at and Thomas, Sir to
appeared, soon Thomas Sir family. the of most were where breakfast-room,
she man the of introduction the agitation and delight with saw Maria and
they were so and indefinable, were sensations Her father. her to loved
chair a had who Crawford, Henry hearing upon afterwards minutes few a
whether undervoice an in latter the ask Tom, and herself between
happy present the after play the resuming for plans any were there
that in because, Thomas), Sir at glance courteous a (with interruption
time any at Mansfield to returning of point a make should he case,
his meet to being immediately, away going was he party: the by required
renewal a of prospect any were there if but delay; without Bath at uncle
should he engaged, positively himself hold should he Vows, Lovers’ of
his with condition absolutely should he claim, other every through break
should play The wanted. be might he whenever them attending for uncle
absence. _his_ by lost be not

will “I he; said be,” may I wherever York, London, Norfolk, Bath, “From
notice.” hour’s an at England, in place any from you attend

He sister. his not and speak, to had Tom that moment that at well was It
going; are you sorry am “I fluency, easy with say immediately could
(looking end” an at over--entirely all is _that_ play, our to as but
and yesterday, off sent was painter “The father). his at significantly
_that_ how knew I to-morrow. theatre the of remain will little very
nobody find will You Bath. for early is It first. the from be would
there.”

time.” usual uncle’s my about is “It

going?” of think you do “When

to-day.” Banbury as far as get perhaps, may, “I

while and question; next the was Bath?” at use you do stables “Whose
wanted who Maria, discussion, under was subject the of branch this
it of share her encounter to preparing was resolution, nor pride neither
calmness. tolerable with

with said, already had he what of much repeating turned, soon he her To
availed what But regret. of expressions stronger and air softened a only
going, voluntarily not if and, going, was He air? his or expressions his
due be might what excepting for, away; stay to intending voluntarily
of talk might He self-imposed. all were engagements his uncle, his to
pressed so had which hand The independence. his knew she but necessity,
and motionless alike were heart the and hand the heart! his to hers
was mind her of agony the but her, supported spirit Her now! passive
language to listening from arose what endure to long not had She severe.
feelings her of tumult the bury to or contradicted, actions his which
called soon civilities general for society; of restraint the under
openly became then it as visit, farewell the and her, from notice his
her touched had gone--he was He one. short very a was acknowledged,
seek might she and bow, parting his made had he time, last the for hand
gone, was Crawford Henry her. for do could solitude that all directly
parish; the from afterwards hours two within and house, the from gone
and Maria in raised had vanity selfish his hopes the all ended so and
Bertram. Julia

be to beginning was presence His gone. was he that rejoice could Julia
to enough cool now was she not, him gained Maria if and her; to odious
added be to exposure want not did She revenge. other any with dispense
sister. her pity even could she gone, Crawford Henry desertion. to

it heard She intelligence. the in rejoice Fanny did spirit purer a With
mentioned was it others the all By blessing. a it felt and dinner, at
feeling--from of gradation due with honoured merits his and regret; with
his of unconcern the to regard, partial too Edmund’s of sincerity the
her, about look to began Norris Mrs. rote. by entirely speaking mother
and nothing; to come had Julia with love in falling his that wonder and
but it; forwarding in herself remiss been had she that fear almost could
to activity _her_ even for possible it was how for, care to many so with
wishes? her with pace keep

departure _his_ In likewise. gone was Yates Mr. and two, or day Another
family, his with alone be to wanting interest: chief the felt Thomas Sir
irksome; been have must Yates Mr. to superior stranger a of presence the
way every was it expensive, and idle confident, and trifling him, of but
and Tom of friend the as but wearisome, was he himself In vexatious.
quite been had Thomas Sir offensive. became he Julia of admirer the
wishes good his but staying: or going Crawford’s Mr. to indifferent
the to him with walked he as journey, pleasant a having Yates’s Mr. for
to staid had Yates Mr. satisfaction. genuine with given were hall-door,
the Mansfield, at preparation theatrical every of destruction the see
all in house the left he play: the to appertaining everything of removal
seeing in hoped, Thomas Sir and character; general its of soberness the
scheme, the with connected object worst the of rid be to it, of out him
existence. its of him reminding inevitably be must that last the and

might that sight his from article one remove to contrived Norris Mrs.
such with presided had she which over curtain, The him. distressed have
she where cottage, her to her with off went success, such and talent
baize. green of want in particularly be to happened



XXI CHAPTER

family, the of ways the in change striking a made return Thomas’s Sir
an was Mansfield government, his Under Vows. Lovers’ of independent
spirits the and away, sent society their of members Some place. altered
with compared gloom and sameness all was saddened--it others many of
little was There enlivened. rarely party family sombre past--a the
intimacies from back drawing Thomas, Sir Parsonage. the with intercourse
any for time, this at disinclined, particularly was general, in
to addition only the were Rushworths The quarter. one in but engagements
solicit. could he which circle domestic own his

nor feelings, father’s his be should such that wonder not did Edmund
he they,” “But Grants. the of exclusion the but anything regret he could
seem they us; to belong to seem They claim. a “have Fanny, to observed
of sensible more were father my wish could I ourselves. of part be to
I away. was he while sisters and mother my to attention great very their
my that is, truth the But neglected. themselves feel may they afraid am
he when twelvemonth a here been not had They them. knows hardly father
it as society their value would he better, them knew he If England. left
would he people of sort the exactly fact in are they for deserves;
my ourselves: among animation of want in little a sometimes are We like.
Dr. ease. his at not certainly is Tom and spirits, of out seem sisters
with away pass evenings our make and us, enliven would Grant Mrs. and
father.” my to even enjoyment more

like not would uncle my opinion, my “in Fanny: said so?” think you “Do
and of, speak you quietness very the values he think I addition. _any_
does it And wants. he all is circle family own his of repose the that
mean be--I to used we than serious more are we that me to appear not
always was it recollect, can I as well As abroad. went uncle my before
if or, presence; his in laughing much never was There same. the much
absence an such than think, I more, not is it difference, any is there
but shyness; of sort a be must There first. at produce to tendency a has
except merry, ever were formerly evenings our that recollect cannot I
those when suppose, I are, people’s young No town. in was uncle my when
home”. at are to up look they

short a after reply, his was Fanny,” right, are you believe “I
they what to returned rather are evenings our believe “I consideration.
being their in was novelty The character. new a assuming than were,
give! will weeks few a only that impression the strong how Yet, lively.
before.” so lived never had we if as feeling been have I

do evenings “The Fanny. said people,” other than graver am I suppose “I
Indies. West the of talk uncle my hear to love I me. to long appear not
than more _me_ entertains It together. hour an for him to listen could I
dare I people, other unlike am I then but done; have things other many
say.”

told be to want you “Do (smiling). _that_?” say dare you should “Why
discreet? and wise more being in people other unlike only are you that
Go Fanny? me, from compliment a get ever anybody, or you, did when But
Ask you. satisfy will He complimented. be to want you if father my to
and enough: compliments hear will you and thinks, he what uncle your
and it, with up put must you person, your on chiefly be may they though
time.” in mind of beauty much as seeing his to trust

her. embarrassed quite it that Fanny to new so was language Such

and long the is that Fanny--and dear pretty, very you thinks uncle “Your
something made have would myself but Anybody matter. the of short the
been not had you that resent would you but anybody and it, of more
never uncle your that is, truth the but before; pretty very thought
so is complexion Your does. he now now--and till you admire did
your countenance!--and much so gained have you improved!--and
If uncle. an but is it--it about away turn not do Fanny, figure--nay,
You you? of become to is what admiration, uncle’s an bear cannot you
looking worth being of idea the to yourself harden to begin really must
woman.” pretty a into up growing mind to not try must You at.

more by distressed Fanny, cried so,” talk don’t so, talk don’t “Oh!
he distressed, was she that seeing but of; aware was he than feelings
seriously-- more added only and subject, the with done had

I and respect; every in you with pleased be to disposed is uncle “Your
too are who those of one are You more. him to talk would you wish only
circle.” evening the in silent

hear you not Did do. I sure am I used. I than more him to talk do I “But
night?” last slave-trade the about him ask me

It others. by up followed be would question the hopes in was did--and “I
farther.” of inquired be to uncle your pleased have would

while And silence! dead a such was there it--but do to longed I “And
all at seeming or word, a speaking without by sitting were cousins my
as appear would it thought like--I not did I subject, the in interested
curiosity a shewing by expense, their at off myself set to wanted I if
to daughters own his wish must he which information his in pleasure and
feel.”

day: other the you of said she what in right very was Crawford “Miss
women other as praise and notice of fearful as almost seemed you that
were those and Parsonage, the at you of talking were We neglect. of were
distinguishes who nobody know I discernment. great has She words. her
certainly She remarkable! is it woman a young so For better. characters
of part greater the by understood are you than better _you_ understands
can I others, some to regard with and long; so you known have who those
of expressions unguarded the hints, lively occasional from perceive,
delicacy not did accurately, as _many_ define could she that moment, the
him admire must She father! my of thinks she what wonder I it. forbid
consistent dignified, gentlemanlike, most with man, fine-looking a as
be may reserve his seldom, so him seen having perhaps, but manners;
their of sure feel I together, much be they Could repulsive. little a
to talents has she and liveliness her enjoy would He other. each liking
not does she hope I frequently! more met they wish I powers. his value
side.” his on dislike any is there suppose

you,” of rest the all of regard the of secure too herself know must “She
Sir And apprehension. such any have “to sigh, a half with Fanny, said
very so is family, his with only be to first at just wishing Thomas’s
I while, little a After that. from nothing argue can she that natural,
allowing way, of sort same the in again meeting be shall we say, dare
year.” of time the of difference the for

her since country the in passed has she that October first the is “This
November and country; the Cheltenham or Tunbridge call not do I infancy.
very is Grant Mrs. that see can I and month, serious more still a is
on.” comes winter as dull Mansfield finding not her for anxious

and nothing, say to safer was it but deal, great a said have could Fanny
her accomplishments, resources--her Crawford’s Miss all untouched leave
into her betray should it lest friends, her importance, her spirits,
of opinion kind Crawford’s Miss unhandsome. seemingly observations any
talk to began she and forbearance, grateful a least at deserved herself
else. something of

Mr. and you and Sotherton, at dines uncle my think, I “To-morrow,
uncle my hope I home. at party small a quite be shall We too. Bertram
Rushworth.” Mr. like to continue may

to-morrow’s after less him like must He Fanny. impossible, is “That
dread should I company. his in hours five be shall we for visit,
to evil greater much a not were there if day, the of stupidity the
much cannot He Thomas. Sir on leave must it impression follow--the
give would and all, them for sorry am I himself. deceive longer
met.” never had Maria and Rushworth that something

Thomas. Sir over impending was disappointment indeed, quarter, this In
Rushworth’s Mr. all not Rushworth, Mr. for good-will his all Not
of part some discerning soon from him prevent could him, for deference
ignorant as man, young inferior an was Rushworth Mr. truth--that the
without and unfixed, general in opinions with books, in as business in
himself. it of aware much seeming

feel to beginning and son-in-law; different very a expected had He
Little feelings. _her_ understand to tried account, Maria’s on grave
the was indifference that him tell to necessary was there observation
Rushworth Mr. to behaviour Her in. be could they state favourable most
Thomas Sir him. like not did not, could She cold. and careless was
the be would as Advantageous her. to seriously speak to resolved
her engagement, the was as public and standing long and alliance,
been perhaps, had, Rushworth Mr. it. to sacrificed be not must happiness
she better, him knowing on and, acquaintance, an short too on accepted
repenting. was

fears, his her told her: addressed Thomas Sir kindness solemn With
and sincere, and open be to her entreated wishes, her into inquired
connexion the and braved, be should inconvenience every that her assured
He it. of prospect the in unhappy herself felt she if up, given entirely
she as struggle moment’s a had Maria her. release and her for act would
to able was she ceased, father her when moment’s: a only and listened,
agitation. apparent no with and decidedly, immediately, answer her give
he but kindness, paternal his attention, great his for him thanked She
breaking of desire smallest the had she supposing in mistaken quite was
or opinion of change any of sensible was or engagement, her through
Mr. for esteem highest the had She it. forming her since inclination
her of doubt a have not could and disposition, and character Rushworth’s
him. with happiness

the urge to perhaps, satisfied, be to glad too satisfied; was Thomas Sir
It others. to dictated have might judgment his as far so quite matter
pain; without relinquished have not could he which alliance an was
Mr. improve. to enough young was Rushworth Mr. reasoned. he thus and
now could Maria if and society; good in improve would and must Rushworth
without certainly speaking him, with happiness her of securely so speak
Her believed. be to ought she love, of blindness the prejudice, the
be to them supposed never had he acute; not were probably, feelings,
could she if and account; that on less be not might comforts her but so;
there character, shining leading, a husband her seeing with dispense
young well-disposed A favour. her in else everything be certainly would
attached more the but general in was love, for marry not did who woman,
Mansfield to Sotherton of nearness the and family; own her to
all in would, and temptation, greatest the out hold naturally must
innocent and amiable most the of supply continual a be probability,
Thomas, Sir of reasonings the were such-like and Such enjoyments.
wonder, the rupture, a of evils embarrassing the escape to happy
a secure to happy it; attend must that reproach the reflections, the
respectability of addition an such him bring would which marriage
daughter’s his of anything think to happy very and influence, and
purpose. the for favourable most was that disposition

a in was She him. to as satisfactorily as closed conference the her To
recall: beyond fate her secured had she that glad be to mind of state
from safe was she that Sotherton; to anew herself pledged had she that
actions, her governing of triumph the Crawford giving of possibility the
determined resolve, proud in retired and prospects; her destroying and
her that future, in Rushworth Mr. to cautiously more behave to only
her. suspecting again be not might father

four or three first the within daughter his to applied Thomas Sir Had
were feelings her before Mansfield, leaving Crawford’s Henry after days
or him, of hope every up given had she before tranquillised, all at
been have might answer her rival, his enduring on resolved absolutely
no was there when days, four or three another after but different;
hope no heart, softened a of symptom no message, no letter, no return,
all seek to enough cool became mind her separation, from advantage of
give. could revenge self and pride that comfort the

that know not should he but happiness, her destroyed had Crawford Henry
her appearance, her credit, her destroy not should he it; done had he
the in pining as her of think to have not should He too. prosperity,
London, and Sotherton rejecting _him_, for Mansfield of retirement
more was Independence sake. _his_ for splendour, and independence
She felt. sensibly more Mansfield at it of want the ever; than needful
imposed. father her which restraint the endure to able less and less was
absolutely become now was given had absence his which liberty The
possible, as soon as Mansfield and him from escape must She necessary.
world, the and bustle consequence, and fortune in consolation find and
not. varied and determined, quite was mind Her spirit. wounded a for

have would preparation, much of delay the even delay, feelings such To
the for impatient more be hardly could Rushworth Mr. and evil, an been
mind the of preparations important the all In herself. than marriage
home, of hatred an by matrimony for prepared being complete: was she
affection, disappointed of misery the by tranquillity; and restraint,
The wait. might rest The marry. to was she man the of contempt and
and London for wait might furniture and carriages new of preparations
play. fairer have could taste own her when spring,

a that appeared soon it respect, this in agreed all being principals The
precede must as arrangements such for sufficient be would weeks few very
wedding. the

fortunate the for way make and retire, to ready quite was Rushworth Mrs.
November in early very and selected; had son dear her whom woman young
true with chariot, her and footman, her maid, her herself, removed
of wonders the over parade to there Bath, to propriety, dowager
perhaps, thoroughly, as them enjoying parties; evening her in Sotherton
and spot; the on done ever had she as card-table, a of animation the in
which place taken had ceremony the month same the of middle the before
mistress. another Sotherton gave

two the dressed; elegantly was bride The wedding. proper very a was It
mother her away; her gave father her inferior; duly were bridesmaids
tried aunt her agitated; be to expecting hand, her in salts with stood
Nothing Grant. Dr. by read impressively was service the and cry; to
the of discussion the under came it when to objected be could
and bride the conveyed which carriage the that except neighbourhood,
same the was Sotherton to church-door the from Julia and bridegroom
In before. twelvemonth a for used had Rushworth Mr. which chaise
strictest the stand might day the of etiquette the else everything
investigation.

father anxious an as felt Thomas Sir gone. were they and done, was It
his which agitation the of much experiencing indeed was and feel, must
escaped. fortunately had but herself, for of apprehensive been had wife
spending by day, the of duties the in assist to happy most Norris, Mrs.
health the drinking and spirits, sister’s her support to Park the at it
all was two, or glass supernumerary a in Rushworth Mrs. and Mr. of
everything; done had she match; the made had she for delight; joyous
she that triumph, confident her from supposed, have would one no and
the have could or life, her in infelicity conjugal of heard ever had
brought been had who niece the of disposition the into insight smallest
eye. her under up

to days, few a after proceed, to was couple young the of plan The
was place public Every weeks. some for there house a take and Brighton,
When summer. in as winter in gay as almost is Brighton and Maria, to new
wider the for time be would it over, was there amusement of novelty the
London. of range

sisters the between rivalry Since Brighton. to them with go to was Julia
good former their of much recovering gradually been had they ceased, had
of each make to friends sufficiently least at were and understanding;
other Some time. a such at other the with be to glad exceedingly them
lady; his to consequence first the of was Rushworth Mr. than companion
though Maria, as pleasure and novelty for eager as quite was Julia and
could and them, obtain to much so through struggled have not might she
situation. subordinate a bear better

chasm a Mansfield, at change material another made departure Their
greatly became circle family The up. fill to time some required which
to little added latterly had Bertrams Miss the though and contracted;
them; missed mother their Even missed. be but not could they gaiety, its
about wandered who cousin, tenderhearted their more much how and
of degree a with them, for felt and them, of thought and house, the
deserve! to much done never had they which regret affectionate



XXII CHAPTER

Becoming, cousins. her of departure the on increased consequence Fanny’s
only the drawing-room, the in woman young only the did, then she as
had she which in family a of division interesting that of occupier
be to not her for impossible was it third, a humble so held hitherto
been ever had she than to, attended and of thought more at, looked more
without even question, uncommon no became Fanny?” is “Where and before;
convenience. one’s any for wanted being her

In too. Parsonage the at but increase, value her did home at only Not
Norris’s Mr. since year a twice entered hardly had she which house, that
dirt and gloom the in and guest, invited an welcome, a became she death,
there, visits Her Crawford. Mary to acceptable most day, November a of
Grant, Mrs. solicitation. by continued were chance, by beginning
easiest the by could, sister, her for change any get to eager really
by thing kindest the doing was she that herself persuade self-deceit,
in improvement of opportunities important most the her giving and Fanny,
calls. frequent her pressing

aunt her by errand some on village the into sent been having Fanny,
and Parsonage; the to close shower heavy a by overtaken was Norris,
shelter find to endeavouring windows the of one from descried being
their beyond just oak an of leaves lingering and branches the under
her on reluctance modest some without not though forced, was premises,
Grant Dr. when but withstood; had she servant civil A in. come to part,
to but done be to nothing was there umbrella, an with out went himself
and possible; as fast as house the into get to and ashamed, much very be
rain dismal the contemplating been just had who Crawford, Miss poor to
her all of ruin the over sighing mind, of state desponding very a in
a seeing of chance every of and morning, that for exercise of plan
the hours, twenty-four next the for themselves beyond creature single
Price Miss of sight the and door, front the at bustle little a of sound
an of value The delightful. was vestibule, the in wet with dripping
her. before brought forcibly most was country the in day wet a on event
being in active most the among and directly, again alive all was She
first at would she than wetter be to her detecting in Fanny, to useful
being after Fanny, and clothes; dry with her providing and allow,
and assisted being to and attention, this all to submit to obliged
returning on obliged, also being maids, and mistresses by on waited
rain the while hour an for drawing-room their in fixed be to downstairs,
thus was of think and see to fresh something of blessing the continued,
period the to spirits her on carry might and Crawford, Miss to extended
dinner. and dressing of

might Fanny that pleasant, so and her, to kind so were sisters two The
way, the in not herself believed have she could visit her enjoyed have
at clear certainly would weather the that foreseen have she could and
Grant’s Dr. having of shame the from her save and hour, the of end the
threatened. was she which with home, her take to out horses and carriage
might weather such in absence her that alarm any for anxiety to As
her as for score; that on suffer to nothing had she home, at occasion
that aware perfectly was she aunts, two her to only known was out being
chuse might Norris aunt cottage whatever in that and felt, be would none
be would cottage such in being her rain, the during her establish to
Bertram. aunt to indubitable

the in harp a observing Fanny, when brighter, look to beginning was It
acknowledgment an to led soon which it, about questions some asked room,
could which confession, a and it, hear to much very wishing her of
being its since it heard yet never having her of believed, be hardly
natural and simple very a appeared it herself Fanny To Mansfield. in
the since Parsonage the at been ever scarcely had She circumstance.
Miss but should; she that reason no been had there arrival, instrument’s
was subject, the on wish expressed early an mind to calling Crawford,
“What and now?” you to play I “Shall and neglect; own her at concerned
readiest the with following immediately questions were have?” you will
good-humour.

who listener a and listener, new a have to happy accordingly; played She
who and performance, the at wonder of full so obliged, much so seemed
eyes, Fanny’s till played She taste. in wanting not herself shewed
what spoke fair, evidently being weather’s the on window the to straying
done. be must felt she

how see shall we “and Crawford, Miss said hour,” an of quarter “Another
Those up. holding its of moment first the away run not Do be. will it
alarming.” look clouds

This them. watching been have “I Fanny. said over,” passed are they “But
south.” the from all is weather

not must you and it; see I when cloud black a know I north, or “South
play to want I besides, And threatening. so is it while forward set
Edmund’s cousin your piece--and pretty very you--a to more something
favourite.” cousin’s your hear and stay must You favourite. prime

that for waited not had she though and must; she that felt Fanny
particularly her made memento a such Edmund, of thinking be to sentence
again room that in sitting him fancied she and idea, his to awake
with listening now, sat she where spot very the in perhaps again, and
her, to appeared it as played, air, favourite the to delight constant
herself, it with pleased though and expression; and tone superior with
sincerely more was she him, by liked was whatever like to glad and
before; been had she than it of conclusion the at away go to impatient
to again, call to asked kindly so was she evident, being this on and
the of more hear and come to could, she whenever walk her in them take
at arose objection no if done, be to necessary it felt she that harp,
home.

between place took which intimacy of sort the of origin the was Such
away--an going Bertrams’ Miss the after fortnight first the within them
something of desire Crawford’s Miss from principally resulting intimacy
her to went Fanny feelings. Fanny’s in reality little had which and new,
not could she fascination: of kind a seemed it days: three or two every
ever without her, loving without was it yet and going, without easy be
sought being for obligation of sense any without her, like thinking
higher no deriving and had; be to was else nobody when now after
_that_ and amusement, occasional than conversation her from pleasure
pleasantry by raised was it when judgment, her of expense the at often
went, She respected. be to wished she which subjects or people on
Mrs. in half-hour an many together about sauntered they and however,
of time the for mild unusually being weather the shrubbery, Grant’s
now benches the of one on down sit to even sometimes venturing and year,
midst the in till, perhaps there remaining unsheltered, comparatively
protracted so of sweets the on Fanny’s of ejaculation tender some of
shaking gust cold a of swell sudden the by forced, were they autumn, an
for walk and up jump to them, about leaves yellow few last the down
warmth.

as her around looking Fanny, said pretty,” very pretty, is “This
this into come I time “every day; one together sitting thus were they
ago, years Three beauty. and growth its with struck more am I shrubbery
field, the of side upper the along hedgerow rough a but nothing was this
now and anything; becoming of capable or anything, as of thought never
whether say to difficult be would it and walk, a into converted is it
another in perhaps, and ornament; an or convenience a as valuable most
before. was it what forgetting forgetting--almost be may we years, three
the and time, of operations the wonderful very how wonderful, How
thought, of train latter the following And mind!” human the of changes
be may nature our of faculty one any “If added: afterwards soon she
There memory. is it think do I rest, the than wonderful _more_ called
powers, the in incomprehensible speakingly more something seems
our of other any in than memory, of inequalities the failures, the
so serviceable, so retentive, so sometimes is memory The intelligences.
so again, others at and weak; so and bewildered so others, at obedient;
way; every miracle a sure, be to are, We control! beyond so tyrannic,
past peculiarly seem do forgetting of and recollecting of powers our but
out.” finding

and say; to nothing had inattentive, and untouched Crawford, Miss
must thought she what to mind own her back brought it, perceiving Fanny,
interest.

taste the admire must I but praise, to _me_ in impertinent seem may “It
in simplicity quiet a such is There this. all in shewn has Grant Mrs.
attempted!” much too Not walk! the of plan the

a for well very does “it carelessly, Crawford Miss replied “Yes,”
between and _here_; extent of think not does One sort. this of place
parson country a imagined not had I Mansfield, to came I till ourselves,
kind.” the of anything or shrubbery, a to aspired ever

“My reply. in Fanny, said thrive!” evergreens the see to glad so am “I
and own, his than better is here soil the says always gardener uncle’s
general. in evergreens and laurels the of growth the from appears it so
evergreen! the wonderful how welcome, how beautiful, How evergreen! The
some In nature! of variety a astonishing how it, of thinks one When
that but variety, the is leaf its sheds that tree the know we countries
should sun same the and soil same the that amazing less it make not does
existence. their of law and rule first the in differing plants nurture
especially doors, of out am I when but rhapsodising; me think will You
of sort this into get to apt very am I doors, of out sitting am I when
natural commonest the on eyes one’s fix cannot One strain. wondering
fancy.” rambling a for food finding without production

the like something am “I Crawford, Miss replied truth,” the say “To
no see I that declare may and XIV.; Lewis of court the at Doge famous
had anybody If it. in myself seeing to equal shrubbery this in wonder
be should I that home, my be would place this that ago year a me told
should certainly I done, have I as here, month after month spending
and, months; five nearly here been now have I them. believed have not
passed.” ever I months five quietest the moreover,

believe.” I you, for quiet “_Too_

eyes her and but,” myself, _theoretically_ so thought have should “I
a happy so spent never I all, and all it “take spoke, she as brightened
“there voice, lowered and air thoughtful more a with then,” But summer.
to.” lead may it what saying no is

surmising to unequal quite felt she and quick, beat heart Fanny’s
renewed with however, Crawford, Miss more. anything soliciting or
on-- went soon animation,

residence country a to reconciled better far being of conscious am “I
to pleasant it suppose even can I be. to expected ever had I than
circumstances, certain under country, the in year the _half_ spend
family of centre the in house moderate-sized elegant, An pleasant. very
first the commanding them; among engagements continual connexions;
even it leading as perhaps, to, up looked neighbourhood; the in society
round cheerful the from turning and fortune, larger of those than more
person the with _tete-a-tete_ a than worse nothing to amusements such of
in frightful nothing is There world. the in agreeable most feels one
Mrs. new the envy not need One Price? Miss there, is picture, a such
_that_.” as home a such with Rushworth

come, “Come, say. to attempted Fanny that all was Rushworth!” Mrs. “Envy
I for Rushworth, Mrs. on severe be to us in un-handsome very be would it
hours. happy brilliant, gay, many great a her owing our to forward look
Such year. another Sotherton at much very all be shall we expect I
first the for blessing; public a is made has Bertram Miss as match a
give and house, her fill to be must wife Rushworth’s Mr. of pleasures
country.” the in balls best the

till thoughtfulness, into relapsed Crawford Miss and silent, was Fanny
“Ah! exclaimed, she minutes, few a of end the at up looking suddenly
then who Edmund, but however, Rushworth, Mr. not was It is.” he here
Mr. and sister “My Grant. Mrs. with them towards walking appeared
Mr. be may he that gone, is cousin eldest your glad so am I Bertram.
Bertram _Edmund_ Mr. of sound the in something is There again. Bertram
it.” detest I that younger-brother-like, so pitiful, so formal, so

_Mr._ of sound the me, “To Fanny. cried feel!” we differently “How
or warmth without entirely so nothing-meaning, and cold so is Bertram
is there But all. that’s and gentleman, a for stands just It character!
of renown; and heroism of name a is It Edmund. of name the in nobleness
chivalry of spirit the breathe to seems and knights; and princes, kings,
affections.” warm and

_Sir_ or Edmund _Lord_ and itself, in good is name the you grant “I
annihilation the chill, the under it sink but delightfully; sound Edmund
Well, Thomas. Mr. or John Mr. than more no is Edmund Mr. and Mr., a of
sitting upon lecture their half of them disappoint and join we shall
can they before up being by year, of time this at doors of out down
begin?”

his of time first the was It pleasure. particular with them met Edmund
acquaintance better that of beginning the since together them seeing
friendship A satisfaction. great with of hearing been had he which
wished: have could he what exactly was him to dear very so two between
he that stated, it be understanding, lover’s the of credit the to and
greater the as even or only, the as Fanny consider means any by not did
friendship. a such by gainer

imprudence? our for us scold not you do “and Crawford, Miss said “Well,”
to talked be to but for down sitting been have we think you do What
again?” so do to never supplicated and entreated and it, about

been had you of either “if Edmund, said scolded,” have might I “Perhaps
a overlook can I together, wrong do you while but alone; down sitting
deal.” great

went I when “for Grant, Mrs. cried long,” sitting been have cannot “They
were they then and window, staircase the from them saw I shawl my for up
walking.”

down sitting your that mild, so is day “the Edmund, added really,” “And
must weather Our imprudent. thought hardly be can minutes few a for
greater take sometimes may We calendar. the by judged be always not
May.” in than November in liberties

most the of two are “you Crawford, Miss cried word,” my “Upon
no is There with! met ever I friends kind unfeeling and disappointing
been have we much how know not do You uneasiness. moment’s a you giving
Mr. thought long have I But felt! have we chills what nor suffering,
manoeuvre little any in on, work to subjects worst the of one Bertram
very had I with. plagued be could woman a that sense, common against
my sister, my Grant, Mrs. you, but first; the from _him_ of hope little
little.” a you alarm to right a had I think I sister, own

smallest the not have You Mary. dearest my yourself, flatter not “Do
different a in quite are they but alarms, my have I me. moving of chance
a had have would you weather, the altered have could I if and quarter;
of some are here time--for whole the you on blowing wind east sharp good
mild, so are nights the because out leave _will_ Robert which plants my
of change sudden a have shall we that be, will it of end the know I and
least (at everybody taking once, at all in setting frost hard a weather,
cook worse, is what and one; every lose shall I and surprise, by Robert)
wished particularly I which turkey, the that me telling been just has
Grant Dr. more much how know I because Sunday, till dressed be to not
keep not will day, the of fatigues the after Sunday on it enjoy would
think me make and grievances, like something are These to-morrow. beyond
close.” unseasonably most weather the

Crawford Miss said village!” country a in housekeeping of sweets “The
poulterer.” the and nurseryman the to me “Commend archly.

St. or Westminster of deanery the to Grant Dr. commend child, dear “My
you as poulterer and nurseryman your of glad as be should I and Paul’s,
have you would What Mansfield. in people such no have we But be. could
do?” me

often, very plagued be already: do you what but nothing do can you “Oh!
temper.” your lose never and

live Mary, vexations, little these escaping no is there but you; “Thank
I you, see to come I and town in settled are you when and may; we where
and nurseryman the of spite in yours, with you find shall I say dare
and remoteness Their account. very their on perhaps poulterer, the
drawing be will frauds, and charges exorbitant their or unpunctuality,
lamentations.” bitter forth

sort. the of anything feel to or lament to rich too be to mean “I
It of. heard ever I happiness for recipe best the is income large A
it.” of part turkey and myrtle the all secure may certainly

Fanny’s to which, look a with Edmund, said rich?” very be to intend “You
meaning. serious of deal great a had eye,

all?” we not Do you? not Do sure. be “To

power my beyond completely so be must it which anything intend cannot “I
only has She wealth. of degree her chuse may Crawford Miss command. to
of doubt no be can there and year, a thousands of number her on fix to
poor.” be to not only are intentions My coming. their

income, your to wants your down bringing and economy, and moderation “By
a for is it plan proper very a you--and understand I that. all and
indifferent and means limited such with life, of time your at person
have You maintenance? decent a but want _you_ can What connexions.
do to situation no in are relations your and you; before time much not
wealth own their of contrast the by you mortify to or you, for anything
envy not shall I means--but all by poor, and honest Be consequence. and
greater much a have I you. respect even shall I think much not do I you;
rich.” and honest are that those for respect

what precisely is poor, or rich honesty, for respect of degree “Your
Poverty poor. be to mean not do I with. concern of manner no have I
something the in Honesty, against. determined have I what exactly is
am I that all is circumstances, worldly of state middle the in between,
on.” down looking not your for anxious

must I higher. been have might it if it, upon down look do I “But
to rise might it when obscurity with contented anything upon down look
distinction.”

any to rise least at honesty my may How rise? it may how “But
distinction?”

“Oh!” an occasioned and answer, to question a easy very so not was This
be to ought “You add, could she before lady fair the from length some of
ago.” years ten army the into gone have should you or parliament, in

in being my to as and now; purpose the to much not is “_That_
for assembly especial an is there till wait must I believe I parliament,
Miss No, on. live to little have who sons younger of representation the
distinctions _are_ “there tone, serious more a in added, he Crawford,”
any without myself thought I if miserable be should I which
they obtaining--but of possibility or chance without chance--absolutely
character.” different a of are

consciousness a seemed what and spoke, he as consciousness of look A
answer, laughing some made she as side Crawford’s Miss on manner of
quite herself finding and observation; Fanny’s for food sorrowfull was
now was she side whose by Grant, Mrs. to ought she as attend to unable
immediately, home going on resolved nearly had she others, the following
clock great the of sound the when so, say to courage for waited only and
had she that feel her made three, striking Park, Mansfield at
previous the brought and usual, than absent longer much been really
how, and then, just not or leave take should she whether of self-inquiry
her began directly she decision undoubting With issue. speedy very a to
mother his that recollect to time same the at began Edmund and adieus;
Parsonage the to down walked had he that and her, for inquiring been had
back. her bring to purpose on

Edmund’s expecting least the in without and increased; hurry Fanny’s
was pace general the but alone; away hastened have would she attendance,
it which through house, the into her accompanied all they and quickened,
stopt they as and vestibule, the in was Grant Dr. pass. to necessary was
to mean _did_ he that manner, Edmund’s from found, she him to speak to
In thankful. be but not could She leave. taking was too He her. with go
mutton his eat to Grant Dr. by invited was Edmund parting, of moment the
unpleasant an for time barely had Fanny and day; next the him with
recollection, sudden with Grant, Mrs. when occasion, the on feeling
was This too. company her of pleasure the for asked and her to turned
of events the in circumstance a new perfectly so attention, an new so
while and embarrassment; and surprise all was she that life, Fanny’s
it suppose not did she “but her and obligation, great her out stammering
help. and opinion his for Edmund at looking was power,” her in be would
and offered, happiness an such having her with delighted Edmund, But
no had she that sentence, a half and look, a half with ascertaining
mother his that imagine not could account, aunt’s her on but objection
decided his gave therefore and her, sparing of difficulty any make would
Fanny though and accepted; be should invitation the that advice open
of flight a such to encouragement, his on even venture, not would
heard were nothing if that settled, soon was it independence, audacious
her. expect might Grant Mrs. contrary, the to

smiling--“the Grant, Mrs. said be,” will dinner your what know you “And
her to turning dear,” my for, one; fine very a you assure I and turkey,
to-morrow.” dressed being turkey’s the upon insists “cook husband,

glad am I better; the “all Grant, Dr. cried well,” very well, “Very
Mr. and Price Miss But house. the in good so anything have you hear to
want us of none We chance. their take would say, dare I Bertram, Edmund
dinner, fine a not and meeting, friendly A fare. of bill the hear to
or mutton, of leg a or goose, a or turkey, A view. in have we all is
us.” give to chuse cook your and you whatever

immediate the in except and, together; home walked cousins two The
warmest the with of spoke Edmund which engagement, this of discussion
which intimacy the in her for desirable particularly so as satisfaction,
for walk; silent a was it established, pleasure much so with saw he
any for indisposed and thoughtful grew he subject, that finished having
other.



XXIII CHAPTER

she came “How Bertram. Lady said Fanny?” ask Grant Mrs. should why “But
this in know, you there, dines never Fanny Fanny? asking of think to
go. to want not does she sure am I and her, spare cannot I way. of sort
you?” do go, to want not do you Fanny,

his preventing Edmund, cried her,” to question a such put you “If
my sure, am I but No; say immediately will “Fanny speaking, cousin’s
she why reason no see can I and go; to like would she mother, dear
not.” should

never She her? asking of think should Grant Mrs. why imagine cannot “I
never she but then, and now sisters your ask to used She before. did
Fanny.” asked

self-denying a in Fanny, said ma’am--” me, without do cannot you “If
tone.

evening.” the all her with father my have will mother my “But

shall.” I so sure, be “To

ma’am.” opinion, father’s my take you “Suppose

as Thomas, Sir ask will I Edmund. will, I So of. thought well “That’s
her.” without do can I whether in, comes he as soon

opinion father’s my meant I but head; that on ma’am, please, you “As
and not; or accepted being invitation’s the of _propriety_ the to as
by as well as Grant, Mrs. by thing right a it consider will he think I
accepted.” be should it invitation _first_ the being that Fanny,

that surprised much very be will he But him. ask will We know. not do “I
all.” at Fanny ask should Grant Mrs.

purpose, any to said be could that or said, be to more nothing was There
did, it as involving, subject the but present; were Thomas Sir till
Lady in uppermost much so was morrow, the for comfort evening’s own her
a for in looking his on afterwards, hour an half that mind, Bertram’s
called she dressing-room, his to plantation his from way his in minute
Thomas, “Sir with door, the closed almost had he when again, back him
you.” to say to something have moment--I a stop

her raising of trouble the took never she for languor, calm of tone Her
Her back. came Thomas Sir and to; attended and heard always was voice,
hear to for room; the of out slipped immediately Fanny and began; story
her than more was uncle her with discussion any of subject the herself
than perhaps anxious knew--more she anxious, was She bear. could nerves
staid? or went she whether all after it was what be--for to ought she
and deciding, and considering while great a be to were uncle her if but
and her, to directed looks grave those and looks, grave very with
properly appear to able be not might she her, against decide last at
It well. on went meanwhile, cause, Her indifferent. and submissive
that you tell to something have with--“I part, Bertram’s Lady on began,
dinner.” to Fanny asked has Grant Mrs. you. surprise will

surprise. the accomplish to more waiting if as Thomas, Sir said “Well,”

her?” spare I can how But go. to her wants “Edmund

is what “but watch; his out taking Thomas, Sir said late,” be will “She
difficulty?” your

his in blanks the up fill and speak to obliged himself found Edmund
strange! “So add, to only had she and whole; the told He story. mother’s
her.” ask to used never Grant Mrs. for

should Grant Mrs. “that Edmund, observed natural,” very not it is “But
sister?” her for visitor a agreeable so procure to wish

short a after Thomas, Sir said natural,” more be can “Nothing
anything, could case, the in sister no there were “nor, deliberation;
Miss to civility shewing Grant’s Mrs. natural. more be opinion, my in
only The explanation. want never could niece, Bertram’s Lady to Price,
its of time _first_ the be should this that is, feel can I surprise
conditional a only giving in right perfectly was Fanny paid. being
she that conclude I as But ought. she as feel to appears She answer.
see can I together, be to like people young all since go, to wish must
indulgence.” the denied be should she why reason no

Thomas?” Sir her, without do I can “But

may.” you think I “Indeed

here.” not is sister my when know, you tea, makes always “She

and us, with day the spend to on prevailed be may perhaps, sister, “Your
home.” at be certainly shall I

Edmund.” go, may Fanny then, well, “Very

way his in door her at knocked Edmund her. followed soon news good The
own. his to

smallest the without and settled, happily all is it Fanny, “Well,
go.” to are You opinion. one but had He side. uncle’s your on hesitation

when though reply; instinctive Fanny’s was glad,” _so_ am I you, “Thank
feeling, help not could she door, the shut and him from turned had she
hearing or seeing of certain not I am for glad? be I should why yet “And
me?” pain to there something

an such as Simple glad. was she however, conviction, this of spite In
in importance and novelty had it eyes, other in appear might engagement
dined ever scarcely had she Sotherton, at day the excepting for hers,
three to only and mile, a half only going now though and before; out
of interests little the all and out, dining was it still people,
nor sympathy neither had She themselves. in enjoyments were preparation
and feelings her into entered have to ought who those from assistance
to useful being of thought never Bertram Lady for taste; her directed
of consequence in morrow, the on came she when Norris, Mrs. and anybody,
humour, ill very a in was Thomas, Sir from invitation and call early an
present both pleasure, niece’s her lessening on only intent seemed and
possible. as much as future, and

attention such with meet to luck high in are you Fanny, word, my “Upon
for Grant Mrs. to obliged much very be to ought You indulgence! and
to ought you and go, you letting for aunt your to and you, of thinking
that aware are you hope I for extraordinary; something as it upon look
of sort this in company into going your for occasion real no is there
upon depend not must you what is it and all; at out dining ever or way,
is invitation the that fancying be you must Nor repeated. being ever
intended is compliment the _you_; to compliment particular any as meant
to due civility a it thinks Grant Mrs. me. and aunt and uncle your to
come have never would it else or you, of notice little a take to _us_
Julia cousin your if that, certain very be may you and head, her into
all.” at asked been have not would you home, at been had

of part Grant’s Mrs. all away done ingeniously so now had Norris Mrs.
only could speak, to expected herself found who Fanny, that favour, the
her, sparing for Bertram aunt her to obliged much very was she that say
a such in work evening aunt’s her put to endeavouring was she that and
missed. being her prevent to as state

you or you, without well very do can aunt your it, upon depend “Oh!
easy quite be may you so here, be shall _I_ go. to allowed be not would
and day, _agreeable_ very a have will you hope I And aunt. your about
the is five that observe must I But _delightful_. mighty all it find
I and table; to down sit to numbers possible all of awkwardest very
should Grant Mrs. as lady _elegant_ an such that surprised be but cannot
too, table, wide great enormous their round And better! contrive not
to contented been doctor the Had dreadfully! so room the up fills which
would senses their in anybody as away, came I when dining-table my take
is which own, his of one new absurd that having of instead done, have
better infinitely how here, dinner-table the than wider literally wider,
for respected! been have would he more much how and been! have would it
sphere. proper their of out step they when respected never are people
table. that round sitting be to five Five--only Fanny. that, Remember
say.” dare I ten, for it on enough dinner have will you However,

again. on went and breath, fetched Norris Mrs.

and rank their of out stepping people’s of folly and nonsense “The
_you_ give to right it think me makes themselves, above appear to trying
us; of any without company into going are you that now Fanny, hint, a
and forward, yourself putting be to not you entreat and beseech do I and
cousins--as your of one were you if as opinion your giving and talking
believe do, never will _That_ Julia. or Rushworth Mrs. dear were you if
and last; and lowest the be must you are, you wherever Remember, me.
are you Parsonage, the at home at manner a in is Crawford Miss though
are you night, at away coming to as And her. of place taking be to not
_that_.” settle to him Leave chuses. Edmund as long as just stay to

else.” anything of think not should I ma’am, “Yes,

never I for likely, exceedingly think I which rain, should it if “And
as manage must you life, my in evening wet a for threatening more it saw
I you. for sent be to carriage the expecting be not and can, you as well
not will carriage the therefore, and, to-night, home go not do certainly
happen, may what to mind your up make must you so account; my on out be
accordingly.” things your take and

claims own her rated She reasonable. perfectly it thought niece Her
soon Thomas Sir when and could; Norris Mrs. as even low as comfort to
you would time what at “Fanny, said, door, the opening just afterwards,
which astonishment of degree a felt she round?” come carriage the have
speak. to her for impossible it made

can “Fanny anger, with red Norris, Mrs. cried Thomas!” Sir dear “My
walk.”

and dignity, unanswerable most of tone a in Thomas, Sir repeated “Walk!”
at engagement dinner a to walk niece “My room. the into farther coming
you?” suit four after minutes twenty Will year! the of time this

almost feelings the with given answer, humble Fanny’s was sir,” “Yes,
her with remain to bearing not and Norris; Mrs. towards criminal a of
of out uncle her followed she triumph, of state a seem might what in
words these hear to enough long only him behind staid having room, the
agitation-- angry in spoken

is it true, goes; Edmund But kind! too deal great a unnecessary! “Quite
night.” Thursday on hoarse was he observed I account. Edmund’s upon

for was carriage the that felt She Fanny. on impose not could this But
coming her, of consideration uncle’s her and alone: herself and herself,
some her cost aunt, her from representations such after immediately
alone. was she when gratitude of tears

the down brought minute another minute; a to round drove coachman The
being of fear scrupulous most a with had, lady the as and gentleman;
them saw Thomas Sir drawing-room, the in seated minutes many been late,
required. habits punctual correctly own his as time good as in off

an of smile kind the with Edmund, said Fanny,” you, at look must I “Now
can I as well as and you; like I how you tell “and brother, affectionate
on?” got you have What indeed. nicely very look you light, this by judge

cousin’s my on me give to as good so was uncle my that dress new “The
as it wear to ought I thought I but fine; too not is it hope I marriage.
all opportunity another such have not might I that and could, I as soon
fine.” too me think not do you hope I winter. the

no see I No, white. in all is she while fine too be never can woman “A
seems gown Your proper. perfectly is what but nothing you; about finery
gown a Crawford Miss not Has spots. glossy these like I pretty. very
same?” the something

and stable-yard the by close passed they Parsonage the approaching In
coach-house.

they have who carriage! a here’s company, “here’s Edmund, said “Heyday!”
“‘Tis distinguish, to side-glass the down letting And us?” meet to got
men two own his are There protest! I barouche, Crawford’s Crawford’s,
is This course. of here, is He quarters. old its into back it pushing
him.” see to glad very be shall I Fanny. surprise, a quite

very how say to Fanny for time no was there occasion, no was There
observe to another such having of idea the but felt; she differently
the performed she which with trepidation the of increase great a was her
drawing-room. the into walking of ceremony awful very

long just been having was, certainly Crawford Mr. drawing-room the In
looks pleased and smiles the and dinner; for ready be to arrived enough
his was welcome how shewed him, round standing others three the of
Bath. leaving on days few a for them to coming of resolution sudden
the with and Edmund; and him between passed meeting cordial very A
there _her_ to even and general; was pleasure the Fanny, of exception
the to addition every since presence, his in advantage some be might
to suffered being of indulgence favourite her forward rather must party
for herself; this of aware soon was She to. unattended and silent sit
spite in directed, mind of propriety own her as submit, must she though
company, in lady principal the being to opinion, Norris’s aunt her of
while found, she thereon, consequent distinctions little the all to and
in prevailing, conversation of flow happy a such table, at were they
be to much so was part--there any take to required not was she which
two the between much so Bath, about sister and brother the between said
and Crawford Mr. between politics of much so hunting, about men young
Crawford Mr. between together all and everything of and Grant, Dr.
only having of prospect fairest the her leave to as Grant, Mrs. and
not could She day. agreeable very a passing of and quiet, in listen to
of appearance any with however, gentleman, arrived newly the compliment
sending and Mansfield, at stay his extending for scheme a in interest,
by advised Grant, Dr. by suggested which, Norfolk, from hunters his for
of possession in soon was sisters, two the by urged warmly and Edmund,
to her by even encouraged be to want to seemed he which and mind, his
the of continuance probable the to as sought was opinion Her on. resolve
civility as indifferent and short as were answers her but weather, open
have not rather much would and stay, to him wish not could She allowed.
her. to speak him

on thoughts her in much were Maria, especially cousins, absent two Her
spirits. _his_ affected remembrance embarrassing no but him; seeing
and before, passed had all where ground same the on again was he Here
Bertrams, Miss the without happy be and stay to willing as apparently
them heard She state. other any in Mansfield known never had he if as
re-assembled all were they till way, general a in only him by of spoken
of matter some in apart engaged being Edmund, when drawing-room, the in
and them, engross to entirely seemed which Grant, Dr. with business
more with them of talking began he tea-table, the at occupied Grant Mrs.
made which smile, significant a With sister. other his to particularity
at are bride fair his and Rushworth “So! said, he him, hate quite Fanny
man!” happy understand; I Brighton,

not? they have Price, Miss fortnight, a about there been have they “Yes,
them.” with is Julia And

off.” far not is presume, I Yates, Mr. “And

he imagine not do I Yates. Mr. of nothing hear we Oh! Yates! “Mr.
I Price? Miss you, do Park; Mansfield to letters the in much figures
Mr. with father her entertain to than better knows Julia friend my think
Yates.”

Crawford. continued speeches!” two-and-forty his and Rushworth “Poor
and toil now--his him see I fellow! Poor them. forget ever can “Nobody
want ever will Maria lovely his if mistaken much am I Well, despair. his
momentary a with adding, her”; to speeches two-and-forty make to him
changing then And good.” too him--much for good too is “She seriousness,
he Fanny, addressing and gallantry, gentle of one to again tone his
patience and kindness Your friend. best Rushworth’s Mr. were “You said,
it make to trying in patience indefatigable your forgotten, be never can
brain a him give to trying part--in his learn to him for possible
the of out him for understanding an up mix denied--to had nature which
to himself enough sense have not might _He_ own! your of superfluity
from honour had it that say to venture may I but kindness, your estimate
party.” the of rest the all

nothing. said and coloured, Fanny

forth breaking exclaimed, he dream!” pleasant a dream, a as is “It
our on back look always shall “I musing. minutes’ few a after again,
an such interest, an such was There pleasure. exquisite with theatricals
alive. all were We it. felt Everybody diffused. spirit a such animation,
of hour every for bustle, solicitude, hope, employment, was There
little some doubt, little some objection, little some Always day. the
happier.” was never I over. got be to anxiety

“Never herself, to repeated Fanny indignation silent With
not was know must you what doing when than happier happier!--never
and dishonourably so behaving when than happier justifiable!--never
mind!” corrupted a what Oh! unfeelingly!

avoid to tone, lower a in continued, he Price,” Miss unlucky, were “We
her of aware all at not and Edmund, by heard being of possibility the
other one only week, Another unlucky. very were certainly “we feelings,
disposal the had had we if think I us. for enough been have would week,
winds the of government the had had Park Mansfield events--if of
been have would there equinox, the about two, or week a for just
any by safety his endangered have would we that Not difference. a
I calm. a or wind, contrary steady a by only weather--but tremendous
calm week’s a with ourselves indulged have would we Price, Miss think,
season.” that at Atlantic the in

said, face, her averting Fanny, and answered; be to determined seemed He
would I sir, concerned, am _I_ as far “As usual, than tone firmer a with
so all it disapproved uncle My day. a for return his delayed have not
gone had everything opinion my in that arrive, did he when entirely
enough.” far quite

and before, life her in him to once at much so spoken never had She
trembled she over, was speech her when and one; any to angrily so never
few a after but surprised; was He daring. own her at blushed and
tone, graver calmer, a in replied her, of consideration silent moments’
right. are you believe “I conviction, of result candid the if as and
And noisy.” too getting were We prudent. than pleasant more was It
other some on her engaged have would he conversation, the turning then
not could he that reluctant and shy so were answers her but subject,
any. in advance

Edmund, and Grant Dr. eyeing repeatedly been had who Crawford, Miss
to point interesting very some have must gentlemen “Those observed, now
discuss.”

make to brother--“how her replied world,” the in interesting most “The
giving is Grant Dr. better. a into income good a turn to how money;
find I soon. so into step to is he living the about instructions Bertram
I dining-parlour. the in it at were They weeks. few a in orders takes he
pretty very a have will He off. well so be will Bertram hear to glad am
I trouble. much without earned and with, drakes and ducks make to income
hundred Seven year. a hundred seven than less have not will he apprehend
will he course of as and brother; younger a for thing fine a is year a
a and _plaisirs_; _menus_ his for all be will it home, at live still
of total sum the be will suppose, I Easter, and Christmas at sermon
sacrifice.”

me amuses “Nothing saying, by feelings her off laugh to tried sister His
of abundance the settles everybody which with manner easy the than more
rather look would You themselves. than less deal great a have who those
seven to limited be to were _plaisirs_ _menus_ your if Henry, blank,
year.” a hundred

comparative. entirely is know you _that_ all but might; I “Perhaps
well certainly is Bertram business. the settle must habit and Birthright
or four is he time the By family. baronet’s a even of cadet a for off
for do to nothing and year, a hundred seven have will he twenty and five
it.”

do to something a be would there that said have _could_ Crawford Miss
she but of; lightly think not could she which it, for suffer to and
unconcerned and calm look to tried and pass; it let and herself checked
them. joined afterwards shortly gentlemen two the when

to coming of point a make shall “I Crawford, Henry said “Bertram,”
purpose on come shall I sermon. first your preach you hear to Mansfield
not will Price, Miss be? to it is When beginner. young a encourage to
attend to engage you not Will cousin? your encouraging in me join you
do--not shall I time--as whole the him on fixed steadily eyes your with
sentence any down note to just off looking only or word; a lose to
a and tablets with ourselves provide will We beautiful? preeminently
that know, you Mansfield, at preach must You be? it will When pencil.
you.” hear may Bertram Lady and Thomas Sir

Edmund; said can,” I as long as Crawford, you, of clear keep shall “I
more be should I and me, disconcert to likely more be would you “for
man.” other any almost than it at trying you see to sorry

he as nothing feel can he “No, Fanny. thought this?” feel not he “Will
ought.”

each attracting talkers chief the and united, all now being party The
formed was whist-table a as and tranquillity; in remained she other,
his by Grant, Dr. of amusement the for really tea--formed after
Crawford Miss so--and supposed be to not was it though wife, attentive
tranquillity her and listen; to but do to nothing had she harp, her took
Crawford Mr. when except evening, the of rest the undisturbed remained
could she which observation, or question a her to addressed then and now
passed had what by vexed much too was Crawford Miss answering. avoid not
herself soothed she that With music. but anything for humour a in be to
friend. her amused and

her upon coming orders, take to soon so being Edmund’s of assurance The
a at and uncertain hoped still and suspended, been had that blow a like
angry very was She mortification. and resentment with felt was distance,
think to begun _had_ She more. influence her thought had She him. with
decided almost with regard, great with had, she that felt she him; of
It feelings. cool own his with him meet now would she but intentions;
by attachment, true no views, serious no have could he that plain was
never would she know must he which situation a in himself fixing
would She indifference. his in him match to learn would She to. stoop
immediate beyond idea any without attentions his admit henceforth
her do should _hers_ affections, his command so could _he_ If amusement.
harm. no



XXIV CHAPTER

give to morning next the by mind his up made quite had Crawford Henry
and hunters, his for sent having and Mansfield, to fortnight another
at round looked he Admiral, the to explanation of lines few a written
the seeing and him, from letter the threw and sealed he as sister his
do how “And smile, a with said, family, the of rest the of clear coast
hunt? not do I that days the on Mary, myself, amuse to mean I think you
a have I but week; a times three than more out go to old too grown am I
is?” it think you do what and days, intermediate the for plan

sure.” be to me, with ride and walk “To

be would _that_ but both, do to happy be shall I though exactly, “Not
Besides, mind. my of care take must I and body, my to only exercise
wholesome the without indulgence, and recreation all be would _that_
my No, idleness. of bread the eat to like not do I and labour, of alloy
me.” with love in Price Fanny make to is plan

two her with satisfied be to ought You no. No, Nonsense! Price! “Fanny
cousins.”

small a making without Price, Fanny without satisfied be cannot I “But
her of aware properly seem not do You heart. Price’s Fanny in hole
you of none you night, last her of talked we When notice. to claims
her in place taken has that improvement wonderful the of sensible seemed
do therefore and day, every her see You weeks. six last the within looks
from creature different a quite is she you assure I but it; notice not
not modest, quiet, a merely then was She autumn. the in was she what
think to used I pretty. absolutely now is she but girl, plain-looking
of skin soft that in but countenance; nor complexion neither had she
is there yesterday, was it as blush a with tinged frequently so hers,
do I mouth, and eyes her of observed I what from and beauty; decided
she when enough expression of capable being their of despair not
_tout_ her manner, her air, her then, And express. to anything has
inches, two grown be must She improved! indescribably so is _ensemble_,
October.” since least, at

compare to women tall no were there because only is This phoo! “Phoo!
so her saw never you and gown, new a got has she because and with, her
me. believe October, in was she what just is She before. dressed well
notice, to you for company in girl only the was she that is, truth The
pretty--not her thought always have I somebody. a have must you and
beauty of sort a say; people as enough,’ ‘pretty pretty--but strikingly
smile; sweet a has she but darker, be should eyes Her one. on grows that
all may it sure am I improvement, of degree wonderful this for as but
to else nobody having your and dress, of style better a into resolved be
you her, with flirtation a about set do you if therefore, and at; look
that or beauty, her to compliment in is it that me persuade will never
folly.” and idleness own your but anything from proceeds it

afterwards soon and accusation, this to smile a only gave brother Her
not do I Fanny. Miss of make to what know quite not do “I said,
is What yesterday. at be would she what tell not could I her. understand
she did Why prudish? she Is queer? she Is solemn? she Is character? her
I speak. to her get hardly could I me? at grave so look and back draw
entertain to trying life, my in girl a with company in long so was never
on grave so looked who girl a with met Never ill! so succeed and her,
not will ‘I say, looks Her this. of better the get to try must I me!
shall.” she say I and you’; like to not determined am I you, like

is, it This all! after attraction her is this so And fellow! “Foolish
makes and skin, soft a such her gives which you, about caring not her
do I graces! and charms these all produces and taller, much so her
love, _little_ a unhappy; really her making be not will you that desire
plunge you have not will I but good, her do and animate may perhaps,
a has and lived, ever as creature little a good as is she for deep, her
feeling.” of deal great

can fortnight a if “and Henry; said fortnight,” a for but be can “It
I No, save. could nothing which constitution a have must she her, kill
kindly look to her want only soul! little dear harm, any her do not will
by me for chair a keep to blushes, as well as smiles me give to me, on
talk and it take I when animation all be and are, we wherever herself
and possessions my all in interested be think, I as think to her; to
away go I when feel and Mansfield, at longer me keep to try pleasures,
more.” nothing want I again. happy never be shall she that

you Well, now. scruples no have can “I Mary. said itself!” “Moderation
yourself, recommend to endeavouring of enough opportunities have will
together.” deal great a are we for

to Fanny left she remonstrance, farther any attempting without And
way a in guarded been heart Fanny’s not had which, fate a fate, her
she than harder little a been have might Crawford, Miss by unsuspected
young unconquerable such are doubtless there although for deserved;
never are as them) about read not should one (or eighteen of ladies
talent, that all by judgment their against love into persuaded be to
to inclination no have I do, can flattery and attention, manner,
tenderness much so with that think to or them, of one Fanny believe
have could she her, to belonged as taste much so and disposition, of
of only courtship the (though courtship the from heart-whole escaped
some being there of spite in Crawford, as man a such of fortnight) a
been affection her not had overcome, be to him of opinion ill previous
and another of love which security the all With elsewhere. engaged
attacking, was he mind of peace the to give could him of disesteem
adapting and obtrusive, not but attentions--continued, continued his
her of delicacy and gentleness the to more and more themselves
She formerly. than less him dislike to soon very her character--obliged
as him of ill as thought she and past, the forgotten means no by had
were manners his and entertaining; was he powers: his felt she but ever;
was it that polite, blamelessly and seriously so polite, so improved, so
return. in him to civil be to not impossible

few those of end the at and this; effect to enough were days few very A
his forward to rather tendency a had which arose circumstances days,
happiness of degree a her gave they as inasmuch her, pleasing of views
her William, everybody. with pleased be to her dispose must which
England in was brother, loved dearly and absent long so the brother,
lines, happy hurried few a herself, him from letter a had She again.
with Portsmouth into sent and Channel, up came ship the as written
when and Spithead; in anchor at Antwerp the left that boat first the
hoped had he which hand, his in newspaper the with up walked Crawford
this over joy with trembling her found he tidings, first the bring would
kind the to countenance grateful glowing, a with listening and letter,
reply. in dictating collectedly most was uncle her which invitation

thoroughly himself made had Crawford that before day the but was It
having her of aware all at become fact in had or subject, the of master
then interest the but ship, a such in being his or brother, a such
to return his on him determining lively, properly very been had excited
Antwerp’s the of period probable the to as information for apply to town
attended which luck good the and etc.; Mediterranean, the from return
of reward the seemed morning next the news ship of examination early his
as well as her, pleasing of method a such out finding in ingenuity his
years many for having in Admiral, the to attention dutiful his of
He intelligence. naval earliest the have to esteemed paper the in taken
which of feelings, first fine those All late. too be to however, proved,
intention, his But given. already were exciter, the be to hoped had he
quite acknowledged: thankfully was intention, his of kindness the
timidity common the beyond elevated was she for warmly, and thankfully
William. for love her of flow the by mind her of

doubt no be could There them. amongst be soon would William dear This
a only still was he for immediately, absence of leave obtaining his of
already must spot, the on living from parents, his as and midshipman;
holidays direct his daily, perhaps him seeing be and him, seen have
his been had who sister, the to given instantly be justice with might
who uncle the and years, seven of period a through correspondent best
reply the accordingly and advancement; and support his for most done had
as soon as came arrival, his for day early very a fixing reply, her to
in been had Fanny since passed had days ten scarcely and possible;
an in herself found she when dinner-visit, first her of agitation the
on lobby, the in hall, the in watching nature, higher a of agitation
a her bring to was which carriage the of sound first the for stairs, the
brother.

neither being there and waiting; thus was she while happily came It
with was she meeting, of moment the delay to fearfulness nor ceremony
feeling exquisite of minutes first the and house, the entered he as him
intent chiefly servants the unless witnesses, no and interruption no had
exactly was This such. called be could doors proper the opening upon
each as at, conniving separately been had Edmund and Thomas Sir what
both they which with alacrity sympathetic the by other the to proved
out rushing of instead was, she where continuing Norris’s Mrs. advised
them. reached arrival the of noises the as soon as hall the into

the had Thomas Sir and themselves; shewed soon Fanny and William
person different very a certainly protege, his in receiving, of pleasure
an of man young a but ago, years seven equipped had he one the from
and feeling but unstudied, frank, and countenance, pleasant open,
friend. his him confirmed as such and manners, respectful

of happiness agitating the from recover could Fanny before long was It
expectation, of minutes thirty last the by formed was as hour an such
happiness her before even time some was it fruition; of first the and
inseparable disappointment the before happy, her make to said be could
the him in see could she and vanished, had person of alteration the from
yearning been had heart her as him, to talk and before, as William same
come, gradually did however, time, That year. past a many through do to
less much and own, her as warm as side his on affection an by forwarded
object first the was She self-distrust. or refinement by encumbered
bolder and spirits, stronger his which love a was it but love, his of
the On feel. to as express to him for natural as it made temper,
every and enjoyment, true with together about walking were they morrow
but not could Thomas Sir which _tete-a-tete_ a renewed morrow succeeding
him. to out it pointed had Edmund before even complacency, with observe

or marked any which delight, peculiar of moments the Excepting
few last the in her of consideration Edmund’s of instance unlooked-for
life, her in felicity much so known never had Fanny excited, had months
and brother the with intercourse fearless equal, unchecked, this in as
hopes his all her telling her, to heart his all opening was who friend
of, thought long that respecting solicitudes and plans, fears, and
give could who promotion; of blessing valued justly and earned, dearly
and brothers mother, and father the of information minute and direct her
the all in interested was who heard; seldom very she whom of sisters,
to ready Mansfield; at home her of hardships little the all and comforts
only differing or directed, she as home that of member every of think
Norris, aunt their of abuse noisy more and opinion, scrupulous less a by
evil the all whole) the of indulgence dearest the (perhaps whom with and
every and again, over gone be could years earliest their of good and
recollection. fondest the with retraced pleasure and pain united former
conjugal the even which in love, of strengthener a this, advantage An
same the family, same the of Children fraternal. the beneath is tie
of means some have habits, and associations first same the with blood,
and supply; can connexions subsequent no which power, their in enjoyment
which divorce a by estrangement, unnatural and long a by be must it
the of remains precious such if justify, can connexion subsequent no
is it alas! often, Too outlived. entirely ever are attachments earliest
than worse others at is everything, almost sometimes love, Fraternal so.
sentiment a still was it Price Fanny and William with But nothing.
interest, of opposition no by wounded freshness, and prime its all in
and time of influence the feeling and attachment, separate no by cooled
increase. its in only absence

had who all of opinion the in each advancing was amiable so affection An
with struck much as was Crawford Henry good. anything value to hearts
young the of fondness blunt warm-hearted, the honoured He any. as it
Fanny’s towards stretched hands his with say, to him led which sailor,
though already, fashion queer that like to begin I know, you “Do head,
could I England, in done being things such of heard first I when
the at women other the and Brown, Mrs. when and it; believe not
they thought I trim, same the in appeared Gibraltar, at Commissioner’s
lively with saw, and anything”; to me reconcile can Fanny but mad; were
the eye, her of brightness the cheek, Fanny’s of glow the admiration,
describing was brother her while attention, absorbed the interest, deep
at period a such which scenes, terrific or hazards, imminent the of any
supply. must sea

value. to enough taste moral had Crawford Henry which picture a was It
sensibility the for twofold; increased--increased attractions Fanny’s
an was countenance her illumined and complexion her beautified which
of capabilities the of doubt in longer no was He itself. in attraction
to something be would It feeling. genuine feeling, had She heart. her
young her of ardours first the excite to girl, a such by loved be
A foreseen. had he than more him interested She mind! unsophisticated
indefinite. became stay His enough. not was fortnight

recitals His talker. the be to uncle his by on called often was William
in object chief the but Thomas, Sir to themselves in amusing were
his by man young the know to reciter, the understand to was them seeking
details spirited simple, clear, his to listened he and histories;
principles, good of proof the them in seeing satisfaction, full with
everything cheerfulness, and courage, energy, knowledge, professional
already had William was, he as Young well. promise or deserve could that
Indies; West the in Mediterranean; the in been had He deal. great a seen
favour the by shore on taken often been had again; Mediterranean the in
variety every known had years seven of course the in and captain, his of
in means such With offer. could together war and sea which danger of
could Norris Mrs. though and to; listened be to right a had he power his
needlefuls two of quest in everybody disturb and room, the about fidget
nephew’s her of midst the in button, shirt second-hand a or thread of
attentive; was else everybody engagement, an or shipwreck a of account
or unmoved, horrors such of hear not could Bertram Lady even and
how me! “Dear say, to work her from eyes her lifting sometimes without
sea.” to go ever can anybody wonder I disagreeable!

been have to longed He feeling. different a gave they Crawford Henry To
warmed, was heart His much. as suffered and done and seen and sea, at
before who, lad a for respect highest the felt he and fired, fancy his
such given and hardships bodily such through gone had twenty, was he
of exertion, of usefulness, of heroism, of glory The mind. of proofs
shameful in appear indulgence selfish of habits own his made endurance,
distinguishing Price, William a been had he wished he and contrast;
much so with consequence and fortune to way his working and himself
was! he what of instead ardour, happy and self-respect

reverie the from roused was He lasting. than eager rather was wish The
Edmund from inquiry some by it, by produced regret and retrospection of
well as was it found he and hunting; day’s next the for plans his to as
command. his at grooms and horses with once at fortune of man a be to
a conferring of means the him gave it as better, was it respect one In
curiosity and courage, spirits, With oblige. to wished he where kindness
Crawford and hunt; to inclination an expressed William anything, to up
with and himself, to inconvenience slightest the without him mount could
his than better knew who Thomas, Sir in obviate to scruples some only
in away reason to alarms some and loan, a such of value the nephew
he that all by convinced means no by William; for feared She Fanny.
the of countries, various in horsemanship own his of relate could
and horses rough the engaged, been had he which in parties scrambling
falls, dreadful from escapes narrow many his or ridden, had he mules
an in hunter high-fed a of management the to equal all at was he that
accident without well, and safe returned he till nor fox-chase; English
that of any feel or risk, the to reconciled be she could discredit, or
fully had he which horse the lending for Crawford Mr. to obligation
done have to however, proved, was it When produce. should it intended
reward even and kindness, a be to it allow could she harm, no William
his to tendered minute one was animal the when smile a with owner the
manner a in and cordiality, greatest the with next, the and again; use
remained he as long so entirely use his to over made resisted, be to not
Northamptonshire. in

edition. this of one volume [End
Constable, A. and T. by Printed
at Majesty Her to Printers
Press] University Edinburgh the



XXV CHAPTER

nearly more period this at was families two the of intercourse The
the of member any than autumn, the in been had it what to restored
Henry of return The again. be to likely ever thought had intimacy old
it, with do to much had Price, William of arrival the and Crawford,
the of toleration than more Thomas’s Sir to owing still was much but
from disengaged now mind, His Parsonage. the at attempts neighbourly
find to leisure at was first, at him on pressed had which cares the
though and visiting; worth really inmates young their and Grants the
advantageous most the any for contriving or scheming above infinitely
possibilities apparent the among be could that establishment matrimonial
the littleness a as even disdaining and him, to dear most one any of
in perceiving, avoid not could he points, such on quick-sighted being
distinguishing somewhat was Crawford Mr. that way, careless and grand a
more a giving from unconsciously) (though refrain perhaps niece--nor his
account. that on invitations to assent willing

the when Parsonage, the at dine to agreeing in however, readiness, His
many and debates many after hazarded, last at was invitation general
seemed Thomas Sir “because while, worth were it whether to as doubts
from proceeded indolent!” so was Bertram Lady and inclined, ill so
Mr. with do to nothing had and alone, goodwill and good-breeding
the in was it for group: agreeable an in one being as but Crawford,
in one any that think to began first he that visit very that of course
Mr. that _thought_ _have_ _would_ observations idle such of habit the
Price. Fanny of admirer the was Crawford

a in composed being one, pleasant a be to felt generally was meeting The
listen; would who those and talk would who those of proportion good
usual the to according plentiful, and elegant was itself dinner the and
of habits usual the to according much too and Grants, the of style
behold never could who Norris, Mrs. in except emotion any raise to all
and patience, with it on dishes of number the or table wide the either
the of passing the from evil some experience to contrive always did who
of conviction fresh some away bring to and chair, her behind servants
cold. be must some that but dishes many so among impossible being its

Mrs. of predetermination the to according found, was it evening the In
would there whist-table the up making after that sister, her and Grant
perfectly as being everybody and game, round a for sufficient remain
are, always they occasions such on as choice a without and complying
Bertram Lady and whist; as soon as almost on decided was speculation
her for to applied being of situation critical the in herself found soon
card a draw to either required being and games, the between choice own
hand. at was Thomas Sir Luckily hesitated. She not. or whist for

me amuse will which speculation; and Whist Thomas? Sir do, I shall “What
most?”

was He speculation. recommended thought, moment’s a after Thomas, Sir
much not would it that feel might perhaps and himself, player whist a
partner. a for her have to him amuse

if speculation, “then answer; contented ladyship’s her was well,” “Very
teach must Fanny but it, about nothing know I Grant. Mrs. please, you
me.”

own her of protestations anxious with however, interposed, Fanny Here
in played it seen nor game the played never had she ignorance; equal
upon but again; indecision moment’s a felt Bertram Lady and life; her
the was it that easy, so be could nothing that her assuring everybody’s
a with forward stepping Crawford’s Henry and cards, the on game easiest
Miss and ladyship her between sit to allowed be to request earnest most
Mrs. Thomas, Sir and settled; so was it both, them teach and Price,
prime of table the at seated being Grant Mrs. and Dr. and Norris,
Crawford’s Miss under six, remaining the dignity, and state intellectual
arrangement fine a was It other. the round arranged were direction,
of full hands his with and Fanny, to close was who Crawford, Henry for
for own; his as well as manage to cards persons’ two having business,
the of mistress herself feel to not Fanny for impossible was it though
play, her inspirit to yet had he minutes, three in game the of rules
any in especially which, heart, her harden and avarice, her sharpen
Lady for as and difficulty; some of work a was William, with competition
through fortune and fame her all of charge in continue must he Bertram,
her at looking from her keep to enough quick if and evening; whole the
done be to was whatever in her direct must began, deal the when cards
it. of end the to them with

preeminent and ease, happy with everything doing spirits, high in was He
that impudence playful and resources, quick turns, lively the all in
very a altogether was table round the and game; the to honour do could
the of silence orderly and sobriety steady the to contrast comfortable
other.

his of success and enjoyment the into inquired Thomas Sir had Twice
measured his time the for enough long was pause no vain; in but lady,
Mrs. till known be could state her of little very and needed; manner
her pay and her to go to rubber, first the of end the at able, was Grant
compliments.

game.” the with pleased is ladyship your hope “I

know not do I game. odd very A indeed. entertaining very yes! dear, “Oh
does Crawford Mr. and cards; my see to never am I about. all is it what
rest.” the all

opportunity the taking afterwards, time some Crawford, said “Bertram,”
to happened what you told never have “I game, the in languor little a of
were and together, hunting been had They home.” ride my in yesterday me
when Mansfield, from distance some at and run, good a of midst the in
been had Crawford Henry shoe, a flung have to found being horse his
I you told “I back. way his of best the make and up, give to obliged
because yew-trees, the with farmhouse old that passing after way my lost
usual my with that, you told not have I but ask; to bear never can I
due in myself found it--I by gaining without wrong do never I luck--for
suddenly, was I see. to curiosity a had I which place very the in time
of midst the in field, downy steepish a of corner the turning upon
stream small a hills; rising gently between village little retired a
my to knoll of sort a on standing church a forded, be to me before
and place, the for handsome and large strikingly was church right--which
one--to excepting seen be to house gentleman’s a half or gentleman a not
and knoll said the of throw stone’s a Parsonage--within the presumed be
Lacey.” Thornton in short, in myself, found I church.

after turn you did way which “but Edmund; said it,” like sounds “It
farm?” Sewell’s passing

to I were though questions; insidious and irrelevant such no answer “I
never would you hour, an of course the in put could you that all answer
certainly it such Lacey--for Thornton _not_ was it that prove to able be
was.”

then?” inquired, “You

was it that hedge a mending man a _told_ I But inquire. never I “No,
it.” to agreed he and Lacey, Thornton

so half you told ever having forgotten had I memory. good a have “You
place.” the of much

Crawford Miss as living, impending his of name the was Lacey Thornton
knave Price’s William for negotiation a in interest her and knew; well
increased.

saw?” you what like you did how “and Edmund, continued “Well,”

five for work be will There fellow. lucky a are You indeed. much “Very
liveable.” is place the before least at summers

you; grant I moved, be must farmyard The that. as bad so not no, “No,
and bad, means no by is house The else. anything of aware not am I but
it.” to approach tolerable very a be may there removed, is yard the when

shut to up planted and entirely, away cleared be must farmyard “The
east the front to turned be must house The shop. blacksmith’s the out
be must mean, I rooms, principal and entrance north--the the of instead
be may it sure am I pretty; very really is view the where side, that on
the present at is what through approach, your be must _there_ And done.
house; the of back the now is what at garden new a make must You garden.
the to sloping world, the in aspect best the it giving be will which
yards fifty rode I it. for formed precisely seems ground The south-east.
about look to order in house, the and church the between lane, the up
meadows The easier. be can Nothing be. all might it how saw and me;
sweeping _is_, now what as well as garden, the _be_ _will_ what beyond
the to is, that north-east, the to in stood I lane the from round
of together, laid all be must village, the through road principal
They timber. with sprinkled finely are, they meadows pretty very course;
Then them. purchase must you not, if suppose; I living, the to belong
not could I but stream; the with done be must stream--something the
ideas.” three or two had I what. determine quite

is, them of one “and Edmund, said also,” ideas three or two have I “And
in put be ever will Lacey Thornton for plan your of little very that
I beauty. and ornament less rather with satisfied be must I practice.
air the given and comfortable, made be may premises and house the think
that and expense, heavy very any without residence, gentleman’s a of
me.” about care who all suffice may hope, I and, me; suffice must

of tone certain a of resentful and suspicious little a Crawford, Miss
his of expression last the attending half-look certain a and voice,
and Price; William with dealings her of finish hasty a made hope,
will I “There, exclaimed, rate, exorbitant an at knave his securing
not am I me. for prudence cold No spirit. of woman a like last my stake
be not shall it game, the lose I If nothing. do and still sit to born
it.” for striving not from

given had she what for her pay not did only and hers, was game The
about again began Crawford and proceeded, deal Another it. secure to
Lacey. Thornton

form to minutes many not had I possible: best the be not may plan “My
you and it, deserves place The deal. good a do must you but in; it
of. capable is it than less much with satisfied not yourself find will
lie them let There, cards. your see not must ladyship your me, (Excuse
it giving of talk You Bertram. it, deserves place The you.) before just
removal the by done be will _That_ residence. gentleman’s a of air the
saw never I nuisance, terrible that of independent for, farmyard; the of
a of air the much so itself in had which kind the of house a
mere a above something a of look the much so residence, gentleman’s
is It year. a hundreds few a of expenditure the parsonage-house--above
roofs many as with rooms, single low of collection scrambling a not
square a of compactness vulgar the into cramped not is it windows; as
as such house, looking mansion-like roomy, solid, a is it farmhouse:
from in lived had family country old respectable a suppose might one
now were and least, at centuries two through generation, to generation
listened, Crawford Miss in.” year a thousand three to two from spending
residence, gentleman’s a of air “The this. to agreed Edmund and
capable is it But anything. do you if it, give but cannot you therefore,
that for dozen a bids Bertram Lady Mary; see, me (Let more. much of
not does Bertram Lady worth. is it than more is dozen a no, no, queen;
some By on.) go on, Go it. to say to nothing have will She dozen. a bid
to you require really not do (I suggested have I as improvements such
out striking anybody’s doubt I bye, the by though, plan, my upon proceed
into it raise may You character. higher a it give may you better) a
by becomes, it residence, gentleman’s mere the being From _place_. a
taste, education, of man a of residence the improvement, judicious
that and it; on stamped be may this All connexions. good manners, modern
the as down set be owner its make to as air an such receive house
road; the travelling creature every by parish the of landholder great
point--a the dispute to house squire’s real no is there as especially
a such of value the enhance to ourselves, between circumstance,
calculation. all beyond independence and privilege of point in situation
Fanny). to voice softened a with (turning hope” I me, with think _You_
place?” the seen ever you “Have

the in interest her hide to tried and negative, quick a gave Fanny
a hard as driving was who brother, her to attention eager an by subject
pursued Crawford but could; he as much as her on imposing and bargain,
too her bought have You queen. the with part not must you no, “No, with
sir, no, No, value. her half offer not does brother your and dearly,
is She queen. the with part not does sister Your off. hands off, hands
“it again; her to turning yours,” be will game The determined. quite
yours.” be certainly will

at smiling Edmund, said William’s,” were it rather much had Fanny “And
wishes!” she as herself cheat to allowed not Fanny! “Poor her.

know “you afterwards, minutes few a Crawford, Miss said Bertram,” “Mr.
in engage possibly cannot you that improver, capital a such be to Henry
Only help. his accepting without Lacey Thornton at sort the of anything
were things grand what think Only Sotherton! at was he useful how think
drive to August in day hot one him with going all our by there produced
and went, we There fire. take genius his see and grounds, the about
told!” be to not is there done was what and again; home came we there

expression an with moment a for Crawford on turned were eyes Fanny’s
instantly were his, catching on but reproachful; grave--even than more
his at head his shook he consciousness of something With withdrawn.
at done much was there say cannot “I replied, laughingly and sister,
each after walking all were we and day, hot a was it but Sotherton;
he shelter, him gave buzz general a as soon As bewildered.” and other,
to sorry be should “I Fanny, at solely directed voice, low a in added,
see I Sotherton. at day the by of judged _planning_ of powers my have
then.” appeared I as me of think not Do now. differently very things

the in then just being and Norris, Mrs. catch to word a was Sotherton
Thomas’s Sir by trick odd the securing followed which leisure happy
hands, great Grant’s Mrs. and Dr. against own her and play capital
place, a is that Yes, “Sotherton! good-humour, high in out, called she
of out quite are you William, there. day charming a had we and indeed,
Rushworth Mrs. and Mr. dear hope I come, you time next the but luck;
kindly being your for answer can I sure am I and home, at be will
their forget to sort a of not are cousins Your both. by received
Brighton at are They man. amiable most a is Rushworth Mr. and relations,
fine Rushworth’s Mr. as there, houses best the of one in know; you now,
distance, the know exactly not do I be. to right a them gives fortune
you off, far very not is it if Portsmouth, to back get you when but
a send could I and them; to respects your pay and over go to ought
cousins.” your to conveyed get to want I that you by parcel little

Head; Beachey by almost is Brighton but aunt; happy, very be should “I
a such in welcome be to expect not could I far, so get could I if and
am.” I as midshipman scrubby that--poor as place smart

might he affability the of assurance eager an beginning was Norris Mrs.
authority, with saying Thomas’s Sir by stopped was she when on, depend
may you trust I as William, Brighton, to going your advise not do “I
daughters my but meeting; of opportunities convenient more have soon
Mr. find will you and anywhere; cousins their see to happy be would
our of connexions the all regard to disposed sincerely most Rushworth
own.” his as family

than Lord First the to secretary private him find rather would “I
meant not undervoice, an in answer, only William’s was else,” anything
dropped. subject the and far, reach to

Crawford’s Mr. in remark to nothing seen had Thomas Sir yet As
second the of end the at up broke whist-table the when but behaviour;
last their over dispute to Norris Mrs. and Grant Dr. leaving and rubber,
the niece his found he other, the at looker-on a became he play,
pointed somewhat a of professions, of rather or attentions, of object
character.

Thornton about scheme another of glow first the in was Crawford Henry
his to it detailing was ear, Edmund’s catch to able being not and Lacey;
was scheme His earnestness. considerable of look a with neighbour fair
a have might he that winter, following the himself house the rent to
use the for merely not was it and neighbourhood; that in own his of home
_that_ though her), telling then was he (as hunting-season the in it of
in that, did he as feeling weight, some certainly had consideration
him for impossible was it kindness, great very Grant’s Dr. all of spite
material without were now they where accommodated be to horses his and
depend not did neighbourhood that to attachment his but inconvenience;
upon heart his set had he year: the of season one or amusement one upon
little a time, any at to come could he that there something a having
be might year his of holidays the all where command, his at homestall
_perfecting_ and improving, continuing, himself find might he and spent,
was which family Park Mansfield the with intimacy and friendship that
not was and heard Thomas Sir day. every him to value in increasing
address; man’s young the in respect of want no was There offended.
and calm so modest, and proper so was it of reception Fanny’s and
little, said She her. in censure to nothing had he that uninviting,
of either inclination no betrayed and there, and here only assented
strengthening of or herself, to compliment the of part any appropriating
was he whom by Finding Northamptonshire. of favour in views his
Sir to subject same the on himself addressed Crawford Henry observed,
feeling. with still but tone, everyday more a in Thomas,

me heard perhaps, have, you as Thomas, Sir neighbour, your be to want “I
not your for and acquiescence, your for hope I May Price. Miss telling
tenant?” a such against son your influencing

which in sir, way, only the is “It replied, bowing, politely Thomas, Sir
hope, I but neighbour; permanent a as established you wish _not_ could I
Lacey. Thornton at house own his occupy will Edmund that believe, and
much?” too saying I am Edmund,

on but, on; going was what hear to first had appeal, this on Edmund,
answer. an for loss no at was question, the understanding

though Crawford, But, residence. of but idea no have I sir, “Certainly,
as house the Consider friend. a as me to come tenant, a as you refuse I
own your on stables the to add will we and winter, every own your half
that plan improved your of improvements the all with and plan, improved
spring.” this you to occur may

only though going, “His Thomas. Sir continued losers,” the be shall “We
but circle; family our of contraction unwelcome an be will miles, eight
reconcile could mine of son any if mortified deeply been have should I
have not should you that natural perfectly is It less. doing to himself
and wants has parish a But Crawford. Mr. subject, the on much thought
and resident, constantly clergyman a by only known be can which claims
Edmund extent. same the to satisfying of capable be can proxy no which
might he is, that Thornton, of duty the do phrase, common the in might,
ride might he Park: Mansfield up giving without preach, and prayers read
divine through go and inhabited, nominally house a to Sunday, every over
day, seventh every Lacey Thornton of clergyman the be might he service;
not. will it But him. content would that if hours, four or three for
can sermon weekly a than lessons more needs nature human that knows He
prove and parishioners, his among live not does he if that and convey;
does he friend, and well-wisher their attention, constant by himself,
own.” his or good their for either little very

acquiescence. his bowed Crawford Mr.

only the is Lacey Thornton “that Thomas, Sir added again,” repeat “I
on wait to happy be _not_ should I which in neighbourhood the in house
occupier.” as Crawford Mr.

thanks. his bowed Crawford Mr.

parish a of duty the understands “undoubtedly Edmund, said Thomas,” “Sir
too.” it knows _he_ that prove may son his hope must We priest.

Mr. on produce really might harangue little Thomas’s Sir effect Whatever
two others, the of two in sensations awkward some raised it Crawford,
of One Fanny. and Crawford listeners--Miss attentive most his of
so and soon so was Thornton that understood before never having whom,
it what on eyes downcast with pondering was home, his be to completely
the from startled other, the and day; every Edmund see to _not_ be would
of strength the on indulging previously been had she fancies agreeable
had she picture the in able, longer no description, brother’s her
the sink church, the out shut to Thornton, future a of forming been
and modernised, elegant, respectable, the only see and clergyman,
considering was fortune, independent of man a of residence occasional
and this, all of destroyer the as ill-will, decided with Thomas, Sir
character his which forbearance involuntary that from more the suffering
single a by herself relieve to daring not from and commanded, manner and
cause. his on ridicule throwing at attempt

was It hour. that for over was speculation _her_ of agreeable the All
to glad was she and prevailed; sermons if cards, with done have to time
her refresh to able be and conclusion, a to come to necessary it find
neighbour. and place of change a by spirits

the round irregularly collected now were party the of chief The
most the were Fanny and William break-up. final the waiting and fire,
card-table, deserted otherwise the at together remained They detached.
the of some till rest, the of thinking not and comfortably, very talking
be to first the was chair Crawford’s Henry them. of think to began rest
a for them observing silently sat he and them, towards direction a given
was who Thomas, Sir by observed meanwhile, the in himself, minutes; few
Grant. Dr. with chat in standing

I Portsmouth at were I “If William. said night,” assembly the is “This
perhaps.” it, at be should

William?” Portsmouth, at yourself wish not do you “But

of and Portsmouth of enough have shall I not. do I that Fanny, “No,
would there that know not do I And you. have cannot I when too, dancing
partner. a get not might I for assembly, the to going in good any be
a not has who anybody at noses their up turn girls Portsmouth The
_is_ One midshipman. a as nothing be well as might One commission.
amazing up grown are they Gregorys; the remember You indeed. nothing,
courted is Lucy because _me_, to speak hardly will they but girls, fine
lieutenant.” a by

a in cheeks own (her William” it, mind never But shame! shame, “Oh!
no is It minding. worth not is “It spoke). she as indignation of glow
have admirals greatest the what than more no is it _you_; on reflection
that, of think must You time. their in less, or more experienced, all
which hardships the of one as it to mind your up make to try must you
only living, hard and weather bad like share, sailor’s every to fall
will there that it, to end an be will there that advantage, this with
you When endure. to sort that of nothing have will you when time a come
how lieutenant, a are you when William, think, only lieutenant! a are
kind.” this of nonsense any for care will you little

gets Everybody Fanny. lieutenant, a be never shall I think to begin “I
me.” but made

uncle My desponding. so be not do so; talk not do William, dear my “Oh!
get to power his in everything do will he sure am I but nothing, says
is.” it consequence what of do, you as well as knows, He made. you

she than them to nearer much uncle her of sight the by checked was She
something of talk to necessary it found each and of, suspicion any had
else.

Fanny?” dancing, of fond you “Are

tired.” soon am I only very; “Yes,

you Have dance. you see and you with ball a to go to like should “I
I’d and dance, you see to like should I Northampton? at balls any never
here, was I who know would nobody for _would_, you if you with dance
about jump to used We more. once partner your be to like should I and
street? the in was hand-organ the when we? not did time, a many together
better.” a are you say dare I but way, my in dancer good pretty a am I
a Fanny not “Is them, to close now was who uncle, his to turning And
sir?” dancer, good very

which know not did question, unprecedented an such at dismay in Fanny,
grave very Some answer. the for prepared be to how or look, to way
be must indifference, of expression coldest the least at or reproof,
the on But, ground. the to her sink and brother, her distress to coming
unable am I that say to sorry am “I than, worse no was it contrary,
a was she since dance Fanny seen never have I question. your answer to
like herself acquits she think both shall we trust I but girl; little
an have may we perhaps, which, her, see do we when gentlewoman a
long.” ere doing of opportunity

Price,” Mr. dance, sister your seeing of pleasure the had have “I
every answer to engage will “and forward, leaning Crawford, Henry said
satisfaction. entire your to subject, the on make can you which inquiry
some at be must “it distressed) looked Fanny (seeing believe” I But
have to like not does who company in person _one_ is There time. other
of.” spoken Price Miss

true equally was it and dance; Fanny seen once had he enough, True
light quiet, with about gliding her for answered have now would he that
life the for not could he fact, in but, time; admirable in and elegance,
granted for it took rather and been, had dancing her what recall him of
her. about anything remembered than present been had she that

no by Thomas, Sir and dancing; her of admirer an for however, passed, He
and general, in dancing on conversation the prolonged displeased, means
to listening and Antigua, of balls the describing in engaged well so was
which dancing of modes different the of relate could nephew his what
carriage his heard not had he that observation, his within fallen had
of bustle the by it of knowledge the to called first was and announced,
Norris. Mrs.

see you not Do going. are We about? you are what Fanny, Fanny, “Come,
Wilcox old good keep to bear cannot I quick! Quick, going? is aunt your
Sir dear My horses. and coachman the remember always should You waiting.
you, for back come should carriage the that it settled have we Thomas,
William.” and Edmund and

arrangement, own his been had it as dissent, not could Thomas Sir
seemed _that_ but sister; and wife his to communicated previously
all it settled she that fancy must who Norris, Mrs. by forgotten
herself.

shawl the for disappointment: was visit the in feeling last Fanny’s
round put and bring to servant the from taking quietly was Edmund which
was she and hand, quicker Crawford’s Mr. by seized was shoulders her
attention. prominent more his to indebted be to obliged



XXVI CHAPTER

momentary a than more made dance Fanny seeing of desire William’s
Thomas Sir which opportunity, an of hope The uncle. his on impression
remained He more. no of thought be to given not was given, then had
anybody gratify to feeling; a amiable so gratify to inclined steadily
the to pleasure give to and dance, Fanny see to wish might who else
taken and over, matter the thought having and general; in people young
the appeared it of result the independence, quiet in resolution his
what commending and recalling after when, breakfast, at morning next
you that William, like, not do “I added, he said, had nephew his
me give would It indulgence. this without Northamptonshire leave should
Northampton. at balls the of spoke You dance. both you see to pleasure
not would they but them; attended occasionally have cousins Your
I aunt. your for much too be would fatigue The now. us suit altogether
would home at dance A ball. Northampton a of think not must we believe
if--” and eligible; more be

was what knew “I Norris, Mrs. interrupted Thomas!” Sir dear my “Ah,
home, at were Julia dear If say. to going were you what knew I coming.
occasion an reason, a afford to Sotherton, at Rushworth Mrs. dearest or
dance a people young the give to tempted be would you thing, a such for
the grace to home at were _they_ If would. you know I Mansfield. at
uncle, your Thank Christmas. very this have would you ball a ball,
uncle!” your thank William,

their “have interposing, gravely Thomas, Sir replied daughters,” “My
I which dance the but happy; very are hope I and Brighton, at pleasures
all be we Could cousins. their for be will Mansfield at giving of think
the but complete, more be undoubtedly would satisfaction our assembled,
amusement.” of others the debar to not is some of absence

looks, his in decision saw She say. to word another not had Norris Mrs.
be to silence minutes’ some required vexation and surprise her and
and absent daughters His time! a such at ball A composure. into settled
_She_ hand. at soon however, comfort, was There consulted! not herself
spared be course of would Bertram Lady everything: of doer the be must
should She _her_. upon fall all would it and exertion, and thought all
quickly reflection this and evening; the of honours the do to have
the with in join to her enabled as good-humour her of much so restored
expressed. all were thanks and happiness their before others,

speak and look ways, different their in did, Fanny and William, Edmund,
could Thomas Sir as ball promised the in pleasure grateful much as
never had father His two. other the for were feelings Edmund’s desire.
satisfaction. his to more kindness a shewn or favour a conferred

no had and contented, and quiescent perfectly was Bertram Lady
little very her giving its for engaged Thomas Sir make. to objections
the of afraid all at not was she “that him assured she and trouble;
any.” be would there imagine not could she indeed, trouble;

would he rooms the to as suggestions her with ready was Norris Mrs.
she when and prearranged; all it found but used, be to fittest think
the that appeared it day, the about hinted and conjectured have would
a shaping with himself amusing been had Thomas Sir too. settled was day
listen would she as soon as and business; the of outline complete very
whom from invited, be to families the of list his read could quietly,
the of shortness the for allowance necessary all with calculated, he
fourteen or twelve form to enough people young collect to notice,
to him induced had which considerations the detail could and couple:
at be to required was William day. eligible most the as 22nd the on fix
his of day last the be therefore would 22nd the 24th; the on Portsmouth
any on fix to unwise be would it few so were days the where but visit;
the just thinking with satisfied be to obliged was Norris Mrs. earlier.
herself, 22nd the proposing of point the on been having with and same,
purpose. the for day best the far by as

proclaimed a evening the before and thing, settled a now was ball The
despatch, with sent were Invitations concerned. it whom all to thing
happy of full head her with night that bed to went lady young a many and
beyond almost sometimes were cares the her To Fanny. as well as cares
choice of means small with inexperienced, and young for happiness; the
was dressed” be should she “how the taste, own her in confidence no and
her in ornament solitary almost the and solicitude; painful of point a
from her brought had William which cross amber pretty very a possession,
bit a but nothing had she for all, of distress greatest the was Sicily,
manner that in it worn had she though and to; it fasten to ribbon of
rich the all of midst the in time a such at allowable be it would once,
in? appear would ladies young other the all supposed she which ornaments
too, chain gold a her buy to wanted had William it! wear to not yet And
wear to not therefore and means, his beyond been had purchase the but
considerations; anxious were These him. mortifying be might cross the
given ball a of prospect the under even spirits her sober to enough
gratification. her for principally

on sit to continued Bertram Lady and on, went meanwhile preparations The
visits extra some had She them. from inconvenience any without sofa her
new a up making in hurried rather was maid her and housekeeper, the from
but about; ran Norris Mrs. and orders, gave Thomas Sir her: for dress
in was, “there foreseen, had she as and trouble, no _her_ gave this all
business.” the in trouble no fact,

being mind his cares: of full particularly time this at was Edmund
now events important two of consideration the in occupied deeply
and life--ordination in fate his fix to were which hand, at
which ball, the make to as character serious a such of matrimony--events
in moment less of appear them, of one by followed quickly very be would
23rd the On house. the in person other any of those in than eyes his
situation same the in Peterborough, near friend a to going was he
the of course the in ordination receive to were they and himself, as
the but determined, be then would destiny his Half week. Christmas
be would duties His wooed. smoothly very so be not might half other
reward and animate, and share, to was who wife the but established,
he but mind, own his knew He unattainable. be yet might duties, those
were There Crawford’s. Miss knowing of assured perfectly always not was
which in moments were there agree; quite not did they which on points
her to altogether trusting though and propitious; seem not did she
to it bringing resolved--on resolved--almost be to as far so affection,
business of variety the as soon as time, short very a within decision a
he her, offer to had he what knew he and arranged, were him before
His result. the to as hours doubting many feelings, anxious many had
could he strong; very sometimes was him for regard her of conviction
in perfect as was she and encouragement, of course long a on back look
times other at But else. everything in as attachment disinterested
of thought he when and hopes; his with intermingled alarm and doubt
decided her retirement, and privacy for disinclination acknowledged her
determined a but expect he could what life, London a of preference
deprecated, be to more even acceptance an were it unless rejection?
as side his on employment and situation of sacrifices such demanding
forbid. must conscience

enough well him love she Did question. one on depended all of issue The
well him love she Did points? essential be to used had what forego to
was he which question, this And essential? longer no them make to enough
“Yes,” a with answered oftenest though himself, to repeating continually
“No.” its sometimes had

the circumstance this on and Mansfield, leave to soon was Crawford Miss
seen had He alternation. in recently very been had “yes” the and “no”
claimed which letter, friend’s dear the of spoke she as sparkle eyes her
in Henry, of kindness the of and London, in her from visit long a
her convey might he that January, till was he where remain to engaging
with journey a such of pleasure the of speak her heard had he thither;
the on occurred had this But tone. every in “no” had which animation an
of burst the of hour first the within settled, being its of day first
before was visit to was she friends the but nothing when enjoyment, such
other with differently, herself express her heard since had He her.
that Grant Mrs. tell her heard had he feelings: chequered more feelings,
the neither believe to began she that regret; with her leave should she
left she those worth were to going was she pleasures the nor friends
enjoy should she knew and go, must she felt she though that and behind;
at being to forward looking already was she away, once when herself
this? all in “yes” a not there Was again. Mansfield

Edmund re-arrange, and arrange, and over, ponder to matters such With
the which evening the of much very think account, own his on not, could
of degree equal more a with to forward looking were family the of rest
the it, in enjoyment cousins’ two his of Independent interest. strong
meeting appointed other any than value higher no of him to was evening
of hope a was there meeting every In be. might families two the of
the but attachment; Crawford’s Miss of confirmation farther receiving
the to favourable particularly not was perhaps, ballroom, a of whirl
for early her engage To feelings. serious of expression or excitement
which happiness individual of command the all was dances first two the
he which ball the for preparation only the and power, his in felt he
the on him around passing was that all of spite in into, enter could
night. till morning from subject,

still Fanny, morning Wednesday on and ball; the of day the was Thursday
to determined wear, to ought she what to as herself satisfy to unable
and Grant Mrs. to apply and enlightened, more the of counsel the seek
blameless; her bear certainly would taste acknowledged whose sister, her
reason had she and Northampton, to gone were William and Edmund as and
Parsonage the to down walked she out, likewise Crawford Mr. think to
discussion; private for opportunity an wanting of fear much without
to it of part important most a was discussion a such of privacy the and
solicitude. own her of half-ashamed than more being Fanny,

setting just Parsonage, the of yards few a within Crawford Miss met She
though friend, her that her to seemed it as and her, on call to out
she walk, her lose to unwilling was back, turning on insist to obliged
so be would she if that observed, and once, at business her explained
without well as over talked all be might it opinion, her give to as kind
application, the by gratified appeared Crawford Miss within. as doors
much a in her with returning Fanny’s urged thought, moment’s a after and
her into up going their proposed and before, than manner cordial more
Dr. disturbing without coze, comfortable a have might they where room,
the just was It drawing-room. the in together were who Grant, Mrs. and
for side her on gratitude of deal great a with and Fanny; suit to plan
and upstairs, and indoors, proceeded they attention, kind and ready such
with pleased Crawford, Miss subject. interesting the in deep soon were
everything made taste, and judgment best her all her gave appeal, the
her by agreeable everything make to tried and suggestions, her by easy
parts--“But grander its all in settled being dress The encouragement.
not “Shall Crawford. Miss said necklace?” of way by have you shall what
a undoing was she spoke she as And cross?” brother’s your wear you
Fanny met. they when hand her in observed had Fanny which parcel, small
know not did she point: this on doubts and wishes her acknowledged
was She it. wearing from refrain to or cross, the wear to either how
being and her, before placed trinket-box small a having by answered
Such necklaces. and chains gold several among from chuse to requested
the such and provided, was Crawford Miss which with parcel the been had
urged now she manner kindest the in and visit: intended her of object
saying sake, her for keep to and cross the for one taking Fanny’s
making were which scruples the obviate to of think could she everything
proposal. the at horror of look a with first at back start Fanny

ever I than half by “more she; said have,” I collection a what see “You
old an but nothing offer I new. as them offer not do I of. think or use
me.” oblige and liberty, the forgive must You necklace.

But valuable. too was gift The heart. her from and resisted, still Fanny
affectionate much so with case the argued and persevered, Crawford Miss
the and cross, the and William of heads the all through earnestness
found Fanny successful. finally be to as herself, and ball,
pride of accused be not might she that yield, to obliged herself
modest with having and littleness; other some or indifference, or
She selection. the make to proceeded consent, her given reluctance
and valuable; least be might which know to longing looked, and looked
necklace one was there fancying by last, at choice her in determined was
gold, of was It rest. the than eyes her before placed frequently more
a and longer a preferred have would Fanny though and worked; prettily
fixing in hoped, she purpose, her for adapted more as chain plainer
Miss keep. to wished least Crawford Miss what chusing be to this, on
the complete to hastened and approbation; perfect her smiled Crawford
well how see her making and her, round necklace the putting by gift
and, becomingness, its against say to word a not had Fanny looked. it
with pleased exceedingly was scruples, her of remained what excepting
been have perhaps, rather, would She apropos. very so acquisition an
Miss feeling. unworthy an was this But person. other some to obliged
a her proved which kindness a with wants her anticipated had Crawford
you,” of think always shall I necklace this wear I “When friend. real
were.” you kind very how feel “and she, said

necklace,” that wear you when too, else somebody of think must “You
choice his was it for Henry, of think must “You Crawford. Miss replied
over make I necklace the with and me, to it gave He place. first the in
be to is It giver. original the remembering of duty the all you to
without mind your in be to not is sister The remembrancer. family a
too.” brother the bringing

the returned have would confusion, and astonishment great in Fanny,
person, another of gift the been had what take To instantly. present
eagerness an with and be! not must it impossible! too, brother a of
the down laid she companion, her to diverting quite embarrassment and
another take to either resolved seemed and cotton, its on again necklace
prettier a seen never had she thought Crawford Miss all. at none or
afraid you are “what laughing, she, said child,” dear “My consciousness.
you fancy and mine, as necklace the claim will Henry think you Do of?
much too be would he imagining you are or it? by honestly come not did
money his which ornament an throat lovely your round seeing by flattered
the in throat a such was there knew he before ago, years three purchased
between confederacy a suspect archly--“you perhaps”--looking or world?
his at and knowledge his with is doing now am I what that and us,
desire?”

thought. a such against protested Fanny blushes deepest the With

all at without but seriously, more Crawford Miss replied then,” “Well,
as are and trick, no suspect you that me convince “to her, believing
necklace the take you, found always have I as compliment of unsuspicious
make not need brother’s my of gift a being Its it. about more no say and
makes it you assure I as it, accepting your in difference smallest the
something me giving always is He it. with part to willingness my in none
quite is it that him from presents innumerable such have I other. or
this for as And half. remember to him for or value to me for impossible
pretty, very is it times: six it worn have I suppose not do I necklace,
welcome heartily most be would you though and it; of think never I but
very the on fix to happened have you trinket-box, my in other any to
your in see and with part rather would I choice, a have I if which, one
a Such you. entreat I it, against more no Say other. any than possession
words.” many so half worth not is trifle

less but renewed with and opposition; farther any make not dared Fanny
in expression an was there for again, necklace the accepted thanks happy
with. satisfied be not could she which eyes Crawford’s Miss

of change Crawford’s Mr. of insensible be to her for impossible was It
was he her: please to tried evidently He it. seen long had She manners.
her to been had he what like something was he attentive, was he gallant,
as tranquillity her of her cheat to supposed, she wanted, he cousins:
this in concern some have not might he whether and them; cheated had he
Crawford, Miss for not, had he that convinced be not could necklace--she
friend. a and woman a as careless was sister, a as complaisant

had she what of possession the that feeling and doubting, and Reflecting
walked now she satisfaction, much bring not did for wished much so
her since cares of diminution a than rather change a with again, home
before. path that treading



XXVII CHAPTER

this deposit to upstairs immediately went Fanny home reaching On
some in necklace, a of good doubtful this acquisition, unexpected
treasures; smaller her all held which room, East the in box favourite
Edmund cousin her find to surprise her was what door, the opening on but
before, occurred never having sight a Such table! the at writing there
welcome. was it as wonderful as almost was

her meeting and pen, his and seat his leaving directly, he said “Fanny,”
came I here. being for pardon your beg “I hand, his in something with
coming your of hope in while little a waiting after and you, for look to
find will You errand. my explain to inkstand your of use making was in,
business, my speak now can I but yourself; to note a of beginning the
chain trifle--a little this of acceptance your beg to merely is which
has there but ago, week a it had have to ought You cross. William’s for
soon so days several by town in being not brother’s my from delay a been
I Northampton. at it received now just only have I and expected; I as
the consult to endeavoured I Fanny. itself, chain the like will you hope
to kind be will you know I rate, any at but, taste; your of simplicity
of love the of token a is, really it as it, consider and intentions, my
friends.” oldest your of one

a by overpowered Fanny, before away, hurrying was he saying, so And
but speak; to attempt could pleasure, and pain of feelings thousand
stop cousin, “Oh! out, called then she wish, sovereign one by quickened
stop!” pray moment, a

back. turned He

agitated very a in continued, she you,” thank to attempt cannot “I
can I than more much feel I question. the of out are “thanks manner;
is way a such in me of thinking in goodness Your express. possibly
beyond--”

again. away turning and smiling Fanny” say, to have you all is that “If

you.” consult to want I not. is it no, “No,

put just had he parcel the undone now had she unconsciously Almost
jewellers’ of niceness the all in her, before seeing and hand, her into
not could she neat, and simple perfectly chain, gold plain a packing,
the is This indeed! beautiful is this “Oh, again, forth bursting help
I ornament only the is This for! wished I what precisely thing, very
They cross. my suit exactly will It possess. to desire a had ever have
acceptable an such in too, comes, It together. worn be shall and must
is.” it acceptable how know not do you cousin, Oh, moment.

most am I much. too deal great a things these feel you Fanny, dear “My
for time in here be should it that and chain, the like you that happy
I me, Believe occasion. the beyond far are thanks your but to-morrow;
yours. to contributing of that to superior world the in pleasure no have
It unalloyed. so complete, so pleasure no have I say, safely can I No,
drawback.” a without is

hour an lived have could Fanny affection of expressions such Upon
obliged moment, a waiting after Edmund, but word; another saying without
what “But saying, by flight heavenly its from mind her down bring to her
about?” me consult to want you that it is

to longing earnestly most now was she which necklace, the about was It
the gave She doing. her of approbation his obtain to hoped and return,
over; be well might raptures her now and visit, recent her of history
what with delighted so circumstance, the with struck so was Edmund for
conduct of coincidence a such by gratified so done, had Crawford Miss
one of power superior the admit but not could Fanny that them, between
was It drawback. its have might it though mind, own his over pleasure
answer any or plan, her to attention his get could she before time some
reflection, fond of reverie a in was he opinion: his of demand her to
when but praise; of half-sentences few a then and now only uttering
she what opposing in decided very was he understand, and awake did he
wished.

be would It account. no upon Fanny, dear my No, necklace! the “Return
sensation unpleasant more a be hardly can There severely. her mortifying
with given have we which hands our on returned anything having the than
Why friend. a of comfort the to contributing its of hope reasonable a
of?” deserving so herself shewn has she which pleasure a lose she should

“I Fanny, said instance,” first the in me to given been had it “If
brother’s her being but it; returning of thought have not should
with part not rather would she that suppose to fair it not is present,
wanted?” not is it when it,

its and least: at acceptable, not wanted, not it suppose not must “She
as for difference; no makes gift brother’s her originally been having
that on it taking from you nor offering, from prevented not was she
is it doubt No it. keeping from you prevent to not ought it account,
ballroom.” a for fitter and mine, than handsomer

for and, way, its in handsomer all at not handsomer, not is it “No,
cross William’s with agree will chain The fit. so half not purpose, my
necklace.” the than better comparison all beyond

am I sacrifice; a _be_ it if night, one only for Fanny, night, one “For
give than rather sacrifice that make consideration, upon will, you sure
Crawford’s Miss comfort. your of studious so been has who one to pain
entitled justly were you than more been--not have you to attentions
been have they but _be_, _could_ that think to person last the am to--I
the something have must what with them returning be to and invariable;
_meaning_, the have never could it know I though ingratitude, of _air_
engaged are you as necklace, the Wear sure. am I nature, your in not is
with ordered not was which chain, the let and evening, to-morrow do, to
my is This occasions. commoner for kept be ball, the to reference any
whose two the between coolness a of shadow the have not would I advice.
whose in and pleasure, greatest the with observing been have I intimacy
generosity true in resemblance general much so is there characters
resulting differences, slight few the make to as delicacy natural and
perfect a to hindrance reasonable no situation, from principally
he arise,” coolness a of shadow the have not would I friendship.
I objects dearest two the “between little, a sinking voice his repeated,
earth.” on have

as herself tranquillise to remained Fanny and spoke; he as gone was He
But her. support must dearest--that two his of one was She could. she
before, openly so speak him heard never had She first! the other: the
was it perceived, long had she what than more no her told it though and
were They views. and convictions own his of told it for stab, a
every of spite in stab, a was It Crawford. Miss marry would He decided.
and again repeat to obliged was she and expectation; long-standing
her gave words the before dearest, two his of one was she that again,
would it him, deserve to Crawford Miss believe she Could sensation. any
was he But tolerable! more far be--how it would different how be--oh,
were faults her not; had she which merits her gave he her: in deceived
shed had she Till longer. no them saw he but been, ever had they what
agitation; her subdue not could Fanny deception, this over tears many
influence the by relieved be only could followed which dejection the and
happiness. his for prayers fervent of

overcome to try to duty, her be to it felt she as intention, her was It
her in selfishness, on bordered that all excessive, was that all
disappointment, a loss, a it fancy to or call To Edmund. for affection
to enough strong words not had she which for presumption a be would
be might Crawford Miss as him of think To humility. own her satisfy
be could he her To insanity. be her in would thinking, in justified
did Why friend. a than dearer nothing circumstances; any under nothing
It forbidden? and reprobated be to enough even her to occur idea an such
would She imagination. her of confines the on touched have to not ought
Miss of judging of right the deserve to and rational, be to endeavour
a by him for solicitude true of privilege the and character, Crawford’s
heart. honest an and intellect sound

duty; her do to determined was and principle, of heroism the all had She
not her let nature, and youth of feelings the of many also having but
the on resolutions good these all making after if, at, wondered much be
Edmund which on paper of scrap the seized she self-government, of side
and hopes, her all beyond treasure a as her, to writing begun had
Fanny, dear very “My words, these emotion tenderest the with reading
the as chain, the with up it locked accept” to favour the me do must you
letter a to approaching thing only the was It gift. the of part dearest
another; receive never might she him; from received ever had she which
perfectly so another receive should ever she that impossible was it
had prized more lines Two style. the and occasion the in gratifying
author--never distinguished most the of pen the from fallen never
The biographer. fondest the of researches the blessed completely more
her, To biographer’s. the beyond even is love woman’s a of enthusiasm
a is convey, may it anything of independent itself, handwriting the
as being human other any by cut characters such were Never blessedness.
haste in written specimen, This gave! handwriting commonest Edmund’s
the of flow the in felicity a was there and fault; a not had was, it as
she which Fanny,” dear very “My of arrangement the in words, four first
ever. for at looked have could

happy this by feelings her comforted and thoughts her regulated Having
down go to time due in able was she weakness, and reason of mixture
the her pay and Bertram, aunt her near employments usual her resume and
spirits. of want apparent any without observances usual

with opened and came; enjoyment, and hope to predestined Thursday,
often days unmanageable self-willed, such than Fanny to kindness more
brought was note friendly very a breakfast after soon for volunteer,
obliged himself found he as that stating William, to Crawford Mr. from
trying help not could he days, few a for morrow the on London to go to
could William if that hoped therefore and companion; a procure to
been had than earlier day a half Mansfield leave to mind his up make
to meant Crawford Mr. carriage. his in place a accept would he proposed,
William and dinner-hour, late accustomary uncle’s his by town in be
very a was proposal The Admiral’s. the at him with dine to invited was
post travelling of idea the enjoyed who himself, William to one pleasant
in and, friend; agreeable good-humoured, a such and horses, four with
everything once at saying was despatches, with up going to it likening
could imagination his which dignity and happiness its of favour in
pleased; exceedingly was motive, different a from Fanny, and suggest;
from mail the by up go should William that was plan original the for
an him allowed have not would which night, following the Northampton
though and coach; Portsmouth a into got have must he before rest hour’s
company, his of hours many of her rob would Crawford’s Mr. of offer this
such of fatigue the from spared William having in happy too was she
for it of approved Thomas Sir else. anything of think to journey, a
be might Crawford Admiral to introduction nephew’s His reason. another
it whole, the Upon interest. had believed, he Admiral, The service. of
morning, the half it on lived spirits Fanny’s note. joyous very a was
go to himself being writer its from pleasure of accession some deriving
away.

fears and agitations many too had she hand, at near so ball, the for As
had, have to ought she which anticipation in enjoyment the half have to
looking ladies young many the by have to supposed been have must or
under but ease, at more situations in event same the to forward
peculiar less interest, less novelty, less of circumstances
known Price, Miss her. to attributed be would than gratification,
first her make to now was invited, people the half to name by only
could Who evening. the of queen the as regarded be must and appearance,
to up brought been not had Price Miss But Price? Miss than happier be
ball this light what in known she had and _out_; _coming_ of trade the
have much very would it her, respecting considered general, in was,
doing of had already she fears the increasing by comfort her lessened
any or observation much without dance To at. looked being and wrong
the half about for partners and strength have to fatigue, extraordinary
Mr. with deal great a not and Edmund, with little a dance to evening,
away keep to able be and himself, enjoy William see to Crawford,
to seemed and ambition, her of height the was Norris, aunt her from
best the were these As happiness. of possibility greatest her comprehend
long a of course the in and prevail; always not could they hopes, her of
the under often was she aunts, two her with principally spent morning,
this make to determined William, views. sanguine less much of influence
Edmund, snipe-shooting; out was enjoyment, thorough of day a day last
left and Parsonage; the at was suppose, to reason much too had she
the because cross was who Norris, Mrs. of worrying the bear to alone
could _she_ whom and supper, the with way own her have would housekeeper
to last at down worn was Fanny might, housekeeper the though avoid not
with off sent when and ball, the to belonging evil an everything think
and room, own her towards languidly as moved dress, to worry parting a
in share no allowed been had she if as happiness of incapable as felt
it.

been had it yesterday; of thought she upstairs slowly walked she As
and Parsonage, the from returned had she that hour same the about
again there him find to were I “Suppose room. East the in Edmund found
fancy. of indulgence fond a in herself, to she said to-day!”

up, looking and Starting her. near moment that at voice a said “Fanny,”
standing himself, Edmund reached, just had she lobby the across saw, she
look “You her. towards came He staircase. different a of head the at
far.” too walking been have You Fanny. fagged, and tired

all.” at out been not have I “No,

had You worse. are which doors, within fatigues had have you “Then
out.” gone have better

and answer; no make to easiest it found complain, to liking not Fanny,
had he believed she kindness, usual his with her at looked he though
spirits: in appear not did He countenance. her of think to ceased soon
proceeded They amiss. probably was her with unconnected something
above. floor same the on being rooms their together, upstairs

my guess may “You presently. Edmund said Grant’s,” Dr. from come “I
think could Fanny that conscious, so looked he And Fanny.” there, errand
to wished “I speech. for sick too her turned which errand, one of but
that explanation the was dances,” first two the for Crawford Miss engage
found she as her, enabling again, life to Fanny brought and followed,
the to as inquiry an like something utter to speak, to expected was she
result.

did that smile a (with but” me; to engaged is “she answered, he “Yes,”
will ever she that time last the be to is it says “she easy) sit not
is she sure am I hope, I think, I serious. not is She me. with dance
a with danced has never She it. hear not rather would I but serious; not
wish could I sake, own my For _will_. never she and says, she clergyman,
very this week, very this not mean at--I just ball no been had there
home.” leave I to-morrow day;

has anything that sorry very am “I said, and speech, for struggled Fanny
uncle My pleasure. of day a be to ought This you. distress to occurred
so.” it meant

I right. end all will It pleasure. of day a be will it and yes! yes, “Oh
ball the consider I that not is it fact, In moment. a for vexed only am
taking by her, stopping Fanny,” But, signify? it does what ill-timed; as
means. this all what know “you seriously, and low speaking and hand, her
tell could I than better perhaps me, tell could and is; it how see You
a are You little. a you to talk me Let vexed. am I why and how you,
and morning, this manner her by pained been have I listener. kind kind,
and sweet as be to disposition her know I it. of better the get cannot
companions former her of influence the but own, your as faultless
opinions, professed her to conversation, her to seem--gives her makes
speaks she but evil, _think_ not does She wrong. of tinge a sometimes
it playfulness, be to it know I though and playfulness; in it speaks it,
soul.” the to me grieves

gently. Fanny said education,” of effect “The

have They aunt! and uncle that “Yes, it. to agree but not could Edmund
does it you, to own I Fanny, sometimes, for mind; finest the injured
tainted.” was itself mind the if as appears it manner: than more appear

therefore, and judgment, her to appeal an be to this imagined Fanny
a as me want only you “If said, consideration, moment’s a after
qualified not am I but can; I as useful as be will I cousin, listener,
competent.” not am I _me_. of advice ask not Do adviser. an for

need you but office, an such against protest to Fanny, right, are “You
it advice; ask never should I which on subject a is It afraid. be not
few, and asked; be never better had it which on subject of sort the is
their against influenced be to want they when but it, ask do imagine, I
you.” to talk to want only I conscience.

me. to talk you _how_ care take but liberty; the Excuse more. thing “One
The for. sorry be may you hereafter which now, anything me tell not Do
come--” may time

spoke. she as cheeks her into rushed colour The

with lips his to hand her pressing Edmund, cried Fanny!” “Dearest
all are “you Crawford’s, Miss been had it if as warmth much as almost
never will time The here. unnecessary is it But thought! considerate
it think to begin I come. ever will to allude you as time such No come.
should, it if even and less; and less grow chances the improbable: most
need we that me or you either by remembered be to nothing be will there
they if and scruples; own my of ashamed be never can I for of, afraid be
character her raise only will that changes by be must it removed, are
the are You had. once she faults the of recollection the by more the
you but said; have I what say should I whom to earth upon being only
Fanny, witness, me bear can you her; of opinion my known always have
over talked we have time a many How blinded. been never have I that
every up given almost have I me; fear not need You errors! little her
whatever if, indeed, blockhead a be must I but her; of idea serious
the without sympathy and kindness your of think could I me, befell
gratitude.” sincerest

said had He eighteen. of experience the shake to enough said had He
known, lately had she than feelings happier some Fanny give to enough
convinced am I cousin, “Yes, answered, she look, brighter a with and
some perhaps though else, anything of incapable be would _you_ that
Do say. to wish you anything hearing of afraid be cannot I not. might
like.” you whatever me Tell yourself. check not

housemaid a of appearance the and floor, second the on now were They
was it comfort present Fanny’s For conversation. farther any prevented
talk to able been he had moment: happiest the at perhaps, concluded,
talked have not might he that saying no is there minutes, five another
was, it as But despondence. own his and faults Crawford’s Miss all away
with and affection, grateful of side his on looks with parted they
for it like nothing felt had She hers. on sensations precious very some
worn had William to note Crawford’s Mr. from joy first the Since hours.
been had there reverse; the absolutely state a in been had she away,
smiling. was everything Now her. within hope no around, comfort no
of seemed and mind, her upon again returned fortune good William’s
pleasure of evening an too--such ball, The first. at than value greater
it for dress to began she and animation; real a now was It her! before
well: went All ball. a to belongs which flutter happy the of much with
necklaces the to came she when and looks; own her dislike not did she
given one the trial upon for complete, seemed fortune good her again,
cross. the of ring the through go means no by would Crawford Miss by her
for large too was it but it; wear to resolved Edmund, oblige to had, She
delightful with having, and worn; be must therefore, His, purpose. the
two the of memorials cross--those the and chain the joined feelings,
other each for formed so tokens dearest those heart, her of beloved most
seen and neck, her round them put imaginary--and and real everything by
without able, was she were, they Edmund and William of full how felt and
She too. necklace Crawford’s Miss wearing on resolve to effort, an
was it when and claim; a had Crawford Miss right. be to it acknowledged
the claims, stronger the with interfere to on, encroach to longer no
pleasure with even justice her do could she another, of kindness truer
her left Fanny and well; very looked really necklace The herself. to
her. about all and herself with satisfied comfortably last, at room

unusual an with occasion this on her recollected had Bertram aunt Her
that unprompted, her, to occurred really had It wakefulness. of degree
upper the than help better of glad be might ball, a for preparing Fanny,
to maid own her sent actually she herself, dressed when and housemaid’s,
just had Chapman Mrs. use. any of be to course, of late, too her; assist
completely room her of out came Price Miss when floor, attic the reached
aunt’s her felt Fanny but necessary; were civilities only and dressed,
do could Chapman Mrs. or Bertram Lady as much as almost attention
themselves.



XXVIII CHAPTER

went Fanny when drawing-room the in were aunts her both and uncle Her
with saw he and object, interesting an was she former the To down.
in being her and appearance, her of elegance general the pleasure
all was dress her of propriety and neatness The looks. good remarkably
her upon but presence, her in commend to himself allow would he that
very with beauty her of spoke he afterwards, soon again room the leaving
praise. decided

her.” to Chapman sent I well. very looks “she Bertram, Lady said “Yes,”

look to reason good has “she Norris, Mrs. cried yes!” Oh, well! “Look
been, has she as family this in up brought advantages: her all with well
my think, Only her. before manners cousins’ her of benefit the all with
the been have I and you advantages extraordinary what Thomas, Sir dear
is of notice taking been have you gown very The her. giving of means
What married. Rushworth Mrs. dear when her to present generous own your
hand?” the by her taken not had we if been have she would

of eyes the table to down sat they when but more; no said Thomas Sir
touched gently be might subject the that him assured men young two the
she that saw Fanny success. more with withdrew, ladies the when again,
still look her made well looking of consciousness the and approved; was
made soon was she and happy, was she causes of variety a From better.
who Edmund, room, the of out aunts her following in for happier; still
dance must “You him, passed she as said, door, the open holding was
like, you that two any me; for dances two keep must you Fanny; me, with
hardly had She for. wish to more nothing had She first.” the except
Her life. her in spirits high approaching nearly so state a in been ever
to surprising longer no was ball a of day the on gaiety former cousins’
practising actually was and charming, very indeed be to it felt she her;
the from safe be could she as long as drawing-room the about steps her
fresh in first at up taken entirely was who Norris, aunt her of notice
prepared. had butler the which fire noble the injuring and arranging

any under languid least at been have would that followed hour an Half
but was It prevailed. still happiness Fanny’s but circumstances, other
restlessness the was what and Edmund, with conversation her of think to
Bertram? Lady of yawns the were What Norris? Mrs. of

of expectation sweet the began after soon and them; joined gentlemen The
diffused, seemed enjoyment and ease of spirit general a when carriage, a
had moment every and laughed, and talked and about stood all they and
struggle a be must there that felt Fanny hope. its and pleasure its
so effort the see to delightful was it but cheerfulness, Edmund’s in
made. successfully

to really began guests the when heard, really were carriages the When
so of sight the subdued: much was heart of gaiety own her assemble,
and gravity the besides and herself; into back her threw strangers many
Sir neither of manners the which circle, great first the of formality
herself found she away, do to kind a of were Bertram Lady nor Thomas
introduced was She worse. something endure to on called occasionally
curtsey, to and to, spoken be to forced and uncle, her by there and here
to summoned never was she and duty, hard a was This again. speak and
the in ease his at about walked he as William, at looking without it
him. with be to longing and scene, the of background

The epoch. favourable a was Crawfords and Grants the of entrance The
and manners popular their before way gave soon meeting the of stiffness
grew everybody and formed, were groups little intimacies: diffused more
toils the from back drawing and, advantage; the felt Fanny comfortable.
her kept have she could happy, most again been have would civility, of
all looked _She_ Crawford. Mary and Edmund between wandering from eyes
musings own Her it? of end the be not might what loveliness--and
and her, before Crawford Mr. perceiving on end an to brought were
almost her engaging his by channel another into put were thoughts her
was occasion this on happiness Her dances. two first the for instantly
partner a of secure be To chequered. finely _mortal_, _la_ _a_ much very
now was beginning of moment the good--for essential most a was first at
as claims own her understood little so she and near; seriously growing
the been have must she her, asked not had Crawford Mr. if that think to
through only partner a received have should and after, sought be to last
been have would which interference, and bustle, and inquiry, of series a
of manner his in pointedness a was there time same the at but terrible;
for glancing eye his saw she and like, not did she which her asking
a was there thought smile--she a with necklace, her at moment a
no was there though And wretched. feel and blush her made smile--which
only be to then seemed object his though her, disturb to glance second
embarrassment, her of better the get not could she agreeable, quietly
no had and it, perceiving his of idea the by was it as heightened
gradually could she Then else. one some to away turned he till composure
voluntary a partner, a having of satisfaction genuine the to up rise
began. dancing the against secured partner,

herself found she ballroom, the into moving were company the When
were smiles and eyes whose Crawford, Miss near time first the for
been, had brother’s her as directed unequivocally more and immediately
anxious Fanny, when subject, the on speak to beginning was who and
second the of explanation the give to hastened over, story the get to
intended her all and listened; Crawford Miss chain. real the necklace:
one only felt she forgotten: were Fanny to insinuations and compliments
could they shewing before, been had they as bright eyes, her and thing;
Edmund? Did he? “Did pleasure, eager with exclaimed she brighter, be yet
honour I it. of thought have would man other No himself. like was That
him tell to longing if as around looked she And expression.” beyond him
room; the of out ladies of party a attending was he near, not was He so.
each, of arm an taking and girls, two the to up coming Grant Mrs. and
rest. the with followed they

of even long thinking for leisure no was there but sunk, heart Fanny’s
were violins the ballroom, the in were They feelings. Crawford’s Miss
on fixing its forbade that flutter a in was mind her and playing,
how see and arrangements, general the watch must She serious. anything
done. was everything

engaged; were she if asked and her, to came Thomas Sir minutes few a In
intended had he what exactly was Crawford,” Mr. to sir; “Yes, the and
her, to him brought Thomas Sir off; far not was Crawford Mr. hear. to
the lead to was _she_ that Fanny, to discovered which something saying
before. her to occurred never had that idea an ball; the open and way
as been had it evening, the of minutiae the of thought had she Whenever
the and Crawford; Miss with begin would Edmund that course of matter a
contrary, the spoke _uncle_ _her_ though that strong, so was impression
unfitness, her of hint a surprise, of exclamation an help not could she
Sir against opinion her urging be To excused. be to even entreaty an
her was such but case; the of extremity the of proof a was Thomas’s
in him look actually could she that suggestion, first the at horror
vain, in otherwise; settled be might it hoped she that say and face the
too looked then and her, encourage to tried smiled, Thomas Sir however:
to her for dear,” my so, be must “It decidedly, too said and serious,
by conducted moment next the herself found she and word; another hazard
by joined be to there standing and room, the of top the to Crawford Mr.
formed. were they as couple, after couple dancers, the of rest the

young elegant many so above placed be To it. believe hardly could She
her like her treating was It great. too was distinction The women!
most with cousins absent those to flew thoughts her And cousins!
take to home at not were they that regret, tender truly and unfeigned
which pleasure a of share their have and room, the in place own their
heard had she as often So them. to delightful very so been have would
And felicities! all of greatest the as home at ball a for wish them
the opening be to _her_ for given--and was it when away them have to
that her envy not would they hoped She too! Crawford Mr. with ball--and
in things of state the to back looked she when but _now_; distinction
dancing once when other each to been all had they what to autumn, the
she than more almost was arrangement present the before, house that in
herself. understand could

the for Fanny, to happiness than honour rather was It began. ball The
to tried and spirits, excellent in was partner her least: at dance first
have to frightened much too deal great a was she but her; to them impart
Young, at. looked longer no herself suppose could she till enjoyment any
not were that awkwardnesses no had she however, gentle, and pretty,
not were that present persons few were there and graces, as good as
Sir was she modest, was she attractive, was She her. praise to disposed
It Crawford. Mr. by admired be to said soon was she and niece, Thomas’s
watching was himself Thomas Sir favour. general her give to enough was
his of proud was he complacency; much with dance the down progress her
Norris Mrs. as beauty, personal her all attributing without and niece;
with pleased was he Mansfield, to transplantation her to do, to seemed
she manners and education else: everything supplied having for himself
him. to owed

having, and stood, he as thoughts Thomas’s Sir of much saw Crawford Miss
of desire prevailing general a her, towards wrongs his all of spite in
to aside stepping of opportunity an took him, to herself recommending
he and warm, was praise Her Fanny. of agreeable something say
and discretion, as far as it in joining wish, could she as it received
appearing certainly and allow, would speech of slowness and politeness,
afterwards, soon did lady his than subject the on advantage greater to
she before round turned near, very sofa a on her perceiving Mary, when
looks. Price’s Miss on her compliment to dance, to began

reply. placid Bertram’s Lady was well,” very look does she “Yes,
that but Not her.” to Chapman sent I dress. to her helped “Chapman
more much so was she but admired; Fanny have to pleased really was she
could she that her, to Chapman sending in kindness own her with struck
head. her of out it get not

_her_ gratifying of think to well too Norris Mrs. knew Crawford Miss
offered--“Ah! occasion the as was it her, to Fanny; of commendation by
and to-night!” Julia and Rushworth Mrs. dear want we much how ma’am,
had she as words courteous and smiles many as with her paid Norris Mrs.
making in herself for found she as occupation much so amid for, time
the all move to trying and Thomas, Sir to hints giving card-tables, up
room. the of part better a to chaperons

intentions her in herself Fanny towards most blundered Crawford Miss
flutter, happy a heart little her giving be to meant She please. to
and, self-consequence; delightful of sensations with her filling and
when so doing be must she thought still blushes, Fanny’s misinterpreting
significant a with said, and dances, first two the after her to went she
to-morrow? town to goes brother my why me tell can _you_ “Perhaps look,
time first The what. me tell not will but there, business has he says He
to. come all we what is this But confidence! his me denied ever he
for you to apply must I Now, later. or sooner supplanted are All
for?” going Henry is what Pray, information.

allowed. embarrassment her as steadily as ignorance her protested Fanny

be to it suppose must “I laughing, Crawford, Miss replied then,” “Well,
you of talking of and brother, your conveying of pleasure the for purely
way.” the by

Miss while discontent; of confusion the was it but confused, was Fanny
over-anxious, her thought and smile, not did she wondered Crawford
of insensible than rather anything her thought or odd, her thought or
in enjoyment of deal good a had Fanny attentions. Henry’s in pleasure
to little very had attentions Henry’s but evening; the of course the
so again him by asked been have _not_ rather much would She it. with do
his that suspect to obliged been not had she wished she and soon, very
for all were hour, supper the about Norris, Mrs. of inquiries previous
to not was it But evening. the of part that at her securing of sake the
she though all; of object the was she that feel her made he avoided: be
indelicacy was there that done, unpleasantly was it that say not could
William, of talked he when sometimes, and manner; his in ostentation or
heart of warmth a even shewed and unagreeable, not really was he
her of part no made attentions his still But credit. him did which
how saw and William, at looked she whenever happy was She satisfaction.
could she that minutes five every in himself, enjoying was he perfectly
happy was she partners; his of account his hear and him with about walk
dances two the having in happy was she and admired; herself knowing in
the of part greatest the during to, forward look to still Edmund with
indefinite her that after sought eagerly so being hand her evening,
even happy was She perspective. continual in was _him_ with engagement
side, his on spirits of flow any from not but place; take did they when
morning. the blessed had as gallantry tender of expressions such any or
with friend the being from sprung happiness her and fagged, was mind His
“I he. said civility,” with out worn am “I repose. find could it whom
But say. to nothing with and night, all incessantly talking been have
talked be to want not will You peace. be may there Fanny, _you_, with
speak even hardly would Fanny silence.” of luxury the have us Let to.
the from measure, great in probably, arising weariness, A agreement. her
peculiarly was morning, the in acknowledged had he which feelings same
such with together dances two their down went they and respected, be to
had Thomas Sir that looker-on any satisfy might as tranquillity sober
son. younger his for wife no up bringing been

had Crawford Miss pleasure. little Edmund afforded had evening The
her not was it but together, danced first they when spirits gay in been
comfort; his raised than sank rather it good: him do could that gaiety
her seek to impelled still himself found he for afterwards, and
the of speaking of manner her by him pained absolutely had she again,
had They belonging. of point the on now was he which to profession
ridiculed; had she reasoned, had he silent; been had they and talked,
to able not Fanny, vexation. mutual with last at parted had they and
tolerably be to enough seen had them, observing from entirely refrain
Yet suffering. was Edmund when happy be to barbarous was It satisfied.
did he that conviction very the from arise would and must happiness some
suffer.

for strength and inclination her over, were him with dances two her When
walk her seen having Thomas, Sir and end; an at well pretty were more
hand her with and breathless, set, shortening the down dance than rather
that From entirely. down sitting her for orders his gave side, her at
likewise. down sat Crawford Mr. time

and her, visit to moment a for coming William, cried Fanny!” “Poor
knocked is she soon “how life, for if as fan partner’s his away working
these up it keep shall we hope I begun. just but is sport the Why, up!
soon?” so tired be you can How hours. two

all with watch his producing Thomas, Sir said friend,” good my soon! “So
to used not is sister your and o’clock, three is “it caution; necessary
hours.” of sort these

as Sleep go. I before to-morrow up get not shall you Fanny, then, “Well,
me.” mind never and can, you as long

William.” “Oh!

off?” set you before up being of think she Did “What!

nearer be to seat her from eagerly rising Fanny, cried sir,” yes, “Oh!
last the be will It him. with breakfast and up get must “I uncle; her
morning.” last the know; you time,

half-past by gone be and breakfasted have to is He not. better had “You
nine?” half-past at him for call you think I Crawford, Mr. nine.

for eyes her in tears many too had and however, urgent, too was Fanny
permission. was which well!” “Well, gracious a in ended it and denial;

was latter the as William to Crawford said nine,” half-past “Yes,
sister kind no be will there for punctual, be shall I “and them, leaving
only have shall “I Fanny, to tone lower a in And _me_.” for up get to
time of ideas my find will brother Your from. hurry to house desolate a
to-morrow.” different very own his and

early the join to Crawford asked Thomas Sir consideration, short a After
himself should he alone: eating of instead house that in party breakfast
accepted was invitation his which with readiness the and it; of be
himself, to confess must he whence, suspicions the that him convinced
Mr. founded. well were sprung, measure great in had ball very this
what of anticipation pleasing a had He Fanny. with love in was Crawford
just had he what for him thank not did meanwhile, niece, His be. would
It morning. last the herself to all William have to hoped had She done.
wishes her though But indulgence. unspeakable an been have would
the On her. within murmuring of spirit no was there overthrown, were
or consulted, pleasure her have to unused totally so was she contrary,
she that desire, could she way the in all at place take anything have to
so point her carried having in rejoice and wonder to disposed more was
followed. which counteraction the at repine to than far,

her with little a interfering again was Thomas Sir afterward, Shortly
his was “Advise” bed. to immediately go to her advising by inclination,
to only had she and power, absolute of advice the was it but word,
away; quietly pass adieus, cordial very Crawford’s Mr. with and, rise,
“one Hall, Branxholm of Lady the like entrance-door, the at stopping
at look last a take and scene, happy the view to more,” no and moment
then, and work; at hard still were who couple determined six or five the
ceaseless the by pursued staircase, principal the up slowly creeping
negus, and soup fears, and hopes with feverish country-dance,
spite in feeling, yet agitated, and restless fatigued, and sore-footed
delightful. indeed was ball a that everything, of

thinking be not might perhaps Thomas Sir away, her sending thus In
been had Crawford Mr. that him to occur might It health. her of merely
wife a as her recommend to mean might he or enough, long her by sitting
persuadableness. her shewing by



XXIX CHAPTER

kiss last the too; over soon was breakfast the and over, was ball The
been foretold, he as had, Crawford Mr. gone. was William and given, was
meal. the been had pleasant and short and punctual, very

the to back walked Fanny moment, last the to William seeing After
melancholy the over grieve to heart saddened very a with breakfast-room
conceiving, peace, in cry to her left kindly uncle her there and change;
her exercise might man young each of chair deserted the that perhaps,
in mustard and bones pork cold remaining the that and enthusiasm, tender
egg-shells broken the with feelings her divide but might plate William’s
uncle her as _amore_ _con_ cried and sat She Crawford’s. Mr. in
was William other. no and fraternal _amore_ _con_ was it but intended,
cares idle in visit his half wasted had she if as felt now she and gone,
him. with unconnected solicitudes selfish and

her of think even never could she that such was disposition Fanny’s
house, small own her of cheerlessness and meagreness the in Norris aunt
her to attention of want little some for herself reproaching without
acquit feelings her could less much together; last been had they when
was that William by everything thought and said and done having of her
fortnight. whole a for him to due

Edmund breakfast, second the after Soon day. melancholy heavy, a was It
Peterborough, for horse his mounted and week, a for good-bye them bade
remembrances, but night last of remained Nothing gone. were all then and
Bertram--she aunt her to talked She in. share to nobody had she which
of little so seen had aunt her but ball; the of somebody to talk must
work. heavy was it that curiosity, little so had and passed, had what
at place anybody’s or dress anybody’s of certain not was Bertram Lady
had she that was it what recollect not could “She own. her but supper
Prescott Lady that was it what or Maddoxes, Miss the of one about heard
been had Harrison Colonel whether sure not was she Fanny: in noticed had
finest the was he said he when William of or Crawford Mr. of talking
had she her; to something whispered had room--somebody the in man young
longest her were these And be.” could it what Thomas Sir ask to forgot
“Yes, languid a only was rest the communications: clearest and speeches
know not should I _that_; see not did I he? did you? did well; very yes;
Mrs. than better only was It bad. very was This other.” the from one
with home gone being she but been; have would answers sharp Norris’s
peace was there maid, sick a nurse to jellies supernumerary the all
much boast not could it though party, little their in good-humour and
beside.

matter the is what think cannot “I day. the like heavy was evening The
feel “I removed. were tea-things the when Bertram, Lady said me,” with
must you Fanny, night. last late so up sitting be must It stupid. quite
so feel I cards; the Fetch work. cannot I awake. me keep to something do
stupid.” very

till aunt her with cribbage at played Fanny and brought, were cards The
were sounds no himself, to reading was Thomas Sir as and bedtime;
the of reckonings the beyond hours two next the for room the in heard
You crib. in eight and hand in four thirty-one; makes _that_ game--“And
thought and thought Fanny you?” for deal I shall ma’am; deal, to are
room, that in made had hours twenty-four which difference the of again
smiles, and hope been had it night Last house. the of part that all and
out and drawing-room, the in brilliancy, and noise motion, and bustle
but all and languor, was it Now everywhere. and drawing-room, the of
solitude.

the William of think could She spirits. her improved rest night’s good A
opportunity an her afforded morning the as and cheerfully; more day next
a in Crawford, Miss and Grant Mrs. with night Thursday over talking of
and imagination, of heightenings the all with style, handsome very
a of shade the to essential so are which playfulness of laughs the all
effort much without mind her bring afterwards could she ball, departed
the of tranquillity the to conform easily and state, everyday its into
week. quiet present

for there known ever had she than party smaller a indeed were They
and comfort the whom on gone was _he_ and together, day whole a
depended. chiefly meal every and meeting family every of cheerfulness
gone; always be soon would He endured. be to learned be must this But
her with room same the in sit now could she that thankful was she and
them, answer even and questions, his receive voice, his hear uncle,
known. formerly had she as feelings wretched such without

the both on observation Thomas’s Sir was men,” young two our miss “We
after circle reduced very their formed they as day, second and first
was more nothing eyes, swimming Fanny’s of consideration in and dinner;
the on but health; good their drink to than day first the on said
and commended kindly was William farther. something to led it second
Sir added suppose,” to reason no is there “And for. hoped promotion his
to As frequent. tolerably be now may us to visits his that “but Thomas,
of winter last the be will This him. without do to learn must we Edmund,
done.” has he as us, to belonging his

are They away. going not was he wish I “but Bertram, Lady said “Yes,”
home.” at stay would they wish I think. I away, going all

for applied just had who Julia, at principally levelled was wish This
best it thought Thomas Sir as and Maria; with town to go to permission
Bertram, Lady granted, be should permission the that daughter each for
was it, prevented have not would she good-nature own her in though
which return, Julia’s of prospect the in made it change the lamenting
good of deal great A time. this about place taken have otherwise would
to wife his reconcile to tending side, Thomas’s Sir on followed sense
feel to _ought_ parent considerate a that Everything arrangement. the
mother affectionate an that everything and use; her for advanced was
her to attributed was enjoyment children’s her promoting in feel _must_
end the at and “Yes”; calm a with all it to agreed Bertram Lady nature.
observed, spontaneously consideration silent hour’s an of quarter a of
as Fanny took we glad very am I thinking--and been have I Thomas, “Sir
it.” of good the feel we away are others the now for did, we

true. “Very adding, by compliment this improved immediately Thomas Sir
face, her to her praising by her think we girl good a what Fanny shew We
she _her_, to kind been have we If companion. valuable very a now is she
_us_.” to necessary as quite now is

that think to comfort a is it “and presently; Bertram Lady said “Yes,”
_her_.” have always shall we

gravely then and niece, his at glanced smiled, half paused, Thomas Sir
other some to invited till hope, I us, leave never will “She replied,
knows she than happiness greater her promise reasonably may that home
here.”

her? invite should Who Thomas. Sir be, to likely very not is _that_ “And
she but then, and now Sotherton at her see to glad very be might Maria
better is she sure am I and there; live to her asking of think not would
her.” without do cannot I besides, and here; off

in house great the at peaceably and quietly so passed which week The
young the To Parsonage. the at character different very a had Mansfield
What feelings. different very brought it family, each in least, at lady,
to vexation and tediousness was Fanny to comfort and tranquillity was
so one habit: and disposition of difference from arose Something Mary.
be might more still but endure; to unused so other the satisfied, easily
they interest of points some In circumstances. of difference to imputed
absence Edmund’s mind, Fanny’s To other. each to opposed exactly were
was it Mary To relief. a tendency, its and cause its in really, was
almost day, every society his of want the felt She painful. way every
but anything derive to it of want in much too was and hour, every
not could He went. he which for object the considering from irritation
this than consequence his raise to likely more anything devised have
brother’s her of time very the at did it as occurring absence, week’s
of sort the completing and too, going Price’s William of away, going
it felt She animated. so been had which party a of break-up general
a by doors within confined trio, miserable a now were They keenly.
for. hope to variety no and do to nothing with snow, and rain of series
acting and notions, own his to adhering for Edmund with was she as Angry
had they that angry so been had she (and her of defiance in them on
of thinking help not could she ball), the at friends parted hardly
and affection, and merit his on dwelling absent, when continually him
absence His had. lately they meetings daily almost the for again longing
absence--he an such planned have not should He long. unnecessarily was
from departure own her when week, a for home left have not should
she wished She herself. blame to began she Then near. so was Mansfield
she afraid was She conversation. last their in warmly so spoken not had
the of speaking in expressions contemptuous some strong, some used had
wrong. was it ill-bred; was It been. have not should that and clergy,
heart. her all with unsaid words such wished She

had she but bad, was this All week. the with end not did vexation Her
Edmund; no brought and again round came Friday when feel to more still
slight the through when, and Edmund; no still and came Saturday when
learned she produced, Sunday which family other the with communication
promised having return, his defer to home written actually had he that
friend. his with longer days some remain to

for sorry been had she before--if regret and impatience felt had she If
felt now him--she on effect strong too its feared and said, she what
one with contend to moreover, had, She more. tenfold all it feared and
Mr. friend His her--jealousy. to new entirely emotion disagreeable
his rate, any at But, attractive. them find might he sisters; had Owen
was she plans, preceding all to according when, time a at away staying
Henry Had bear. not could she that something meant London, to remove to
she days, four or three of end the at doing, of talked he as returned,
necessary absolutely became It Mansfield. leaving been have now should
not could She more. something learn to try and Fanny to get to her for
way her made she and wretchedness; solitary such in longer any live
deemed had she which walking of difficulties through Park, the to
in little a hearing of chance the for before, week a unconquerable
name. his hearing least at of sake the for addition,

together, were Bertram Lady and Fanny for lost, was half-hour first The
But nothing. for hope could she herself to Fanny had she unless and
Miss immediately almost then and room, the left Bertram Lady last at
could--“And she as regulated well as voice a with began, thus Crawford
the Being long? so away staying Edmund’s cousin your like _you_ do how
sufferer. greatest the as _you_ consider I home, at person young only
you?” surprise longer staying his Does him. miss must You

particularly not had I “Yes; hesitatingly. Fanny said know,” not do “I
it.” expected

general the is It of. talks he than longer stay always will he “Perhaps
do.” men young all way

before.” Owen Mr. see to went he time only the not, did “He

pleasing very very--a a is He _now_. agreeable more house the finds “He
not at concerned rather being help cannot I and himself, man young
the be undoubtedly now will as London, to go I before again him seeing
there comes he as soon as and day, every Henry for looking am I case.
seen have to like should I Mansfield. at me detain to nothing be will
Yes; him. to compliments my give must you But confess. I more, once him
wanted, something a there not Is compliments. be must it think I
and--and compliments between something language--a our in Price, Miss
So together? had have we acquaintance friendly of sort the suit love--to
here. sufficient be may compliments But acquaintance! months’ many
is he what of account much you give he Does one? long a letter his Was
for?” staying is he that gaieties Christmas it Is doing?

believe I but uncle; my to was it letter; the of part a heard only “I
I that All lines. few a but was it sure am I indeed short; very was it
he that and longer, stay to him pressed had friend his that was heard
am I longer; days _some_ or longer, days _few_ A so. do to agreed had
which.” sure quite not

Lady to been have might it thought I but father; his to wrote he if “Oh!
concise. was he wonder no father, his to wrote he if But you. or Bertram
there you, to written had he If Thomas? Sir to chat write could Who
balls of heard have would You particulars. more been have would
and everything of description a you sent have would He parties. and
there?” are Owens Miss many How everybody.

up.” grown “Three

musical?” they “Are

heard.” never I know. all at not do “I

to trying Crawford, Miss said know,” you question, first the is “That
sure is herself plays who woman every “which unconcerned, and gay appear
about questions ask to foolish very is it But another. about ask to
knows, one for up; grown just sisters three any ladies--about young any
and accomplished very all are: they what exactly told, being without
is it family; every in beauty a is There pretty. very one and pleasing,
and harp; the on one and pianoforte, the on play Two thing. regular a
for better the all sing or taught, were they if sing would or sing, all
it.” like something or taught; being not

calmly. Fanny said Owens,” Miss the of nothing know “I

tone did Never say. people as less, care you and nothing know “You
has one those for care one can how Indeed, plainer. indifference express
Mansfield find will he back, comes cousin your when Well, seen? never
I myself. and mine and brother your gone, ones noisy the all quiet; very
She near. draws time the now Grant Mrs. leaving of idea the like not do
going.” my like not does

by missed being your doubt cannot “You speak. to obliged felt Fanny
missed.” much very be will “You she. said many,”

more, see or hear to wanting if as her, on eye her turned Crawford Miss
missed is evil noisy every as missed yes! “Oh said, laughingly then and
I But felt. difference great a is there is, that away; taken is it when
appear. will it missed, _am_ I If me. compliment don’t fishing; not am
any in be not shall I me. see to want who those by discovered be may I
region.” unapproachable or distant, or doubtful,

was Crawford Miss and speak, to herself bring not could Fanny Now
her of assurance pleasant some hear to hoped had she for disappointed;
clouded were spirits her and know, must thought she who one from power
again.

have to were you “suppose afterwards; soon she, said Owens,” Miss “The
it? like you should how Lacey; Thornton at settled Owens Miss the of one
And it. for trying are they say dare I happened. have things Stranger
establishment pretty very a be would it for right, the in quite are they
duty everybody’s is It them. blame or wonder all at not do I them. for
is son Bertram’s Thomas Sir can. they as themselves for well as do to
clergyman, a is father Their line. own their in is he now and somebody;
together. clergymen all are they and clergyman, a is brother their and
speak, don’t You them. to belongs fairly he property; lawful their is He
rather you not do now, honestly But speak. don’t you Price, Miss Fanny;
otherwise?” than it expect

all.” at it expect not do “I stoutly, Fanny said “No,”

But that. at wonder “I alacrity. with Crawford Miss cried all!” at “Not
do you are--perhaps you imagine always exactly--I know you say dare I
present.” at not all--or at marry to likely him think not

the in either err not did she hoping softly, Fanny said not,” do I “No,
it. of acknowledgment the or belief

from spirit greater gathering and keenly; her at looked companion Her
as off best is “He said, only look, a such from produced soon blush the
subject. the turned and is,” he



XXX CHAPTER

and conversation, this by lightened much was uneasiness Crawford’s Miss
another almost defied have might which spirits in again home walked she
put been they had weather, bad same the in party small same the of week
from down brother her brought evening very that as but proof; the to
she cheerfulness, usual his quite, than more or quite, in again London
what her tell to refusing still His own. her try to farther nothing had
might it before day a gaiety; of promotion the but was for gone had he
of only joke--suspected pleasant a was it now but irritated, have
the And herself. to surprise pleasant a as planned something concealing
just should he said had Henry her. to surprise a bring _did_ day next
but minutes, ten in back be and did, they how Bertrams the ask and go
for waiting been had who sister, his when and hour; an above gone was he
in impatiently most last at him met garden, the in her with walk to him
been have you can where Henry, dear “My out, cried and sweep, the
Lady with sitting been had he that say to only had he time?” this all
Fanny. and Bertram

Mary. exclaimed half!” a and hour an them with “Sitting

surprise. her of beginning the only was this But

along walking and his, within arm her drawing he, said Mary,” “Yes,
sooner; away get not could “I was: he where knowing not if as sweep the
entirely is mind My Mary. determined, quite am I lovely! so looked Fanny
quite am I that aware be must you No: you? astonish it Will up. made
Price.” Fanny marry to determined

his whatever of spite in for, complete; now was surprise The
views such any having his of suspicion a suggest, might consciousness
the truly so looked she and imagination; sister’s his entered never had
said, had he what repeat to obliged was he that felt, she astonishment
determination his of conviction The solemnly. more and fully more and
the with pleasure even was There unwelcome. not was it admitted, once
the with connexion a in rejoice to mind of state a in was Mary surprise.
a marrying brother’s her with displeased not be to and family, Bertram
him. beneath little

caught. fairly am “I assurance. concluding Henry’s was Mary,” “Yes,
them. of end the is this but began; I designs idle what with know You
her in progress inconsiderable no made myself, flatter I have, I
fixed.” entirely are own my but affections;

a “what speak; could she as soon as Mary, cried girl!” lucky “Lucky,
but feeling; _first_ my be must this Henry, dearest My her! for match
your approve I that is, sincerely, as have shall you which _second_, my
wish I as heartily as happiness your foresee and soul, my from choice
and gratitude all wife; little sweet a have will You it. desire and
Mrs. her! for match amazing an What deserve. you what Exactly devotion.
delight The now? say she will what luck; her of talks often Norris
How it! in friends _true_ some has she And indeed! family, the all of
When ever. for me to Talk it! about all me tell But rejoice! will _they_
her?” about seriously think to begin you did

though question, a such answer to than impossible more be could Nothing
pleasing the “How asked. it have to than agreeable more be could nothing
expressed had he before and say; not could he him” on stolen had plague
over, times three words of variation little a with sentiment same the
this and Henry, dear my “Ah, with, him interrupted eagerly sister his
consult to chose You business! your was This London! to you took what is
mind.” your up made you before Admiral the

on him consult to well too uncle his knew He denied. stoutly he this But
never it thought and marriage, hated Admiral The scheme. matrimonial any
fortune. independent of man young a in pardonable

her. on doat will “he Henry, continued him,” to known is Fanny “When
as man a such of prejudice every away do to woman the exactly is She
delicacy now has he indeed if describe, would he she for Admiral, the
absolutely is it till But ideas. own his embody to enough language of
the of nothing know shall he interference, all beyond settled--settled
my discovered not have You mistaken. quite are you Mary, No, matter.
yet.” business

am and relate, must it whom to now know I satisfied. am I well, “Well,
That wonderful! quite wonderful, Price! Fanny rest. the for hurry no in
found have should _you_ for--that much so done have should Mansfield
have not could you right; quite are you But Mansfield! in fate your
not do you and world, the in girl better a not is There better. chosen
The good. than more are they connexions, her to as and fortune; for want
She country. this in people first the of some undoubtedly are Bertrams
But world. the for enough be will that Bertram; Thomas Sir to niece is
own her know she Does plans? your are What more. me Tell on. go on, go
happiness?”

“No.”

for?” waiting you are “What

her like not is she Mary, opportunity. than more little very “For--for
vain.” in ask not shall I think I but cousins;

to not her pleasing--supposing less even you Were cannot. you no! “Oh
would doubt)--you little have can I however, which, (of already you love
secure would disposition her of gratitude and gentleness The safe. be
would she think not do I soul my From immediately. own your all her
world the in girl a is there if is, that love; _without_ you marry
ask but her; it suppose can I ambition, by uninfluenced being of capable
refuse.” to heart the have never will she and you, love to her

tell to happy as was he silence, in rest could eagerness her as soon As
deeply as almost followed conversation a and listen; to be could she as
to nothing fact in had he though himself, to as her to interesting
charms. Fanny’s but on dwell to nothing sensations, own his but relate
goodness and manner of graces Fanny’s figure, and face of beauty Fanny’s
and modesty, gentleness, The theme. exhaustless the were heart, of
sweetness that on; expatiated warmly were character her of sweetness
judgment the in worth woman’s every of part a essential so makes which
never can he not, is it where loves sometimes he though that man, of
and on depend to reason good had he temper Her absent. it believe
family, the of one there Was tried. it seen often had He praise. to
exercised continually other or way some in not had who Edmund, excepting
To strong. evidently were affections Her forbearance? and patience her
the that prove delightfully more could What brother! her with her see
more be could What gentleness? its to equal was heart her of warmth
understanding her Then, view? in love her had who man a to encouraging
the were manners her and clear; and quick suspicion, every beyond was
Henry all. this was Nor mind. elegant and modest own her of mirror
principles good of worth the feel to not sense much too had Crawford
to reflection serious to accustomed little too was he though wife, a in
a such having her of talked he when but name; proper their by them know
and honour, of notion high a such conduct, of regularity and steadiness
fullest the in man any warrant might as decorum of observance an such
by inspired was what expressed he integrity, and faith her on dependence
religious. and principled well being her of knowledge the

_that_ “and he; said her,” in confide absolutely and wholly so could “I
want.” I what is

of opinion his that did really she as believing sister, his might Well
prospects. her in rejoice merits, her beyond scarcely was Price Fanny

you that convinced I am more “the cried, she it,” of think I more “The
Fanny selected have never should I though and right; quite doing are
is she persuaded now am I you, attach to likely most girl the as Price
turns peace her upon project wicked Your happy. you make to one very the
it.” in good your find both will You indeed. thought clever a out

know not did I but creature; a such against me in bad very bad, was “It
put first that hour the lament to reason no have shall she and then; her
has she than happier Mary; happy, very her make will I head. my into it
her take not will I else. anybody seen ever or herself, been yet ever
this in place a rent and Everingham, let shall I Northamptonshire. from
lease years’ seven a let shall I Lodge. Stanwix perhaps neighbourhood;
could I word. a half at tenant excellent an of sure am I Everingham. of
me.” thank and terms own my me give would who now, people three name

we Then pleasant! is That Northamptonshire! in “settle Mary; cried “Ha!”
together.” all be shall

unsaid; it wished and herself, recollected she it, spoken had she When
the as only her saw brother her for confusion; of need no was there but
in her invite to but replied and parsonage, Mansfield of inmate supposed
her. in right best the claim to and house, own his to manner kindest the

admit cannot “I he. said time,” your half than more us give must “You
shall we for myself, and Fanny with claim equal an have to Grant Mrs.
sister!” your truly so be will Fanny you. in right a have both

was she but assurances; general give and grateful be to only had Mary
sister nor brother neither of guest the be to purposed fully very now
longer. months many

Northamptonshire?” and London between year your divide will “You

“Yes.”

longer no own: your of house a course, of London, in and right; “That’s
away getting of you to advantage the Henry, dearest My Admiral. the with
his, of contagion the by hurt are manners your before Admiral the from
to learned or opinions, foolish his of any contracted have you before
are _You_ life! of blessing best the were it if as dinner your over sit
but, you; blinded has him for regard your for gain, the of sensible not
have To you. of saving the be may early marrying your estimation, my in
would gesture, or look deed, or word in Admiral the like grow you seen
heart.” my broken have

his has Admiral The here. alike quite think not do we well, “Well,
to father a than more been has and man, good very a is he but faults,
must You much. so half way own my have me let have would fathers Few me.
another.” one love them have must I him. against Fanny prejudice not

two be not could there that felt, she what saying from refrained Mary
accordant: less were manners and characters whose existence in persons
reflection _this_ help not could she but him; to it discover would time
I if that Price, Fanny of highly so think I “Henry, Admiral. the on
which reason the half have would Crawford Mrs. next the suppose could
the prevent would I name, very the abhor to had aunt ill-used poor my
_loved_ you wife a that know I you: know I but possible; if marriage,
to ceased you when even that and women, of happiest the be would
a of good-breeding and liberality the you in find yet would she love,
gentleman.”

Fanny make to world the in everything doing not of impossibility The
the course of was Price, Fanny love to ceasing of or happy, Price
answer. eloquent his of groundwork

with “attending continued, he Mary,” morning, this her seen you “Had
aunt’s her of demands the all to patience and sweetness ineffable such
beautifully colour her her, for and her, with working stupidity,
to seat her to returning then work, the over leant she as heightened
that for writing in engaged previously was she which note a finish
gentleness, unpretending such with this all and service, woman’s stupid
a have to not was she that course of matter a were it if as much so
is, always it as neatly as arranged hair her command, own her at moment
then and now she which wrote, she as forward falling curl little one and
to intervals at speaking still this, all of midst the in and back, shook
Had said. I what to listen, to liked she if as and listening, or _me_,
her of possibility the implied have not would you Mary, so, her seen you
ceasing.” ever heart my over power

face, his in smiling and short, stopping Mary, cried Henry,” dearest “My
But me. delights quite It love! in much so you see to am I glad “how
say?” Julia and Rushworth Mrs. will what

what see now will They feel. they what nor say they what neither care “I
sense. of man a attach can that me, attach can that is it woman of sort
their see now will they And good. any them do may discovery the wish I
heartily be may they wish I and be, to ought she as treated cousin
be will They unkindness. and neglect abominable own their of ashamed
“Mrs. tone; cooler a in and silence, moment’s a after added, he angry,”
is, that her; to pill bitter a be will It angry. very be will Rushworth
then and flavour, ill moments’ two have will it pills, bitter other like
suppose to as coxcomb a such not am I for forgotten; and swallowed be
object the was _I_ though women’s, other than lasting more feelings her
daily, a indeed: difference a feel will Fanny my Mary, Yes, them. of
her; approaches who being every of behaviour the in difference, hourly
doer the am I that know to happiness my of completion the be will it and
due. her justly so consequence the give to person the am I that it, of
forgotten.” neglected, friendless, helpless, dependent, is she Now

or friendless not all; by forgotten not all; by not Henry, “Nay,
her.” forgets never Edmund cousin Her forgotten.

and her, to kind speaking, generally is, he believe I True, “Edmund!
superior, rich, a of way the is it but way; his in Thomas Sir is so
together Edmund and Thomas Sir can What uncle. arbitrary long-worded,
in dignity and honour, comfort, happiness, her for _do_ they do what do,
do?” _shall_ I what to world, the



XXXI CHAPTER

an at and morning, next the again Park Mansfield at was Crawford Henry
together were ladies two The warrants. visiting common than hour earlier
the on was Bertram Lady him, for fortunately and, breakfast-room, the in
and door, the at almost was She entered. he as it quitting of point very
went still she vain, in trouble much so take to means any by chusing not
for, waited being about sentence short a reception, civil a after on,
servant. the to know” Thomas Sir “Let a and

without and off, her watched and bowed go, her have to overjoyed Henry,
some out taking and, Fanny, to instantly turned moment, another losing
myself acknowledge must “I look, animated most a with said, letters,
opportunity an such me gives who creature any to obliged infinitely
any have can you than more it wishing been have I alone: you seeing of
hardly could I are, sister a as feelings your what do I as Knowing idea.
the in you with share should house the in one any that borne have
a is brother Your made. is He bring. now I news the of knowledge first
on you congratulating of satisfaction infinite the have I lieutenant.
this it, announce which letters the are Here promotion. brother’s your
them.” see to like perhaps, will, You hand. to come moment

the see To speak. to her want not did he but speak, not could Fanny
of progress the complexion, her of change the eyes, her of expression
took She enough. was felicity, and confusion, doubt, their feelings, her
inform to Admiral the from was first The them. gave he as letters the
had he object the in succeeded having his of words, few a in nephew, his
one more, two enclosing and Price, young of promotion the undertaken,
had Admiral the whom friend, a to Lord First the of Secretary the from
himself, to friend that from other the business, the in work to set
of happiness great very the had lordship his that appeared it which by
was Charles Sir that Charles; Sir of recommendation the to attending
regard his proving of opportunity an such having in delighted much
Price’s William Mr. of circumstance the that and Crawford, Admiral for
was out made being Thrush Sloop H.M. of Lieutenant Second as commission
people. great of circle wide a through joy general spreading

from running eye her letters, these under trembling was hand her While
thus Crawford emotion, with swelling heart her and other, the to one
the in interest his express to eagerness, unfeigned with continued,
event--

I for is, it as “great he, said happiness,” own my of talk not will “I
I happy? be to right a has who you, with Compared yours. of only think
to ought you what of knowledge prior own my myself grudged almost have
however. moment, a lost not have I world. the all before known have
moment’s a since been not has there but morning, this late was post The
subject, the on been have I wild how anxious, how impatient, How delay.
cruelly how mortified, severely how describe; to attempt not will I
was I London! in was I while finished it having not in disappointed,
dear less nothing for it, of hope the in day to day from there kept
from time the half me detained have would object an such than me to
the all with wishes my into entered uncle my though But Mansfield.
were there immediately, himself exerted and desire, could I warmth
of engagements the and friend, one of absence the from difficulties
and of, end the stay to bear longer no could I last at which another,
Monday, on away came I cause, the left I hands good what in knowing
by followed be should I before pass not would posts many that trusting
in man best very the is who uncle, My these. as letters very such
your seeing after would, he knew I as himself, exerted has world, the
yesterday myself allow not would I him. with delighted was He brother.
his in said Admiral the that half repeat to or delighted, how say to
of praise the proved be should praise his till all it deferred I praise.
could I even that say may I _Now_ it. prove _does_ day this as friend, a
followed be or interest, greater a excite to Price William require not
voluntarily most were than commendation, higher and wishes warmer by
together.” passed had they evening the after uncle my by bestowed

how heaven! “Good Fanny. cried then?” doing, _your_ all been this “Has
your beg I desire? _your_ by it really--was you Have kind! very very,
I it? was How apply? Crawford Admiral Did bewildered. am I but pardon,
stupefied.” am

an at beginning by intelligible, more it make to happy most was Henry
His done. had he what particularly very explaining and stage, earlier
that than view other no with undertaken been had London to journey last
Admiral the on prevailing and Street, Hill in brother her introducing of
had This on. him getting for have might he interest whatever exert to
not had he creature: no to it communicated had He business. his been
issue, the of uncertain while Mary; to even it of syllable a breathed
had this but feelings, his of participation any borne have not could he
solicitude his what of glow a such with spoke he and business; his been
the in abounding so was expressions, strong such used and been, had
_wishes_ _and_ _views_ in _motives_, _twofold_ in _interest_, _deepest_
remained have not could Fanny that _told_, _be_ _could_ _than_ _more_
was heart her but attend; to able been she had drift, his of insensible
but listen could she that astonished, so still senses her and full so
when only saying and William, of her told he what to even imperfectly
infinitely are we Crawford, Mr. Oh, kind! very how kind! “How paused, he
in moved and up jumped She William!” dearest Dearest, you! to obliged
uncle My uncle. my to go will “I out, crying door, the towards haste
suffered. be not could this But possible.” as soon as it know to ought
was He impatient. too feelings his and fair, too was opportunity The
minutes five him allow must she go, not must “She immediately. her after
in was and seat, her to back her led and hand her took he and longer,”
what for suspected had she before explanation, farther his of middle the
herself found and however, it, understand did she When detained. was she
had heart his which sensations created had she that believe to expected
to was William for done had he everything that and before, known never
attachment unequalled and excessive his of account the to placed be
unable moments some for and distressed, exceedingly was she her, to
and trifling mere as nonsense, as all it considered She speak. to
but not could she hour; the for deceive to only meant which gallantry,
a such in and unworthily, and improperly her treating was it that feel
a of entirely and himself, like was it but deserved; not had she as way
to herself allow not would she and before; seen had she what with piece
an conferring been had he because felt, she displeasure the half shew
trifle a make could part his on delicacy of want no which obligation,
on gratitude and joy with bounding still was heart her While her. to
that anything of resentful severely be not could she behalf, William’s
and hand, her back drawn twice having after and herself; only injured
said and up, got she him, from away turn to vain in attempted twice
you beg I don’t! pray Crawford, Mr. “Don’t, agitation, much with only,
I me. to unpleasant very is which talking of sort a is This not. would
describing on, talking still was he But it.” bear cannot I away. go must
as plain so words in finally, and, return, a soliciting affection, his
fortune, hand, himself, offering her, to even meaning one but bear to
Her it. said had he so; was It acceptance. her to everything,
knowing not still though and increased; confusion and astonishment
an for pressed He stand. hardly could she serious, him suppose to how
answer.

not Do nonsense. all is “This face. her hiding cried, she no!” no, “No,
makes William to kindness Your this. of more no hear can I me. distress
I want, not do I but express; can words than you to obliged more me
But me. of think don’t no, such--No, to listen not must I bear, cannot
nothing.” all is it know I me. of thinking _not_ are you

heard was Thomas Sir moment that at and him, from away burst had She
was It in. were they room the towards way his in servant a to speaking
at her with part to though entreaty, or assurances farther for time no
preassured and sanguine his to seemed, alone modesty her when moment a
cruel a was sought, he happiness the of way the in stand to mind,
uncle her one the from door opposite an at out rushed She necessity.
the in room East the down and up walking was and approaching, was
politeness Thomas’s Sir before feeling, contrary of confusion utmost
joyful the of beginning the reached had he or over, were apologies or
communicate. to came visitor his which intelligence

happy, agitated, everything; about trembling thinking, feeling, was She
beyond all was It angry. absolutely obliged, infinitely miserable,
habits his were such But incomprehensible! inexcusable, was He belief!
previously had He evil. of mixture a without nothing do could he that
knew insulted--she had he now and beings, human of happiest the her made
have not would She it. regard to how or class, to how say, to what not
and words such of use the excuse could what yet and serious, be him
trifle? to but meant they if offers,

and doubt, a beyond fact a was _That_ lieutenant. a was William But
the all forget and ever for it of think would She alloy. an without
must he again: so her address never certainly would Crawford Mr. rest.
gratefully how case, that in and her; to was it unwelcome how seen have
William! to friendship his for him esteem could she

great the of head the than room East the from farther stir not would She
left having Crawford’s Mr. of herself satisfied had she till staircase,
go to eager was she gone, being his of convinced when but house; the
joy his of happiness the all have and uncle, her with be and down
his or information his of benefit the all and own, her as well as
Thomas Sir destination. William’s be now would what to as conjectures
and communicative; and kind very and desire, could she as joyful as was
her make to as William about him with talk a comfortable so had she
the towards found, she till her, vex to occurred had nothing if as feel
that there dine and return to engaged was Crawford Mr. that close,
think might he though for hearing, unwelcome most a was This day. very
see to her to distressing quite be would it passed, had what of nothing
soon. so again him

hour dinner the as hard, very tried it; of better the get to tried She
for impossible quite was it but usual; as appear and feel to approached,
entered visitor their when uncomfortable and shy most look to not her
concurrence any of power the in it supposed have not could She room. the
day first the on sensations painful many so her give to circumstances of
promotion. William’s of hearing of

He her. to close soon was room--he the in only not was Crawford Mr.
but him, at look not could Fanny sister. his from deliver to note a had
her opened She voice. his in folly past of consciousness no was there
read she as happy, and do, to anything have to glad immediately, note
dine to also was who Norris, aunt her of fidgetings the that feel to it,
view. from little a her screened there,

infinite the to you, call always now may I so Fanny,--for dear “My
at for _Price_ _Miss_ at stumbling been has that tongue a of relief
you sending without go brother my let cannot weeks--I six last the least
consent joyful most my giving and congratulation, general of lines few a
no be can there fear; without and Fanny, dear my on, Go approval. and
my of assurance the that suppose to chuse I naming. worth difficulties
sweetest your with him upon smile may you so something; be will consent
he than happier even me to back him send and afternoon, this smiles
C.” M. affectionately, goes.--Yours

read she though for good; any Fanny do to expressions not were These
Miss of judgment clearest the form to confusion and haste much too in
on her compliment to meant she that evident was it meaning, Crawford’s
serious. it believe to _appear_ to even and attachment, brother’s her
in wretchedness was There think. to what or do, to what know not did She
every agitation and perplexity was there serious; being its of idea the
spoke he and her, to spoke Crawford Mr. whenever distressed was She way.
his in something a was there afraid was she and often; too much her to
were they what from different very her addressing in manner and voice
was dinner day’s that in comfort Her others. the to talked he when
Thomas Sir when and anything; eat hardly could she destroyed: quite
she appetite, her away taken had joy that observed good-humouredly
Crawford’s Mr. of dread the from shame, with sink to ready was
turn to her tempted have could nothing though for interpretation;
were _his_ that felt she sat, he where hand, right the to eyes her
her. towards directed immediately

William when even join hardly would She ever. than silent more was She
too, hand right the from all came commission his for subject, the was
connexion. the in pain was there and

in be to began and ever, than longer sat Bertram Lady thought She
drawing-room, the in were they last at but away; getting ever of despair
the finished aunts her while would, she as think to able was she and
style. own their in appointment William’s of subject

to be would it saving the with delighted much as seemed Norris Mrs.
keep to able be would William “_Now_ it. of part any with as Thomas Sir
was it for uncle, his to difference vast a make would which himself,
some make would it indeed, and, uncle; his cost had he much how unknown
given had she that glad very was She too. presents _her_ in difference
in been had it that indeed, glad, very parting, at did she what William
him give to time that at just inconvenience, material without power, her
limited _her_ with _her_, for is, that considerable; rather something
cabin. his up fit to helping in useful be all would it now for means,
to things many have would he that expense, some at be must he knew She
in him put to able be would mother and father his sure be to though buy,
had she glad very was she but cheap; very everything getting of way the
it.” towards mite her contributed

with Bertram, Lady said considerable,” something him gave you glad am “I
pounds.” 10 only him gave _I_ “for calmness, unsuspicious most

gone have must he word, my “Upon reddening. Norris, Mrs. cried “Indeed!”
to journey his for expense no at and lined, well pockets his with off
either!” London

enough.” be would pounds 10 me told Thomas “Sir

sufficiency, its question to inclined all at not being Norris, Mrs.
point. another in matter the take to began

friends, their cost people young much “how she, said amazing,” is “It
They world! the in out them putting and up them bringing with what
their or parents, their what or to, comes it much how think little
are here Now, year. the of course the in them for pay aunts, and uncles
nobody say dare I together, all them take children; Price’s sister my
nothing say to year, every Thomas Sir cost they sum a what believe would
them.” for do _I_ what of

help cannot they things! poor But, say. you as sister, true, “Very
Fanny, Thomas. Sir to difference little very makes it know you and it;
I and Indies; East the to goes he if shawl my forget not must William
I having. worth is that else anything for commission a him give shall
I think I shawl. my have may I that Indies, East the to go may he wish
Fanny.” shawls, two have will

very was it, help not could she when only speaking meanwhile, Fanny,
There at. were Crawford Miss and Mr. what understand to trying earnestly
words his but serious being their _against_ world the in everything was
it; against was reasonable, probable, natural, Everything manner. and
How demerits. own her all and thinking, of ways and habits their all
so seen had who man a in attachment serious excited have _she_ could
infinitely many, so with flirted and many, so by admired been and many,
even impressions, serious to open little so seemed who superiors; her
so slightly, so thought who him; please to taken been had pains where
to everything was who points; such all on unfeelingly so carelessly,
farther, And him? to essential one no find to seemed and everybody,
worldly and high her all with sister, his that supposed be it could how
nature serious a of anything forwarding be would matrimony, of notions
Fanny either. in unnatural more be could Nothing quarter? a such in
than rather possible be might Everything doubts. own her of ashamed was
had She her. toward it of approbation serious or attachment, serious
Crawford Mr. and Thomas Sir before this of herself convinced quite
so quite conviction the maintaining in was difficulty The them. joined
a twice or once for room; the in was Crawford Mr. after absolutely
the among class to how know not did she which her on forced seemed look
that said have would she least, at man, other any in meaning; common
to tried still she But pointed. very earnest, very something meant it
her towards expressed have often might he what than more no it believe
women. other fifty and cousins

She rest. the by unheard her to speak to wishing was he thought She
whenever intervals, at evening whole the it for trying was he fancied
and Norris, Mrs. with engaged all at or room, the of out was Thomas Sir
opportunity. every him refused carefully she

not though nervousness, Fanny’s to last at an seemed last--it At
the of comfort the but away; going of talk to began late--he remarkably
saying, and moment, next the her to turning his by impaired was sound
be will She note? her to answer No Mary? to send to nothing you “Have
it if her, to write Pray you. from nothing receives she if disappointed
line.” a only be

of haste the haste, in rising Fanny, cried certainly,” yes! “Oh
directly.” write will away--“I get to wanting of and embarrassment

writing of habit the in was she where table, the to accordingly went She
the in what knowing without materials her prepared and aunt, her for
to how and once, only note Crawford’s Miss read had She say. to world
distressing. most was understood imperfectly so anything to reply
for time been there had note-writing, of sort such in unpractised Quite
abundance: in them felt have would she style to as fears and scruples
decided one only with and written; instantly be must something but
really anything think to appear to not wishing of that feeling,
hand-- and spirits of both trembling great in thus, wrote she intended,

kind your for Crawford, Miss dear my you, to obliged much very am “I
rest The William. dearest my to relate they as far as congratulations,
of anything to unequal so am I but nothing; means know I note your of
farther no take to you begging my excuse will you hope I that sort, the
his understand to not Crawford Mr. of much too seen have I notice.
behave say, dare I would, he well, as me understood he if manners;
favour great a be would it but write, I what know not do I differently.
of honour the for thanks With again. subject the mention to never you of
etc.” etc., Crawford, Miss dear remain, I note, your

for fright, increasing from intelligible scarcely was conclusion The
was note, the receiving of pretence under Crawford, Mr. that found she
her. towards coming

undervoice, an in he, said you,” hurry to mean I think cannot “You
“you note, the up made she which with trepidation amazing the perceiving
entreat.” I yourself, hurry not Do object. such any have I think cannot

a in ready be will it done; just done, quite have I you; thank I “Oh!
give to as good so be will you if you; to obliged much very am I moment;
Crawford.” Miss to _that_

with and instantly she as and taken; be must and out, held was note The
had he others, the sat where fireplace, the towards walked eyes averted
earnest. good in go to but do to nothing

of both agitation, greater of day a known never had she thought Fanny
die to sort a of not was pleasure the happily but pleasure; and pain
William’s of knowledge the restore would day every for day; the with
had She more. no return would hoped, she pain, the whereas advancement,
that ill-written, excessively appear must note her that doubt no
no allowed had distress her for child, a disgrace would language the
neither being her of both them assure would it least at but arrangement;
attentions. Crawford’s Mr. by gratified nor on imposed



XXXII CHAPTER

next the awoke she when Crawford Mr. forgotten means no by had Fanny
less not was and note, her of purport the remembered she but morning;
Mr. If before. night the been had she than effect its to as sanguine
desired: earnestly most she what was That away! go but would Crawford
to returned he as and do, to was he as him, with sister his take and go
could she already done not was it why And do. to purpose on Mansfield
had Fanny delay. no wanted certainly Crawford Miss for devise, not
named; day the hear to visit, yesterday’s his of course the in hoped,
ere place take would what as journey their of spoken only had he but
long.

convey, would note her conviction the settled satisfactorily so Having
accidentally she as Crawford, Mr. see to astonished be but not could she
day the as early as hour an at and again, house the to up coming did,
avoid must she but her, with do to nothing have might coming His before.
resolved she upstairs, way her on then being and possible; if him seeing
sent actually unless visit, his of whole the during remain, to there
little seemed there house, the in still was Norris Mrs. as and for;
wanted. being her of danger

and trembling, listening, agitation, of deal good a in time some sat She
the approached footsteps no as but moment; every for sent be to fearing
to able be and down, sit could composed, gradually grew she room, East
go would and come had Crawford Mr. that hope to able and herself, employ
matter. the of anything know to obliged being her without

comfortable, very growing was she and passed, had hour an half Nearly
heavy a heard; was approach regular in step a of sound the suddenly when
she uncle’s; her was it house: the of part that in step unusual an step,
began and often, as it at trembled had she voice; his as well as it knew
whatever her, to speak to up coming his of idea the at again, tremble to
and door the opened who Thomas Sir indeed was It subject. the be might
his of terror The in. come might he if and there, were she if asked
felt she and renewed, all seemed room that to visits occasional former
English. and French in again her examine to going were he if as

trying and him, for chair a placing in however, attention, all was She
the overlooked quite had agitation, her in and, honoured; appear to
entered, he as short stopping he, till apartment, her of deficiencies
to-day?” fire no you have “Why surprise, much with said,

She shawl. a in sitting was she and ground, the on snow was There
hesitated.

year.” of time this at long here sit never I sir: cold, not am “I

general?” in fire a have you “But

sir.” “No,

you that understood I mistake. some be must Here about? this comes “How
comfortable. perfectly you making of way by room this of use the had
great some is Here fire. a have _cannot_ you know I bedchamber your In
to you for unfit highly is It rectified. be must which misapprehension
strong. not are You fire. a without day, a hour an half only it be sit,
this.” of aware be cannot aunt Your chilly. are You

she speak, to obliged being but silent; been have rather would Fanny
saying from best, loved she aunt the to justice in forbear, not could
distinguishable. were Norris” aunt “my words the which in something

wanting not and himself, recollecting uncle, her cried understand,” “I
an been always has Norris aunt Your understand. “I more: hear to
up brought being people’s young for judiciously, very and advocate,
in moderation be should there but indulgences; unnecessary without
will course of which herself, hardy very also is She everything.
another on And others. of wants the of opinion her in her influence
sentiments her what know I comprehend. perfectly can I too, account,
have may it but itself, in good was principle The been. always have
I case. your in far too carried _been_, _has_ believe I and been,
misplaced a points, some in sometimes, been has there that aware am
will you suppose to Fanny, you, of well too think I but distinction;
understanding an have You account. that on resentment harbour ever
judging and part, in only things receiving from you prevent will which
you past, the of whole the in take will You event. the by partially
that feel will you and probabilities, and persons, times, consider will
you preparing and educating were who friends your least not were _they_
Though lot. your be to _seemed_ which condition of mediocrity that for
and meant; kindly was it unnecessary, eventually prove may caution their
be will affluence of advantage every that assured, be may you this of
been have may that restrictions and privations little the by doubled
failing by you, of opinion my disappoint not will you sure am I imposed.
attention and respect the with Norris aunt your treat to time any at
speak must I dear. my down, Sit this. of enough But her. to due are that
long.” you detain not will I but minutes, few a for you to

moment’s a After rising. colour and down cast eyes with obeyed, Fanny
on. went smile, a suppress to trying Thomas, Sir pause,

I morning. this visitor a had have I that perhaps, aware, not are “You
was Crawford Mr. when breakfast, after room, own my in long been not had
conjecture.” probably may you errand His in. shewn

that perceiving uncle, her and deeper; and deeper grew colour Fanny’s
looking or speaking either made that degree a to embarrassed was she
farther any without and eyes, own his away turned impossible, quite up
visit. Crawford’s Mr. of account his in proceeded pause

Fanny, of lover the himself declare to been had business Crawford’s Mr.
uncle, the of sanction the entreat and her, for proposals decided make
all it done had he and parents; her of place the in stand to seemed who
feeling, Thomas, Sir that properly, so liberally, so openly, so well, so
much very been have to remarks own his and replies, own his moreover,
their of particulars the give to happy exceedingly was purpose, the to
mind, niece’s his in passing was what of aware little and conversation;
than more far her gratifying be must he details such by that conceived
Fanny’s without minutes several for therefore, talked, He himself.
it. do to wish the attained even hardly had She him. interrupt to daring
and, position; her changed had She confusion. much too in was mind Her
her to listening was windows, the of one on intently fixed eyes her with
but ceased, he moment a For dismay. and perturbation utmost the in uncle
he chair, his from rising when, it, of conscious become barely had she
commission, my of part one performed having Fanny, now, “And said,
and assured most the basis a on placed everything you shewn and
to you on prevailing by remainder the execute may I satisfactory,
having on presume but cannot I though where, downstairs, me accompany
finding your to submit must I myself, companion unacceptable no been
perhaps have you as Crawford, Mr. to. listening worth better still one
you see to hoping and room, my in is He house. the in yet is foreseen,
there.”

which this, hearing on exclamation an start, a look, a was There
on astonishment of increase his was what but Thomas; Sir astonished
to down go cannot I indeed cannot, I sir, no, exclaim--“Oh! her hearing
enough him told I that: know must know--he to ought Crawford Mr. him.
yesterday, subject this on me to spoke he him; convince to yesterday
and me, to disagreeable very was it that disguise without him told I and
opinion.” good his return to power my of out quite

“Out again. down sitting Thomas, Sir said meaning,” your catch not do “I
he know I this? all is What opinion? good his return to power your of
much as received understand) I as far (as and yesterday, you to spoke
permit could woman young well-judging a as proceed to encouragement
have to collected I what with pleased much very was I give. to herself
to highly discretion a shewed it occasion; the on behaviour your been
and properly, so overtures his made has he when now, But commended. be
_now_?” scruples your are honourably--what

the of anxiety the by forced Fanny, cried sir,” mistaken, are “You
quite are “you wrong; was he that uncle her tell to even moment
no him gave I thing? a such say Crawford Mr. could How mistaken.
recollect cannot I him, told I contrary, the On yesterday. encouragement
him, to listen not would I that him told I sure am I but words, exact my
begged I that and respect, every in me to unpleasant very was it that
much as said I sure am I again. manner that in me to talk to never him
quite been had I if more, still said have should I and more; and that as
I be, to like not did I but seriously; anything meaning his of certain
it thought I intended. be might than more imputing be, to bear not could
_him_.” with nothing for pass all might

gone. almost was breath her more; no say could She

silence, moments’ few a after Thomas, Sir said understand,” to I “Am
Crawford?” Mr. _refuse_ to mean you “that

sir.” “Yes,

him?” “Refuse

sir.” “Yes,

reason?” what For plea? what Upon Crawford! Mr. “Refuse

him.” marry to enough well sir, him, like cannot “I--I

displeasure. calm of voice a in Thomas, Sir said strange!” very is “This
Here reach. not does comprehension my which this in something is “There
to everything with you, to addresses his pay to wishing man young a is
character, and fortune, life, in situation merely not him: recommend
conversation and address with agreeableness, common than more with but
have you to-day; of acquaintance an not is he And everybody. to pleasing
friend, intimate your is moreover, sister, His time. some him known now
suppose should I which brother, your for _that_ doing been has he and
been there had you, to recommendation sufficient almost been have would
William got have might interest my when uncertain very is It other. no
already.” it done has He on.

shame; fresh with down looking and voice, faint a in Fanny, said “Yes,”
her as picture a such after herself, of ashamed almost feel did she and
Crawford. Mr. liking not for drawn, had uncle

must “you presently, Thomas Sir continued aware,” been have must “You
manners Crawford’s Mr. in particularity a of aware time some been have
observed have must You surprise. by you taken have cannot This you. to
(I properly very them received always you though and attentions; his
be to them perceived never I head), that on make to accusation no have
not do you that Fanny, think, to inclined half am I you. to unpleasant
feelings.” own your know quite

not did I always--what were attentions His do. I indeed sir! yes, “Oh
like.”

me,” beyond is “This surprise. deeper with her at looked Thomas Sir
seen having and are, you as Young explanation. requires “This he. said
affections--” your that possible hardly is it one, any scarcely

_no_, a into formed lips her saw He fixedly. her eyed and paused He
That, scarlet. like was face her but inarticulate, was sound the though
innocence; with compatible very be might girl, a modest so in however,
I no, “No, added, quickly he satisfied, appear to least at chusing and
there Well, impossible. quite question; the of out quite is _that_ know
said.” be to more nothing is

His thought. in deep was He nothing. say did he minutes few a for And
herself prepare and harden to trying likewise, thought in deep was niece
truth; the own than die rather would She questioning. farther against
beyond herself fortify to reflection, little a by hoped, she and
it. betraying

to seemed _choice_ Crawford’s Mr. which interest the of “Independently
“his composedly, very and again, beginning Thomas, Sir said justify”
an am I me. to recommendatory is early so all at marry to wishing
and proportion, in means are there where marriages, early for advocate
soon as settle income, sufficient a with man, young every have would
am I that opinion, my much so is This can. he as four-and-twenty after
Mr. cousin, your son, eldest own my likely little how think to sorry
judge, can I as far as present, at but early; marry to is Bertram,
more were he wish I thoughts. or plans his of part no makes matrimony
from consider, I “Edmund, Fanny. at glance a was Here fix.” to likely
than early marry to likely more much as habits, and dispositions his
he woman the seen has thought, lately have I indeed, _He_, brother. his
Do right? I Am not. has son eldest my convinced, am I which, love, could
dear?” my me, with agree you

sir.” “Yes,

the on easy was Thomas Sir and said, calmly was it but gently, was It
niece his did alarm his of removal the But cousins. the of score
displeasure his confirmed was unaccountableness her as service: no
which frown, a with room the about walking and up getting and increased;
eyes, her up lift not dared she though herself, to picture could Fanny
any you “Have said, authority, of voice a in and afterwards, shortly he
temper?” Crawford’s Mr. of ill think to child, reason,

sir.” “No,

sunk heart her but have”; I principles his of “But add, to longed She
probably and explanation, discussion, of prospect appalling the under
on chiefly founded was him of opinion ill Her non-conviction.
dare scarcely could she sake, cousins’ her for which, observations,
so were Maria, especially and Julia, and Maria father. their to mention
give not could she that misconduct, Crawford’s Mr. in implicated closely
had She them. betraying without it, believed she as such character, his
so honourable, so discerning, so uncle, her like man a to that, hoped
would side her on _dislike_ settled of acknowledgment simple the good,
not. was it found she grief infinite her To sufficient. been have

trembling in sat she where table the towards came Thomas Sir
no of is “It said, sternness, cold of deal good a with and wretchedness,
most this to end an put better had We you. to talk to perceive, I use,
I waiting. longer kept be not must Crawford Mr. conference. mortifying
of opinion my mark to duty my it thinking as add, only therefore, will,
formed, had I expectation every disappointed have you that conduct, your
had I what of reverse very the character a of yourself proved and
shewn, have must behaviour my think I as Fanny, _had_, I For supposed.
to return my of period the from you of opinion favourable very a formed
temper, of wilfulness from free peculiarly you thought had I England.
which spirit of independence that to tendency every and self-conceit,
young in which and women, young in even days, modern in much so prevails
you But offence. common all beyond disgusting and offensive is women
and can you that perverse; and wilful be can you that me shewn now have
for deference or consideration any without yourself, for decide will
their asking even without you, guide to right some surely have who those
that anything from different very very, yourself shewn have You advice.
your of family, your of disadvantage or advantage The imagined. had I
moment’s a had have to seems never sisters, and brothers your parents,
benefited, be might _they_ How occasion. this on thoughts your in share
to nothing is you, for establishment an such in rejoice must _they_ how
Mr. for feel not do you because and yourself, of only think You _you_.
for necessary be to imagines fancy heated young a what exactly Crawford
for even wishing without once, at him refuse to resolve you happiness,
cool for time more little a it, of consider to time little a
are, and inclinations; own your examining really for and consideration,
of opportunity an such you from away throwing folly, of fit wild a in
will, as settled, nobly honourably, eligibly, life, in settled being
of sense, of man young a is Here again. you to occur never probably,
attached exceedingly fortune, of and manners, of temper, of character,
disinterested and handsome most the in hand your seeking and you, to
longer years eighteen live may you that Fanny, you, tell me let and way;
Crawford’s Mr. half of man a by addressed being without world the in
bestowed have I would Gladly merits. his of part tenth a or estate,
had but married; nobly is Maria him. on daughters own my of either
with him to it given have should I hand, Julia’s sought Crawford Mr.
Mr. to Maria’s gave I than satisfaction heartfelt more and superior
very been have should I “And pause: moment’s a half After Rushworth.”
proposal a receiving on daughters, my of either had surprised much
the _half_ only it with carry might which time any at marriage of
paying without and peremptorily, and immediately _this_, of eligibility
a put consultation, any of compliment the regard my or opinion my
hurt much and surprised much been have should I it. on negative decided
duty of violation gross a it thought have should I proceeding. a such by
not do You rule. same the by judged be to not are _You_ respect. and
of you acquit can heart your if Fanny, But, child. a of duty the me owe
_ingratitude_--”

he as angry that, bitterly so crying time this by was Fanny ceased. He
broke almost was heart Her farther. article that press not would he was,
accusations, such by him; to appeared she what of picture a such by
Self-willed, gradation! dreadful in rising so multiplied, so heavy, so
had She this. all her thought He ungrateful. and selfish, obstinate,
to was What opinion. good his lost had she expectations; his deceived
her? of become

am “I tears, her through inarticulately, she said sorry,” very am “I
indeed.” sorry very

to reason have probably will you and sorry; are you hope I yes, “Sorry!
transactions.” day’s this for sorry long be

another with she, said otherwise” do to me for possible were it “If
make never could I that convinced perfectly so am I “but effort; strong
myself.” miserable be should I that and happy, him

that of spite in and burst, that of spite in but tears; of burst Another
Thomas Sir it, introduce to served which _miserable_, word black great
might inclination, of change little a relenting, little a think to began
personal the from favourably augur to and it; with do to something have
and timid, very be to her knew He himself. man young the of entreaty
mind her that improbable not it thought and nervous; exceedingly
little a pressing, little a time, little a as state a such in be might
the on all of mixture judicious a impatience, little a and patience,
would gentleman the If on. effect usual their work might side, lover’s
began Thomas Sir persevere, to enough love but had he if persevere, but
and mind his across passed having reflections these and hopes; have to
less of but gravity, becoming of tone a in he, said “Well,” it, cheered
tears; these in use no is There tears. your up dry child, “well, anger,
Crawford Mr. me. with downstairs come now must You good. no do can they
own your him give must You already. long too waiting kept been has
only you and less; with satisfied be to him expect cannot we answer:
sentiments, your of misconception that of grounds the him to explain can
totally am I imbibed. has certainly he himself, for unfortunately which,
it.” to unequal

down going of idea the at misery, such reluctance, such shewed Fanny But
better it judged consideration, little a after Thomas, Sir that him, to
small a suffered lady and gentleman both from hopes His her. indulge to
the saw and niece, his at looked he when but consequence; in depression
her brought had crying her which complexion and feature of state
immediate an by gained as lost much as be might there thought he into,
he meaning, particular no of therefore, words, few a With interview.
what over cry and sit to niece poor his leaving himself, by off walked
feelings. wretched very with passed, had

was everything future, present, past, The disorder. all was mind Her
all. of pain severest the her gave anger uncle’s her But terrible.
miserable was She him! to so appeared have to ungrateful! and Selfish
her. for speak or counsel, to part, her take to one no had She ever. for
all, but father; his softened have might He absent. was friend only Her
to have might She ungrateful. and selfish her think would all, perhaps
or it, see or it, hear might she again; and again reproach the endure
not could She her. about connexion every in ever for exist to it know
loved really he if yet, Crawford; Mr. against resentment some feel but
together. wretchedness all was It too! unhappy were and her,

almost was she returned; uncle her hour an of quarter a about In
without however, calmly, spoke He him. of sight the at faint to ready
was There little. a revived she and reproach, without austerity,
with, began he for manner, his as well as words, his in too, comfort,
has what repeat not need I me. left just has he gone: is Crawford “Mr.
an by feeling, be now may you anything to add to want not do I passed.
the in behaved has he that it, Suffice felt. has he what of account
most a in me confirmed has and manner, generous and gentlemanlike most
my Upon temper. and heart, understanding, his of opinion favourable
the with and immediately, he suffering, were you what of representation
present.” the for you see to urge to ceased delicacy, greatest

continued course,” “Of again. down looked up, looked had who Fanny, Here
speak to request should he that but supposed be cannot “it uncle, her
natural, too request a minutes; five for only it be alone, you with
perhaps fixed; time no is there But denied. be to just too claim a
present the For enough. composed are spirits your whenever or to-morrow,
but do they tears; these Check yourself. tranquillise to only have you
any me shew to wish you suppose, to willing am I as If, you. exhaust
to endeavour but emotions, these to way give not will you observance,
out: go to you advise I mind. of frame stronger a into yourself reason
will you gravel; the on hour an for out go good; you do will air the
and air for better the be will and yourself, to shrubbery the have
make shall “I moment), a for again back (turning Fanny” And, exercise.
aunt your tell even not shall I passed; has what of below mention no
say disappointment; the spreading for occasion no is There Bertram.
yourself.” it about nothing

of act an was this obeyed; joyfully most be to order an was This
aunt her from spared be To heart. her at felt Fanny which kindness
gratitude. of glow a in her left he reproaches! interminable Norris’s
Mr. see to Even reproaches. such than rather bearable be might Anything
overpowering. less be would Crawford

his followed and recommended, uncle her as directly, out walked She
did tears; her check did could; she as far as throughout, advice
wished She mind. her strengthen and spirits her compose to try earnestly
regain to sought and comfort, his desire did she that him to prove to
in exertion, for motive strong another her given had he and favour; his
excite to Not aunts. her of knowledge the from affair whole the keeping
and attaining; worth object an now was manner or look her by suspicion
aunt her from her save might that anything almost to equal felt she
Norris.

going and walk her from returning on when, struck, quite struck, was She
a was eye her caught which thing first the again, room East the into
time that at just much; too seemed it fire! A burning. and lighted fire
gratitude. painful even exciting was indulgence an such her giving be to
a such of think to leisure have could Thomas Sir that wondered She
the of information voluntary the from found, soon she but again; trifle
Sir day. every be to was it so that it, attend to in came who housemaid,
it. for orders given had Thomas

in she, said ungrateful!” really be can I if indeed, brute, a be must “I
ungrateful!” being from me defend “Heaven soliloquy.

met they till Norris, aunt her of nor uncle, her of more nothing saw She
possible as nearly as then was her to behaviour uncle’s Her dinner. at
be should there mean not did he sure was she before; been had it what
fancy could that conscience own her only was it that and change, any
how found she when and her; with quarrelling soon was aunt her but any;
aunt’s her without out walked only having her unpleasantly how and much
bless to had she reason the all felt she on, dwelt be could knowledge
exerted reproach, of spirit same the from her saved which kindness the
subject. momentous more a on

go to just you got have should I out, going were you known had I “If
have I “which she, said Nanny,” for orders some with house my as far as
carry and go to obliged been inconvenience, great very my to since,
the me saved have might you and time, the spare ill very could I myself.
were you know us let to as good so been have only would you if trouble,
whether suppose, I you, to difference no made have would It out. going
house.” my to gone or shrubbery the in walked had you

Sir said place,” driest the as Fanny to shrubbery the recommended “I
Thomas.

of kind very was “that check, moment’s a with Norris, Mrs. said “Oh!”
house. my to is path the dry how know not do you but Thomas; Sir you,
the with you, assure I there, walk a good as quite had have would Fanny
her all is it aunt: her obliging and use, some of being of advantage
is there but out going was she know us let have but would she If fault.
to likes before--she it observed often have I Fanny, about something a
takes she to; dictated be to like not does she work; to way own her go
little a has certainly she can; she whenever walk independent own her
I which her, about nonsense, and independence, and secrecy, of spirit
of.” better the get to her advise would

be could nothing thought Thomas Sir Fanny, on reflection general a As
sentiments same the expressing lately so been had he though unjust, more
repeatedly tried conversation: the turn to tried he and himself,
to enough discernment not had Norris Mrs. for succeed; could he before
thought he degree what to time, other any at or now, either perceive,
own his have to wishing from was he far very how or niece, his of well
talking was She hers. of depreciation the by off set merits children’s
dinner. the through half walk private this resenting and Fanny, _at_

more with in set evening the and last; at however, over, was It
could she than spirits of cheerfulness more and Fanny, to composure
first the in trusted, she but morning; a stormy so after for hoped have
her. misled not had judgment her that right: done had she that place,
willing was she and answer; could she intentions her of purity the For
would and abating, was displeasure uncle’s her that secondly, hope, to
and impartiality, more with matter the considered he as farther abate
how unpardonable, how and wretched, how feel, must man good a as felt,
affection. without marry to was it wicked how and hopeless,

past, was morrow the for threatened was she which with meeting the When
finally be would subject the that herself flatter but not could she
everything that Mansfield, from gone once Crawford Mr. and concluded,
could not, would She existed. had subject such no if as be soon would
him distress could her for affection Crawford’s Mr. that believe, not
cure. its bring soon would London sort. that of not was mind his long;
be and infatuation, his at wonder to learn soon would he London In
evil its from him saved had which her in reason right the for thankful
consequences.

was, uncle her hopes, of sort these in engaged was mind Fanny’s While
to common too occurrence an room; the of out called tea, after soon
ten reappeared butler the till it of nothing thought she and her, strike
said, herself, towards decidedly advancing and afterwards, minutes
it Then room.” own his in ma’am, you, with speak to wishes Thomas “Sir
mind her over rushed suspicion a on; going be might what her to occurred
was she rising, instantly but cheeks; her from colour the drove which
what Fanny! stay, “Stay, out, called Norris Mrs. when obey, to preparing
Depend hurry. a such in be don’t going? you are where about? you are
me” is it it, upon depend wanted; are who you not is it it, upon
yourself put to eager very so are you “but butler); the at (looking
you Baddeley, me, is It for? you want Thomas Sir should What forward.
Sir sure; am I Baddeley, me, mean You moment. this coming am I mean;
Price.” Miss not me, wants Thomas

of certain am I Price; Miss is it ma’am, “No, stout. was Baddeley But
which words, the with half-smile a was there And Price.” Miss being its
all.” at purpose the answer would you think not do “I meant,

work to herself compose to obliged was discontented, much Norris, Mrs.
herself, found consciousness, agitating in off walking Fanny, and again;
Crawford. Mr. with alone minute another in anticipated, she as



XXXIII CHAPTER

had lady the as conclusive so nor short so neither was conference The
the all had He satisfied. easily so not was gentleman The designed.
vanity, had He him. wish could Thomas Sir that persevere to disposition
love did she think to place first the in him inclined strongly which
when secondly, which, and herself; it know not might she though him,
feelings, present own her know did she that admit to last at constrained
what feelings those make to time in able be should he that him convinced
wished. he

operating which, love a was it and love; in much very love, in was He
her made delicacy, than warmth more of spirit, sanguine active, an on
and withheld, was it because consequence greater of appear affection
forcing of felicity, the as well as glory, the have to him determined
him. love to her

well-grounded every had He desist. not would he despair: not would He
that worth the all have to her knew he attachment; solid for reason
her her; with happiness lasting of hopes warmest the justify could
and disinterestedness the speaking by time, very this at conduct
rare most believed he which (qualities character her of delicacy
his all confirm and wishes, his all heighten to sort a of was indeed),
attack. to heart pre-engaged a had he that not knew He resolutions.
who one as rather her considered He suspicion. no had he _that_ Of
been had who danger; in be to enough subject the on thought never had
modesty whose person; of as lovely as mind of youth a youth, by guarded
still was who and attentions, his understanding from her prevented had
the and unexpected, wholly so addresses of suddenness the by overpowered
account. into taken never had fancy her which situation a of novelty

should he understood, was he when that, course, of follow not it Must
himself, like man a in his, as such Love fully. it believed He succeed?
and distance; great no at and return, a secure perseverance with must
very a in him love to her obliging of idea the in delight much so had he
little A regretted. scarcely was now him loving not her that time, short
rather He Crawford. Henry to evil no was overcome be to difficulty
His easily. too hearts gain to apt been had He it. from spirits derived
animating. and new was situation

to life her all opposition much too known had who however, Fanny, To
did he that found She unintelligible. was this all it, in charm any find
she as her from language such after could, he how but persevere; to mean
that him told She understood. be to not was use, to obliged herself felt
love should never she sure was him, love not could him, love not did she
most was subject the that impossible; quite was change a such that him;
to again, it mention to never him entreat must she that her; to painful
concluded as considered be it let and once, at him leave to her allow
their opinion her in that added, had pressed, farther when And ever. for
affection mutual make to as dissimilar totally so were dispositions
nature, by other each for unfitted were they that and incompatible;
earnestness the with and said, had she this All habit. and education,
there denied immediately he for enough, not was this yet sincerity; of
unfriendly anything or characters, their in uncongenial anything being
love, still would he that declared, positively and situations; their in
hope! still and

Her manner. own her of judge no was but meaning, own her knew Fanny
concealed it much how aware not was she and gentle; incurably was manner
softness and gratitude, diffidence, Her purpose. her of sternness the
of effort an almost seem indifference of expression every made
herself to pain much as nearly giving be to least, at seem, self-denial;
the as who, Crawford Mr. the longer no was Crawford Mr. him. to as
been had Bertram, Maria of admirer treacherous insidious, clandestine,
she whom in to, speak to or see to hated had she whom abhorrence, her
being of even power, whose and exist, to quality good no believe could
who Crawford Mr. the now was He acknowledged. barely had she agreeable,
feelings whose love; disinterested ardent, with herself addressing was
views whose upright, and honourable was that all become apparently were
was who attachment; of marriage a on fixed all were happiness of
his again describing and describing merits, her of sense his out pouring
language, the in and it, prove could words as far as proving affection,
her for her sought he that too, talent of man a of spirit and tone,
the now was he whole, the complete to and goodness; her and gentleness
promotion! William’s procured had who Crawford Mr.

operate! but not could which claims were here and change, a was Here
in virtue, angry of dignity the all in him disdained have might She
he but Park; Mansfield at theatre the or Sotherton, of grounds the
treatment. different demanded that rights with now her approached
have must She compassionate. be must she and courteous, be must She
her or herself of thinking whether and honoured, being of sensation a
the of effect The gratitude. of feeling strong a have must she brother,
with intermingled words and agitated, and pitying so manner a was whole
of temper a to that concern, and obligation of expressive so refusal her
strength the least at or truth, the Crawford’s, like hope and vanity
so not was he and questionable; be well might indifference, her of
persevering, of professions the in him, considered Fanny as irrational
interview. the closed which attachment desponding not and assiduous,

look no was there but go; to her suffered he that reluctance with was It
being his of hopes her give or words, his belie to parting in despair of
himself. professed he than unreasonable less

so perseverance a at arise did resentment Some angry. was she Now
for regard and delicacy of want a again was Here ungenerous. and selfish
again was Here her. disgusted and struck so formerly had which others
before. reprobated so had she whom Crawford Mr. same the of something a
his where humanity and feeling of want gross a there was evidently How
to principle no known always how alas! and concerned; was pleasure own
affections own her Had in! deficient was heart the what duty a as supply
have could never he been, have to ought they perhaps as free as been
them. engaged

musing sat she as sadness, sober and truth good in Fanny, thought So
wondering upstairs: fire a of luxury and indulgence great too that over
a in and come, to yet was what at wondering present; and past the at
of persuasion the but her to clear nothing made which agitation nervous
and Crawford, Mr. love to able circumstances any under never being her
it. of think and over sit to fire a having of felicity the

for morrow the till wait to himself, obliged or obliged, was Thomas Sir
saw then He people. young the between passed had what of knowledge a
was feeling first The account. his received and Crawford, Mr.
an that thought had he things; better hoped had he disappointment:
so worked have not could Crawford like man young a from entreaty hour’s
speedy was there but Fanny; like girl gentle-tempered a on change little
lover; the of perseverance sanguine and views determined the in comfort
Thomas Sir principal, the in success of confidence such seeing when and
himself. it on depend to able soon was

kindness, or compliment, civility, of side, his on omitted, was Nothing
and honoured, was steadiness Crawford’s Mr. plan. the assist might that
the in desirable most the still was connexion the and praised, was Fanny
had he welcome; be always would Crawford Mr. Park Mansfield At world.
his of frequency the to as feelings and judgment own his consult to only
friends, and family niece’s his all In future. in or present at visits,
influence the subject; the on wish one opinion, one but be could there
way. one incline must her loved who all of

received encouragement every encourage, could that said was Everything
friends. of best the parted gentlemen the and joy, grateful with

and proper most the footing a on now was cause the that Satisfied
importunity farther all from abstain to resolved Thomas Sir hopeful,
disposition her Upon interference. open no shew to and niece, his with
should Entreaty working. of way best the be might kindness believed he
point, a on family her of forbearance The only. quarter one from be
be might wishes, their of doubt no in be could she which respecting
Sir principle, this on Accordingly, it. forwarding of means surest their
gravity, mild a with her, to saying of opportunity first the took Thomas
again, Crawford Mr. seen have I Fanny, “Well, overcoming, be to intended
most a is He you. between stand matters how exactly him from learn and
that feel must you event, the be whatever and man, young extraordinary
young though, character; common no of attachment an created have you
unsteady varying, transient, the with acquainted little and are, you as
I as struck be cannot you exists, generally it as love, of nature
against sort this of perseverance a in wonderful is that all with am
claims he feeling: of matter a entirely is it him With discouragement.
so chosen having Yet, none. to entitled is perhaps it; in merit no
less been choice his Had stamp. respectable a has constancy his well,
persevering.” his condemned have should I unexceptionable,

should Crawford Mr. that sorry very am “I Fanny, said sir,” “Indeed,
I and compliment, great very a me paying is it that know to continue
I and convinced, perfectly so am I but honoured; undeservedly most feel
power--” my in be will never it that so, him told have

Your this. for occasion no is “there Thomas, Sir interrupted dear,” “My
be must regrets and wishes my as me to known well as are feelings
the hour this From done. or said be to more nothing is There you. to
to nothing have will You us. between revived be to never is subject
trying of capable me suppose cannot You about. agitated be to or fear,
and happiness Your inclinations. your against marry to you persuade to
you of required is nothing and view, in have I that all are advantage
may they that you convince to endeavours Crawford’s Mr. with bear to but
on are You risk. own his at proceeds He his. with incompatible be not
as calls, he whenever him seeing your for engaged have I ground. safe
see will You occurred. sort this of nothing had done have might you
you as much as and, manner, same the in us, of rest the with him
leaves He unpleasant. everything of recollection the dismissing can,
be cannot sacrifice slight this even that soon, so Northamptonshire
dear my now, And uncertain. very be must future The demanded. often
us.” between closed is subject this Fanny,

much with of think could Fanny that all was departure promised The
forbearing and however, expressions, kind uncle’s Her satisfaction.
the of much how considered she when and felt; sensibly were manner,
at wonder to right no had she believed she him, to unknown was truth
Mr. to daughter a married had who He, pursued. he conduct of line the
him. from expected be to not certainly was delicacy romantic Rushworth:
easier duty her make might time that trust and duty, her do must She
was. now it than

attachment Crawford’s Mr. suppose eighteen, only though not, could She
steady, that imagine but not could she ever; for out hold would
time. in it to end an put would herself from discouragement unceasing
is dominion, its for allot fancy, own her in might, she time much How
lady’s young a into inquire to fair be not would It concern. another
perfections. own her of estimate exact

more once himself found Thomas Sir silence, intended his of spite In
for briefly her prepare to niece, his to subject the mention to obliged
have still would he which measure a aunts; her to imparted being its
totally the from necessary became which but possible, if avoided,
He proceeding. of secrecy any to as Crawford Mr. of feelings opposite
where Parsonage, the at known all was It concealment. of idea no had
be would it and sisters, his both with future the over talk to loved he
progress the of witnesses enlightened have to him to gratifying rather
necessity the felt he this, understood Thomas Sir When success. his of
business the with acquainted sister-in-law and wife own his making of
the dreaded almost he account, Fanny’s on though, delay; without
He herself. Fanny as much as Norris Mrs. to communication the of effect
was, indeed, Thomas, Sir zeal. well-meaning but mistaken her deprecated
those of one as Norris Mrs. classing from far very not time, this by
disagreeable very and mistaken doing always are who people well-meaning
things.

strictest the for pressed He him. relieved however, Norris, Mrs.
but promised, only not she niece; their towards silence and forbearance
was: she Angry ill-will. increased her looked only She it. observe did
received having for Fanny with angry more was she but angry; bitterly
to affront and injury an was It it. refusing for than offer an such
independently and, choice; Crawford’s Mr. been have to ought who Julia,
she and her; neglected had she because Fanny, disliked she that, of
always been had she whom one to elevation an such grudged have would
depress. to trying

she than occasion the on discretion for credit more her gave Thomas Sir
see to only her allowing for her blessed have could Fanny and deserved;
it. hear to not and displeasure, her

a and beauty, a been had She differently. it took Bertram Lady
that all were wealth and beauty and life; her all beauty, prosperous
of man a by marriage in sought be to Fanny know To respect. her excited
convincing By opinion. her in much very therefore, her, raised fortune,
about doubting been had she which pretty, very _was_ Fanny that her
a feel her made it married, advantageously be would she that and before,
niece. her calling in credit of sort

afterwards, together alone were they as soon as she, said Fanny,” “Well,
her, with alone be to impatience like something known had really she and
“Well, animation; extraordinary had spoke, she as countenance, her and
just must I morning. this surprise agreeable very a had have I Fanny,
I then and _once_, must I Thomas Sir told I _once_, it of speak
her at looking And niece.” dear my joy, you give I done. have shall
family!” handsome a are certainly we “Humph, added, she complacently,

assail to hoping when, say; to what first at doubted and coloured, Fanny
answered-- presently she side, vulnerable her on her

have I what from differently do to me wish cannot _you_ aunt, dear “My
me, miss would you for marry; to me wish cannot _You_ sure. am I done,
that.” for much too me miss would you sure am I Yes, you? not should

as offer an such when you, missing of think not should I dear, my “No,
were you if you, without well very do could I way. your in comes this
be must you And Crawford. Mr. as estate good such of man a to married
very a such accept to duty woman’s young every is it that Fanny, aware,
this.” as offer unexceptionable

advice, of piece only the conduct, of rule only the almost was This
years eight of course the in aunt her from received ever had Fanny which
would contention unprofitable how felt She her. silenced It half. a and
from hoped be could nothing her, against were feelings aunt’s her If be.
talkative. quite was Bertram Lady understanding. her attacking

with love in fell he sure am “I she, said Fanny,” what, you tell will “I
did You evening. that done was mischief the sure am I ball; the at you
you And so. said Thomas Sir so. said Everybody well. remarkably look
sent I glad very am I dress. to you help to Chapman had you know
done was it sure am I that Thomas Sir tell shall I you. to Chapman
soon she thoughts, cheerful same the pursuing still And evening.” that
I than more is which Fanny, what, you tell will “And added, afterwards
puppy.” a have shall you litter a has Pug time next the Maria: for did



XXXIV CHAPTER

were surprises Many return. his on hear to things great had Edmund
the interest: in least not was occurred that first The him. awaiting
the through together walking sister his and Crawford Henry of appearance
be to them meant had concluded--he had He it. into rode he as village
purposely fortnight a beyond extended been had absence His distant. far
ready spirits with Mansfield to returning was He Crawford. Miss avoid to
her when associations, tender and remembrances, melancholy on feed to
found he and arm, brother’s her on leaning him, before was self fair own
woman the from friendly, unquestionably welcome, a receiving himself
off, miles seventy as of thinking been had he before, moments two whom,
distance any than inclination in him from farther, much farther, as and
express. could

hoped have not could he which sort a of was him of reception Her
purport a such from did he as Coming her. see to expected he had for,
rather anything expected have would he away, him taken had as fulfilled
meaning. pleasant simple, of words and satisfaction, of look a than
the in home him bring to and glow, a in heart his set to enough was It
surprises joyful other the of value full the feeling for state properest
hand. at

of; master soon was he particulars, its all with promotion, William’s
to breast own his within comfort of provision secret a such with and
and sensation gratifying most of source a it in found he joy, the help
dinner-time. all cheerfulness unvarying

history; Fanny’s had he alone, were father his and he when dinner, After
present the and fortnight, last the of events great the all then and
him. to known were Mansfield at matters of situation

in usual than longer much so sat They on. going was what suspected Fanny
and her; of talking be must they sure was she that dining-parlour, the
Edmund by seen be to was she and away, them brought last at tea when
took her, by down sat her, to came He guilty. dreadfully felt she again,
that, thought she moment that at and kindly; it pressed and hand, her
she afforded, tea-things the which scene the and occupation the for but
excess. unpardonable some in emotion her betrayed have must

her to conveying be to action, such by however, intending, not was He
drew hopes her which encouragement and approbation unqualified that
that all in participation his express to only designed was It it. from
quickened what hearing been had he that her tell to and her, interested
father’s his on entirely fact, in was, He affection. of feeling every
at father’s his as great so not was surprise His question. the of side
consider to her supposing from far so because, Crawford, refusing her
to it believed always had he preference, a like anything with him
perfectly taken be to her imagine could and reverse, the rather be
more as connexion the regard not could Thomas Sir but unprepared,
while and him; to recommendation every had It did. he than desirable
present her of influence the under done had she what for her honouring
Thomas Sir than terms stronger rather in her honouring indifference,
in sanguine and hoping, in earnest most was he echo, quite could
mutual by united that, and last, at match a be would it that believing,
exactly as were dispositions their that appear would it affection,
beginning now was he as other, each in blessed them make to fitted
had He precipitate. too been had Crawford them. consider to seriously
end. wrong the at begun had He herself. attach to time her given not
Edmund hers, as disposition a such and however, his, as powers such With
Meanwhile, conclusion. happy a out work would everything that trusted
guard scrupulously him make to embarrassment Fanny’s of enough saw he
movement. or look, or word, any by time, second a it exciting against

Sir return, Edmund’s of score the on and day, next the called Crawford
was it dinner; stay to him ask to licensed than more himself felt Thomas
then had Edmund and course, of staid He compliment. necessary a really
degree what and Fanny, with sped he how observing for opportunity ample
manners; her from extracted be might him for encouragement immediate of
every chance, little--every very very, so little, so was it and
was there if only; embarrassment her upon resting it, of possibility
was he else--that nothing in hope was there confusion, her in hope not
it worth was Fanny perseverance. friend’s his at wonder to ready almost
of exertion every patience, of effort every worth be to her held he all;
woman any with himself on gone have could he think not did he but mind,
eyes his than courage his warm to more something without breathing,
saw Crawford that hope to willing very was He hers. in discern could
friend his for conclusion comfortable most the was this and clearer,
at, and before, pass to observed he that all from to come could he that
dinner. after and

more thought he which occurred circumstances few a evening the In
mother his drawing-room, the into walked Crawford and he When promising.
there if as work at silently and intently as sitting were Fanny and
their noticing help not could Edmund for. care to else nothing were
tranquillity. deep apparently

“Fanny mother. his replied time,” the all silent so been not have “We
you hearing upon down book the put only and me, to reading been has
air the had which table the on book a was there enough sure And coming.”
often “She Shakespeare. of volume a closed: recently very being of
very a of middle the in was she and books; those of out me to reads
your heard we Fanny?--when name, his man’s--what’s that of speech fine
footsteps.”

that finishing of pleasure the have me “Let volume. the took Crawford
by And immediately.” it find shall “I he. said ladyship,” your to speech
it, find did he leaves, the of inclination the to way giving carefully
who Bertram, Lady satisfy to enough near quite two, or page a within or
that Wolsey, Cardinal of name the mentioned he as soon as him, assured
Fanny had help of offer an or look a Not speech. very the got had he
her for was attention her All against. or for syllable a not given;
taste But else. nothing by interested be to determined seemed She work.
she minutes: five mind her abstract not could She her. in strong too was
good in pleasure her and capital, was reading his listen; to forced was
used: long been had she however, reading, _good_ To extreme. reading
Mr. in but well, very Edmund all, cousins her well, read uncle her
had she what beyond excellence of variety a was there reading Crawford’s
all Cromwell, Wolsey, Buckingham, Queen, the King, The with. met ever
of power happiest the knack, happiest the with for turn; in given were
scene, best the on will at alight always could he guessing, and jumping
or pride, or dignity, were it whether and each; of speeches best the or
do could he expressed, be to were whatever or remorse, or tenderness,
taught first had acting His dramatic. truly was It beauty. equal with it
his all brought reading his and give, might play a pleasure what Fanny
it for enjoyment, greater with perhaps nay, again; her before acting
to used been had she as drawback such no with and unexpectedly, came
Bertram. Miss with stage the on him seeing in suffer

and amused was and attention, her of progress the watched Edmund
which needlework, the in slackened gradually she how seeing by gratified
hand her from fell it how totally: her occupy to seemed beginning the at
had which eyes the how last, at and it, over motionless sat she while
and turned were day the throughout him avoid to studiously so appeared
short, in him, on fixed minutes, for him on Crawford--fixed on fixed
closed, was book the and her, upon Crawford’s drew attraction the till
herself, into again shrinking was she Then broken. was charm the and
give to enough been had it but ever; as hard as working and blushing and
he him, thanked cordially he as and friend, his for encouragement Edmund
too. feelings secret Fanny’s expressing be to hoped

you if as read “you he; said you,” with favourite a be must play “That
well.” it knew

Crawford; replied hour,” this from believe, I favourite, a be will “It
before hand my in Shakespeare of volume a had have I think not do I “but
heard have I or acted, Eighth the Henry saw once I fifteen. was I since
Shakespeare But which. certain not am I did, who somebody from it of
an of part a is It how. knowing without with acquainted gets one
spread so are beauties and thoughts His constitution. Englishman’s
by him with intimate is one everywhere; them touches one that abroad
his of one of part good a at open can brain any of man No instinct.
immediately.” meaning his of flow the into falling without plays

Edmund, said degree,” a in Shakespeare with familiar is one doubt “No
quoted are passages celebrated His years. earliest one’s “from
talk all we and open, we books the half in are they everybody; by
but descriptions; his with describe and similes, his use Shakespeare,
know To it. gave you as sense his giving from distinct totally is this
thoroughly pretty him know to enough; common is scraps and bits in him
everyday no is aloud well him read to but uncommon; not perhaps, is,
talent.”

mock of bow a with answer, Crawford’s was honour,” me do you “Sir,
gravity.

accordant of word a if see to Fanny, at glance a had gentlemen Both
not could it that feeling both yet her; from extorted be could praise
content must _that_ attention; her in given been had praise Her be.
them.

was “It too. strongly and expressed, was admiration Bertram’s Lady
been had Thomas Sir wish “I she. said play,” a at being like really
here.”

her all with Bertram, Lady If pleased. excessively was Crawford
her what of inference the this, feel could languor, and incompetency
elevating. was feel, must was, she as enlightened and alive niece,

her said Crawford,” Mr. sure, am I acting, for turn great a have “You
will you think I what, you tell will I “and afterwards; soon ladyship
mean I Norfolk. in house your at other, or time some theatre, a have
a up fit will you think I indeed. do I there. settled are you when
Norfolk.” in house your at theatre

be. never will that no, “No, quickness. with he, cried ma’am?” you, “Do
And no!” Oh Everingham! at theatre No mistaken. quite is ladyship Your
meant, evidently which smile, expressive an with Fanny at looked he
Everingham.” at theatre a allow never will lady “That

to as it, see to _not_ determined so Fanny saw and all, it saw Edmund
of meaning full the convey to enough was voice the that clear it make
a such compliment, of consciousness quick a such and protestation; the
than favourable rather was thought, he hint, a of comprehension ready
not.

men young two The discussed. farther was aloud reading of subject The
the over talked fire, the by standing they, but talkers, only the were
it, to inattention total the qualification, the of neglect common too
in yet natural, consequently the boys, for school-system ordinary the in
uncouthness and ignorance of degree unnatural, almost instances some
the to called suddenly when men, well-informed and sensible of men, of
giving notice, their within fallen had which aloud, reading of necessity
the causes, secondary their with failures and blunders, of instances
of emphasis, and modulation proper of voice, the of management of want
of want cause: first the from proceeding all judgment, and foresight
great with again listening was Fanny and habit; and attention early
entertainment.

the little “how smile, a with Edmund, said profession,” my in “Even
good and manner, clear a little how studied! been has reading of art
however, past, the of rather speak I to! attended been have delivery,
among but abroad; improvement of spirit a now is There present. the than
larger the ago, years forty thirty, twenty, ordained were who those
was reading thought have must performance, their by judge to number,
subject The now. different is It preaching. was preaching and reading,
may energy and distinctness that felt is It considered. justly more is
is there besides, and truths; solid most the recommending in weight have
diffused knowledge critical more a taste, and observation general more
who proportion larger a is there congregation every in formerly; than
criticise.” and judge can who and matter, the of little a know

ordination; his since once service the through gone already had Edmund
from questions of variety a had he understood, being this upon and
made, being which questions, success; and feelings his to as Crawford
without taste, quick and interest friendly of vivacity the with though
to knew Edmund which levity of air or banter of spirit that of touch any
and satisfying; in pleasure true had he Fanny, to offensive most be
the to as own his give and opinion his ask to proceeded Crawford when
be should service the in passages particular which in manner properest
before, thought had he which on subject a be to it shewing delivered,
This pleased. more and more still was Edmund judgment, with thought and
that all by won be to not was She heart. Fanny’s to way the be would
least, at or, do; could together good-nature and wit and gallantry
of assistance the without soon, so nearly them by won be not would she
subjects. serious on seriousness and feeling, and sentiment

a even not which beauties, “has Crawford, observed liturgy,” “Our
also has it but destroy; can reading of style slovenly careless,
felt. be to not reading good require which repetitions and redundancies
I as attentive so always not being confess must I least, at myself, For
of out times nineteen “that Fanny); at glance a was (here be” to ought
to longing and read, be to ought prayer a such how thinking am I twenty
and Fanny, to eagerly stepping speak?” you Did myself. read to it have
added, he “No,” saying her upon and voice; softened a in her addressing
you fancied I move. lips your saw I speak? not did you sure you “Are
_allow_ not and attentive, more be to ought I me tell to going be might
so?” me tell to going you not Are wander. to thoughts my

supposing--” to--even me for well too duty your know you indeed, “No,

be not could and puzzle, a into getting herself felt stopt, She
of minutes several of dint by not word, another add to on prevailed
and station, former his to returned then He waiting. and supplication
interruption. tender such no been had there if as on went

read. well prayers than even uncommon more is delivered, well sermon, “A
difficult more is It thing. rare no is itself, in good sermon, A
of trick and rules the is, that well; compose to than well speak to
sermon, good thoroughly A study. of object an oftener are composition
hear never can I gratification. capital a is delivered, well thoroughly
than more and respect, and admiration greatest the without one a such
the in something is There myself. preach and orders take to mind a half
entitled is which eloquence, really is it when pulpit, the of eloquence
affect and touch can who preacher The honour. and praise highest the to
long and limited, subjects on hearers, of mass heterogeneous an such
or new anything say can who hands; common all in threadbare worn
the offending without attention the rouses that anything striking,
one whom man a is hearers, his of feelings the out wearing or taste,
be to like should I enough. honour capacity, public his in not, could
man.” a such

laughed. Edmund

my in preacher distinguished a to listened never I indeed. should “I
audience. London a have must I then, But envy. of sort a without life
of capable were who those to educated; the to but preach not could I
of fond be should I that know not do I And composition. my estimating
spring, the in twice or once perhaps then, and now often; preaching
but together; Sundays dozen a half for expected anxiously being after
constancy.” a for do not would it constancy; a for not

head, her shook involuntarily listen, but not could who Fanny, Here
her know to entreating again, side her by instantly was Crawford and
sitting and chair, a in drawing his by perceived, Edmund as and meaning;
looks that attack, thorough very a be to was it that her, by close down
possible as quietly as sank he tried, well be to were undertones and
sincerely very newspaper, a up took and back, his turned corner, a into
away explaining into persuaded be might Fanny little dear that wishing
as and lover; ardent her of satisfaction the to head the of shake that
in himself from business the of sound every bury to trying earnestly
desirable most “A of advertisements various the over own, his of murmurs
“Capital a and Guardians”; and Parents “To Wales”; South in Estate
Hunter.” season’d

motionless as been having not for herself with vexed meanwhile, Fanny,
Edmund’s see to heart the to grieved and speechless, was she as
modest, her of power the in everything by trying was arrangements,
and looks his both avoid and Crawford, Mr. repulse to nature, gentle
both. in persisting was unrepulsable, he, and inquiries;

to meant it was “What he. said mean?” head the of shake that did “What
saying been I had What what? of But fear. I Disapprobation, express?
lightly, improperly, speaking me think you Did you? displease to
if me tell Only was. I if me tell Only subject? the on irreverently
one for you; entreat I nay, Nay, right. set be to want I wrong. was I
mean?” head the of shake that did What work. your down put moment

twice repeated Crawford,” Mr. pray, don’t; sir, “Pray, her was vain In
eager low, same the In away. move to try she did vain in and over;
same the reurging on, went he neighbourhood, close same the and voice,
displeased. and agitated more grew She before. as questions

can--” you how wonder I me; astonish quite You sir? you, can “How

in anything there Is wonder? you “Do he. said you?” astonish I “Do
you to explain will I understand? not do you that entreaty present my
me gives that all manner, this in you urge me makes that all instantly
I curiosity. present my excites and do, and look you what in interest an
long.” wonder to you leave not will

said she but smile, a half help not could she herself, of spite In
nothing.

to like not should I that acknowledging my at head your shook “You
that Yes, constancy. a for always clergyman a of duties the in engage
it, spell would I word. the of afraid not am I Constancy: word. the was
Did word. the in alarming nothing see I anybody. with it write it, read
ought?” I think you

speaking--“perhaps, into last at wearied Fanny, said sir,” “Perhaps,
as well as yourself know always not did you pity a was it thought I sir,
moment.” that at do to seemed you

determined was rate, any at speak to her get to delighted Crawford,
an such by him silence to hoped had who Fanny, poor and up; it keep to
only was it that and mistaken, sadly herself found reproof, of extremity
another. to words of set one and curiosity of object one from change a
opportunity The of. explanation the entreat to something always had He
uncle’s her in her seeing his since occurred had such None fair. too was
Lady Mansfield. leaving his before again occur might such none room,
trifle, a was table the of side other the on just being Bertram’s
Edmund’s and half-awake, only as considered be always might she for
utility. first the of still were advertisements

reluctant and questions rapid of course a after Crawford, said “Well,”
clearly more understand now I because was, I than happier am “I answers;
of whim the by swayed easily unsteady: me think You me. of opinion your
no opinion, an such With aside. put easily tempted, easily moment, the
shall I that protestations by not is It see. shall we But that. wonder
my that you telling by not is it wronged; am I you convince to endeavour
distance, absence, me; for speak shall conduct My steady. are affections
be can you as far as that, prove shall _They_ me. for speak shall time
superior my infinitely are You you. deserve do I anybody, by deserved
before not had I which qualities have You know. I _that_ all merit; in
some have You creature. human any in degree a such in exist to supposed
one what beyond merely what--not beyond you in angel the of touches
one what beyond it--but like anything sees never one because sees,
equality by not is It frightened. not am I still But be. might fancies
he is It question. the of out is That won. be can you that merit of
most you loves who strongest, the merit your worships and sees who
my build I There return. a to right best the has that devotedly,
once when and you; deserve will and do I right that By confidence.
well too you know I it, declare I what is attachment my that convinced
Nay” Fanny. sweetest dearest, Yes, hopes. warmest the entertain to not
yet as have I Perhaps me. “forgive displeased), back draw her (seeing
are you suppose you Do you? call I can name other what by but right; no
that ‘Fanny’ is it No, other? any under imagination my to present ever
such name the given have You night. all of dream and day, all of think I
you.” of descriptive be now can else nothing that sweetness, of reality

from refrained have or longer, any seat her kept have hardly could Fanny
opposition public too the all of spite in away get to trying least at
relief, approaching of sound the for been not it had it, to foresaw she
thinking long and for, watching long been had she which sound very the
delayed. strangely

and urn, tea-board, of Baddeley, by headed procession, solemn The
grievous a from her delivered and appearance, its made cake-bearers,
was She move. to obliged was Crawford Mr. mind. and body of imprisonment
protected. was she busy, was she liberty, at

who those of number the among again admitted be to sorry not was Edmund
to long full seemed had conference the though But hear. and speak might
vexation, of flush a rather saw he Fanny at looking on though and him,
listened and said been have not could much so that hope to inclined he
speaker. the to profit some without to



XXXV CHAPTER

chuse to Fanny to entirely belonged it that determined had Edmund
mentioned be should Crawford to regard with situation her whether
should it way, the lead not did she if that and not; or them between
he reserve, mutual of two or day a after but him; by on touched be never
influence his what try and mind, his change to father his by induced was
friend. his for do might

Crawfords’ the for fixed actually was day, early very a and day, A
one make to well as be might it thought Thomas Sir and departure;
his all that Mansfield, left he before man young the for effort more
to hope much as have might attachment unshaken of vows and professions
possible. as them sustain

Mr. of perfection the for anxious cordially most was Thomas Sir
of model a be to him wished He point. that in character Crawford’s
not by be would it effecting of means best the fancied and constancy;
long. too him trying

he business; the in engage to persuaded be to unwilling not was Edmund
in him consult to used been had She feelings. Fanny’s know to wanted
her denied be to bear to well too her loved he and difficulty, every
be must he thought he her, to service of be to hoped he now; confidence
did she If to? heart her open to she had else whom her; to service of
Fanny communication. of comfort the need must she counsel, need not
of state unnatural an was reserved, and silent him, from estranged
easily could he which and through, break must he which state a things;
through. break to him wanting was she think to learn

speaking of opportunity first the take will I sir: her, to speak will “I
Sir upon and these; as thoughts such of result the was alone,” her to
the in alone walking time very that at being her of information Thomas’s
her. joined instantly he shrubbery,

her Drawing I?” “Shall he. said Fanny,” you, with walk to come am “I
walk comfortable a had have we since while long a is “It his. within arm
together.”

low. were spirits Her word. than look by rather all it to assented She

walk, comfortable a have to order “in added, presently he Fanny,” “But,
You together. gravel this pacing merely than necessary is more something
you what know I mind. your on something have you know I me. to talk must
it of hear to I Am uninformed. me suppose cannot You of. thinking are
herself?” Fanny but everybody from

from it of hear you “If replied, dejected, and agitated once at Fanny,
tell.” to me for nothing be can there cousin, everybody,

tell can you but one No Fanny. feelings, of but perhaps; facts, of “Not
wish you what not is it If however. you, press to mean not do I them. me
relief.” a be might it thought had I done. have I yourself,

in relief any find to me for differently too think we afraid am “I
feel.” I what of talking

dare I it. of idea no have I differently? think we that suppose you “Do
much as found be would they opinions, our of comparison a on that, say
Crawford’s consider point--I the to be: to used been have they as alike
his return could you if desirable, and advantageous most as proposals
should family your all that natural most as it consider I affection.
exactly done have you cannot, you as that, but it; return could you wish
us between disagreement any be there Can him. refusing in ought you as
here?”

This me. against were you thought I me. blamed you thought I But no! “Oh
comfort!” a such is

But it. sought you had Fanny, sooner, had have might you comfort “This
me imagine you could How you? against me suppose possibly you could how
general in careless even I Were love? without marriage for advocate an
at was happiness your where so me imagine you could how matters, such on
stake?”

you.” to talking been had he knew I and wrong, me thought uncle “My

be may I right. perfectly you think I Fanny, gone, have you as far “As
had not had you for _that_, hardly surprised--though be may I sorry,
admit it Can right. perfectly you think I yourself--but attach to time
him; love not did You does. it if us to disgraceful is It question? a of
him.” accepting your justified have could nothing

days. and days for comfortable so felt not had Fanny

mistaken quite were they and faultless, been has conduct your far “So
here. end not does matter the But otherwise. do to you wished who
of hope the with perseveres, he attachment; common no is Crawford’s
know, we This, before. created been not had which regard that creating
him “let smile) affectionate an (with But” time. of work a be must
proved have You last. at succeed him let Fanny, last, at succeed
and grateful yourself prove disinterested, and upright yourself
which woman a of model perfect the be will you then and tender-hearted;
for.” born you believed always have I

spoke she And me.” with succeed will never he never! never, never, “Oh!
at blushed she which and Edmund, astonished quite which warmth a with
him heard and look, his saw she when herself, of recollection the
like not is This positive! and determined very Fanny!--so “Never! reply,
self.” rational your yourself,

I _think_ I “that herself, correcting sorrowfully cried, she mean,” “I
never I think I for; answered be can future the as far as shall, never
regard.” his return shall

be, can Crawford than aware more aware, am I things. better hope must “I
of notice due having (you him love you make to means who man the that
early your all are there for work, uphill very have must intentions) his
heart your get can he before and array; battle in habits and attachments
things upon holds the all from it unfasten to has he use own his for
and confirmed, have growth years’ many so which inanimate, and animate
idea very the by moment the for tightened considerably are which
quit to forced being of apprehension the that know I separation. of
not had he wish I him. against you arming be time a for will Mansfield
you known had he wish I for. trying was he what you tell to obliged been
My you. won have should we think I us, Between Fanny. do, I as well as
failed. have not could together knowledge practical his and theoretical
time, that however, hope, must I plans. my upon worked have should He
steady his by you deserve to will) it believe firmly I (as him proving
not have you that suppose cannot I reward. his him give will affection,
have must You gratitude. of wish natural him--the love to _wish_ the
indifference.” own your for sorry be must You sort. that of feeling some

“we answer, direct a avoiding Fanny, said unlike,” totally so are “We
that ways, and inclinations our all in different very very, so are
happy tolerably be ever should we impossible quite as it consider I
more people two were never There him. like _could_ I if even together,
miserable.” be should We common. in taste one not have We dissimilar.

are You strong. so not is dissimilarity The Fanny. mistaken, are “You
and moral have You common. in tastes _have_ You alike. enough quite
benevolent and hearts warm both have You common. in tastes literary
to listen you saw and read, him heard that who Fanny, and, feelings;
You companions? as unfitted you think will night, other the Shakespeare
allow. I tempers, your in difference decided a is there yourself: forget
will spirits his better: the much so but serious; are you lively, is He
fancy to and dejected easily be to disposition your is It yours. support
counteract will cheerfulness His are. they than greater difficulties
will gaiety and pleasantness his and nowhere: difficulties sees He this.
not does Fanny, unlike, far so being Your you. to support constant a be
happiness your of probability the against make degree smallest the in
a rather is it that convinced myself am I it. imagine not do together:
tempers the that persuaded perfectly am I circumstance. favourable
in spirits, the of flow the in unlike mean I unlike: be better had
the in company, little or much for inclination the in manners, the
Some gay. be to or grave be to silent, be to or talk to propensity
matrimonial to friendly convinced, thoroughly am I is, here opposition
resemblance close very a and course; of extremes, exclude I happiness.
extreme. an produce to way likeliest the be would points those all in
manners of safeguard best the is continual, and gentle counteraction, A
conduct.” and

Crawford’s Miss now: were thoughts his where guess Fanny could well Full
the from cheerfully her of speaking been had He returning. all was power
had He end. an at quite was her avoiding His home. coming his of hour
day. preceding the only Parsonage the at dined

Fanny, minutes, some for thoughts happier his to him leaving After
“It said, and Crawford, Mr. to returned herself, to due it feeling
to unsuited totally as him consider I that _temper_ in merely not is
too us between difference the think I respect, _that_ in though, myself;
is there but me; oppress often spirits his great: too infinitely great,
that cousin, say, must I more. still to object I which him in something
the from him of well thought not have I character. his approve cannot I
so me, to appeared it as behaving, him saw then I play. the of time
all is it because now it of speak may unfeelingly--I and improperly very
he how care to seeming not Rushworth, Mr. poor by improperly over--so
which--in Maria, cousin my to attentions paying and him, hurt or exposed
will which impression an received I play, the of time the at short,
over.” got be never

“let end, the to her hearing scarcely Edmund, replied Fanny,” dear “My
of period that at appeared we what by judged be us, of any not, us
recollect. to hate I which time a is play the of time The folly. general
but together; wrong all were we wrong, was Crawford wrong, was Maria
blameless. were rest the all me, with Compared myself. as wrong so none
open.” eyes my with fool the playing was I

do I and did; you than more saw I “perhaps Fanny, said bystander,” a “As
jealous.” very sometimes was Rushworth Mr. that think

whole the than improper more be could Nothing wonder. No possibly. “Very
of capable be could Maria that think I whenever shocked am I business.
at surprised be not must we part, the undertake could she if but, it;
rest.” the

was he think not did _Julia_ if mistaken much am I play, the “Before
attentions.” her paying

with love in being his of one some from before heard have I “Julia!
I hope I though Fanny, And, it. of anything see never could I but Julia;
that possible very it think I qualities, good sisters’ my to justice do
Crawford, by admired being of desirous more be both, or one might, they
perfectly was than unguardedly more rather desire that shew might and
society; his of fond evidently were they that remember can I prudent.
may it and lively, Crawford, like man a encouragement, such with and
very nothing be could to--there on led be might unthinking, little a be,
was heart his pretensions: no had he that clear is it because striking,
him raised has you for being its that say, must I And you. for reserved
shews it honour; highest the him does It opinion. my in inconceivably
pure and happiness domestic of blessing the of estimation proper his
in him, proves It uncle. his by unspoilt him proves It attachment.
and him, believe to wish to used been had I that everything short,
not.” was he feared

serious on ought, he as think, not does he that persuaded am “I
subjects.”

subjects, serious upon all at thought not has he that rather, “Say,
otherwise, be it could How case. the deal good a be to believe I which
indeed, disadvantages, the Under adviser? and education an such with
they what be should they that wonderful not it is had, have both which
hitherto have acknowledge, to ready am I _feelings_, Crawford’s are?
been generally have feelings those Happily, guides. his much too been
attach to is he man fortunate most a and rest; the supply will You good.
own her in rock a as firm who, woman a creature--to a such to himself
recommend to adapted well so character of gentleness a has principles,
will He felicity. rare with indeed, partner, his chosen has He them.
make will you but happy; you make will he know I Fanny; happy, you make
everything.” him

shrinking a in Fanny, cried charge,” a such in engage not would “I
responsibility!” high of office an such “in accent;

everything fancying anything! to unequal yourself believing usual, “As
into you persuade to able be not may I though Well, you! for much too
confess I trust. I them, into persuaded be will you feelings, different
in interest common no have I may. you that anxious sincerely myself
first the has his Fanny, happiness, your to Next well-doing. Crawford’s
Crawford.” in interest common no having my of aware are You me. on claim

walked they and say; to anything have to it of aware well too was Fanny
Edmund abstraction. and silence mutual in yards fifty some together on
again-- began first

yesterday, it of speaking of manner her by pleased much very was “I
seeing her upon depended not had I because pleased, particularly
yet but you; of fond very was she knew I light. a just so in everything
as quite brother her to worth your estimating not her of afraid was I
on fixed rather not had he that regretting her of and deserved, it
those of bias the of afraid was I fortune. or distinction of woman some
was it But hear. to used much too been has she which maxims, worldly
desires She ought. she as just Fanny, you, of spoke She different. very
talk long a had We myself. or uncle your as warmly as connexion the
anxious very though subject, the mentioned have not should I it. about
minutes five room the in been not had I but sentiments; her know to
and heart, of openness that all with it introducing began she before
so are which ingenuousness and spirit that manner, of peculiarity sweet
rapidity.” her for her at laughed Grant Mrs. herself. of part a much

then?” room, the in Grant Mrs. “Was

by together sisters two the found I house the reached I when “Yes,
Fanny, you, with done not had we begun, had we once when and themselves;
in.” came Grant Dr. and Crawford till

Crawford.” Miss saw I since week a above is “It

her, see will You best. been have may it owns yet it; laments she “Yes,
be must you Fanny; you, with angry very is She goes. she before however,
her imagine can you but angry, very herself calls She that. for prepared
her thinks who sister, a of disappointment and regret the is It anger.
moment. first the at for, wish may he everything to right a has brother
you esteems and loves she but William; for be would you as hurt, is She
heart.” her all with

me.” with angry very be would she knew “I

“do him, to closer arm her pressing Edmund, cried Fanny,” dearest “My
talked be to anger is It you. distress anger her of idea the let not
for not kindness, and love for made is heart Her felt. than rather of
praise; of tribute her overheard have could you wish I resentment.
you that said she when countenance, her seen have could you wish I
you of spoke always she that observed I And wife. Henry’s be _should_
most of sound a had it and do; to used never was she which ‘Fanny,’ as
cordiality.” sisterly

the all there she was speak; she say--did she did Grant, Mrs. “And
time?”

your of surprise The sister. her with exactly agreeing was she “Yes,
such refuse could you That unbounded. been have to seems Fanny, refusal,
what said I understand. can they than more seems Crawford Henry as man a
must case--you the stated they as truth, good in but you; for could I
different a by can you as soon as senses your in be to yourself prove
have I you. teasing is this But them. satisfy will else nothing conduct;
me.” from away turn not Do done.

and recollection of pause a after Fanny, said thought,” have _should_ “I
man’s a of possibility the felt have must woman every “that exertion,
let least, at sex her of one some by loved being not approved, being not
perfections the all have him Let agreeable. generally so ever be him
man a that certain as down set be to not ought it think I world, the in
But, himself. like to happen may he woman every to acceptable be must
claims the all have to Crawford Mr. allowing so, is it supposing even
him meet to prepared be to I was how has, he think sisters his which
surprise. by wholly me took He own? his to answerable feeling any with
and meaning; any had before me to behaviour his that idea an not had I
was he because only him like to myself teaching be to not was I surely
would it situation, my In me. of notice idle very seemed what taking
Mr. on expectations forming be to vanity of extreme the been have
have must do, they as him rating sisters, his sure am I Crawford.
to I was then, How, nothing. meant had he supposing so, it thought
I was How me? with was he said he moment the him with love in be be--to
His for? asked was it as soon as service, his at attachment an have to
the deserts, his higher The him. as well as me consider should sisters
think and--we And, him. of thought have to ever me for improper more
so woman a imagine can they if women, of nature the of differently very
imply.” to seems this as affection an returning of capable soon very

truth; the be to this know I truth. the have I now Fanny, dear dear, “My
you to them attributed had I feelings. such are you of worthy most and
exactly given now have You you. understand could I thought I before.
Mrs. and friend your to you for make to ventured I which explanation the
warm-hearted your though satisfied, better both were they and Grant,
her of enthusiasm the by little a with away run still was friend
the creatures human all of were you that them told I Henry. for fondness
very the that and least; novelty and power most had habit whom over one
him. against was addresses Crawford’s of novelty the of circumstance
you that disfavour; their in all was recent so and new so being Their
more deal great a and to; used not were you that nothing tolerate could
Miss character. your of knowledge a them give to purpose, same the to
brother. her for encouragement of plans her by laugh us made Crawford
time, in loved being of hope the in persevere to him urge to meant She
ten about of end the at received kindly most addresses his having of and
marriage.” happy years’

Her for. asked here was that smile the give difficulty with could Fanny
saying wrong: doing been had she feared She revolt. in all were feelings
necessary; fancying been had she which caution the overacting much, too
to and another; to open herself laying evil, one against guarding in
on and moment, a such at her to repeated liveliness Crawford’s Miss have
aggravation. bitter a was subject, a such

resolved immediately and face, her in distress and weariness saw Edmund
name the mention to even not and discussion; farther all forbear to
be _must_ what with connected be might it as except again, Crawford of
observed--“They afterwards soon he principle, this On her. to agreeable
either friend your seeing of therefore, sure, are You Monday. on go
trifle a within was I and Monday; on go really They Sunday. or to-morrow
almost had I day! very that till Lessingby at stay to persuaded being of
six or five Those made! have might it difference a What it. promised
life.” my all felt been have might Lessingby at more days

there?” staying near were “You

I Had consented. nearly had and pressed, kindly most was I “Very.
going all were you how me tell to Mansfield, from letter any received
that nothing knew I but staid; have certainly should I believe I on,
long away been had I that felt and fortnight, a for here happened had
enough.”

there?” pleasantly time your spent “You

were They not. did I if mind own my of fault the was it is, that “Yes;
with uneasiness took I so. me finding their doubt I pleasant. very all
again.” Mansfield in was I till it of rid getting no was there and me,

you?” not did them, liked Owens--you Miss “The

am I But girls. unaffected good-humoured, Pleasant, well. very “Yes,
unaffected Good-humoured, society. female common for Fanny, spoilt,
They women. sensible to used been has who man a for do not will girls
too me made have Crawford Miss and You being. of orders distinct two are
nice.”

looks, her in it saw he wearied; and oppressed was Fanny however, Still,
her led he more, no it attempting and away; talked be not could it
the into guardian, privileged a of authority kind the with directly,
house.



XXXVI CHAPTER

Fanny that all with acquainted perfectly himself believed now Edmund
he and sentiments, her of conjectured be to leave could or tell, could
measure a hasty too presumed, before he as been, had It satisfied. was
first idea the make to given be must time and side, Crawford’s on
the to used be must She her. to agreeable then and familiar,
of return a then and her, with love in being his of consideration
distant. very be not might affection

father; his to conversation the of result the as opinion this gave He
farther no her: to said more nothing being there recommended and
to left be should everything that but persuade; or influence to attempts
mind. own her of workings natural the and assiduities, Crawford’s

Fanny’s of account Edmund’s so. be should it that promised Thomas Sir
those all had she supposed he just; be to believe could he disposition
_had_; she that unfortunate very as it consider must he but feelings,
not could he future, the to trust to son his than willing less for,
were habit and time of allowances long very such if that fearing help
receiving into herself persuaded have not might she her, for necessary
paying for inclination man’s young the before properly addresses his
submit to but however, done, be to nothing was There over. were them
best. the hope and quietly

Crawford, Miss called Edmund as friend,” “her from visit promised The
of terror continual in lived she and Fanny, to threat formidable a was
of scrupulous little so and angry, so and partial so sister, a As it.
in was she secure, and triumphant so light another in and said, she what
penetration, her displeasure, Her alarm. painful of object an way every
of dependence the and encounter; to fearful all were happiness her and
looking in support only Fanny’s was met they when present others having
Lady from possible as little as herself absented She it. to forward
the in walk solitary no took and room, East the from away kept Bertram,
attack. sudden any avoid to caution her in shrubbery,

when aunt, her with breakfast-room, the in safe was She succeeded. She
Crawford Miss and over, misery first the and come; did Crawford Miss
she than expression of particularity less much with speaking and looking
be to worse nothing be would there hope to began Fanny anticipated, had
too hoped she here But agitation. moderate of half-hour a than endured
determined was She opportunity. of slave the not was Crawford Miss much;
low a in soon, tolerably her to said therefore and alone, Fanny see to
that words somewhere”; minutes few a for you to speak must “I voice,
Denial nerves. her all and pulses her all in her, over all felt Fanny
made contrary, the on submission, ready of habits Her impossible. was
it did She room. the of out way the lead and rise instantly almost her
inevitable. was it but feelings, wretched with

was countenance of restraint all than hall the in sooner no were They
Fanny at head her shook immediately She side. Crawford’s Miss on over
hardly seemed hand, her taking and reproach, affectionate yet arch, with
“Sad, but, however, nothing, said She directly. beginning help to able
had and you,” scolding done have shall I when know not do I girl! sad
of secure be might they till rest the reserve to enough discretion
and upstairs, turned naturally Fanny themselves. to walls four having
comfortable for fit always now was which apartment the to guest her took
feeling and heart, aching most a with however, door, the opening use;
had spot that ever than her before scene distressing more a had she that
delayed least at was her on burst to ready evil the But witnessed. yet
on effect strong the by ideas; Crawford’s Miss in change sudden the by
produced. again room East the in herself finding the which mind her

East The again? here I “am animation, instant with cried, she “Ha!”
look to stopping after and before”; room this in I was only Once room!
added, she passed, then had that all retrace to seemingly and her, about
cousin Your rehearse. to came I it? remember you Do before. only “Once
prompter. and audience our were You rehearsal. a had we and too; came
in just were, we Here it. forget never shall I rehearsal. delightful A
the were here I, was here cousin, your was here room: the of part this
away?” pass ever things such will why Oh! chairs.

entirely was mind Her answer. no wanted she companion, her for Happily
remembrances. sweet of reverie a in was She self-engrossed.

of subject The remarkable! very so was rehearsing were we scene “The
and describing be to was He say? I shall very--very--what so it
as be to trying now, him see I think I me. to matrimony recommending
speeches. long two the through ought, Anhalt as composed and demure
matrimony state, marriage the in meet hearts sympathetic two ‘When
the out wear ever can time no suppose I life.’ happy a called be may
was It words. those said he as voice and looks his of have I impression
I If play! to scene a such have should we that curious, very curious,
be should it existence, my of week one any recalling of power the had
be should it Fanny, would, you what Say week. acting week--that that
His other. any in happiness exquisite such knew never I for _that_;
But expression. beyond sweet was it Oh! did! it as bend to spirit sturdy
your brought evening very That all. it destroyed evening very that alas,
Yet, you? see to glad was who Thomas, Sir Poor uncle. unwelcome most
Thomas, Sir of disrespectfully speak now would I imagine not do Fanny,
justice him do I No, week. a many for him hate did certainly I though
sober in Nay, be. should family a such of head the what just is He now.
a with so, said having And all.” you love now I believe I sadness,
her in seen never had Fanny which consciousness and tenderness of degree
moment a for away turned she becoming, too only thought now and before,
this into came I since fit little a had have “I herself. recover to
smile, playful a with presently, she said perceive,” may you as room,
to as for comfortable; be and down sit us let so now; over is it “but
not have I do, to intending fully came I which Fanny, you, scolding
very her embracing And point.” the to comes it when it for heart the
the being this of think I when Fanny! gentle “Good, affectionately,
quite it feel I long, how know not do I for you seeing of time last
you.” love but anything do to impossible

her and this, of anything foreseen not had She affected. was Fanny
word the of influence melancholy the withstand seldom could feelings
she than more Crawford Miss loved had she if as cried She “last.”
of sight the by softened farther yet Crawford, Miss and could; possibly
leave to hate “I said, and fondness, with her about hung emotion, such
we says Who going. am I where amiable so half one no see shall I you.
to born are we that feel I shall. we know I sisters? be not shall
dear too, it feel you that me convince tears those and connected; be
Fanny.”

are you “But said, part, in only replying and herself, roused Fanny
very a to going are You another. to friends of set one from going only
friend.” particular

But years. for friend intimate my been has Fraser Mrs. true. very “Yes,
the of only think can I her. near go to inclination least the not have I
in Bertrams the and yourself, sister, excellent my leaving: am I friends
in finds one than you among _heart_ more much so all have You general.
and trust to able being of feeling a me give all You large. at world the
wish I of. nothing knows one intercourse common in which you, in confide
a Easter, after till her to go to not Fraser Mrs. with settled had I
when And off. her put cannot I now but visit, the for time better much
because Stornaway, Lady sister, her to go must I her with done have I
not have I but two, the of friend particular most my rather was _she_
years.” three these _her_ for much cared

each silent, minutes many sat girls two the speech this After
the in friendship of sorts different the on meditating Fanny thoughtful:
spoke first _She_ tendency. philosophic less of something on Mary world,
again.

and upstairs, you for look to resolving my remember I perfectly “How
idea an having without room, East the to way my find to off setting
came I as of thinking was I what remember I well How was! it whereabouts
at table this at sitting here you seeing and in looking my and along,
at door, the opened he when astonishment, cousin’s your then and work;
evening! very that returning uncle’s your sure, be To here! me seeing
it.” like quite anything was never There

she off, it shaking when, followed, abstraction of fit short Another
companion. her attacked thus

one of hope, I Thinking, reverie. a in absolutely are you Fanny, “Why,
a for you transport could I that Oh! you. of thinking always is who
your how understand might you that town, in circle our into time short
heartburnings and envyings the Oh! there! of thought is Henry over power
at felt be will that incredulity the wonder, the dozens; and dozens of
hero the quite is Henry secrecy, to as For done! have you what hearing
London to come should You chains. his in glories and romance, old an of
is he how see to were you If conquest. your estimate to how know to
that aware well am I Now, sake! his for courted am I how and courted,
his of consequence in Fraser Mrs. to welcome so half be not shall I
very will, she truth the know to comes she When you. with situation
of daughter a is there for again; Northamptonshire in me wish likely,
and married, get to wild is she whom wife, first a by Fraser, Mr.
degree. a such to him for trying been has she Oh! take. to Henry wants
the of idea an have cannot you here, sit you as quiet and Innocent
will there curiosity the of occasioning, be will you that _sensation_
Poor answer! to have shall I questions endless the of you, see to be
teeth, your and eyes your about ever for me at be will Fraser Margaret
were Margaret wish I shoes. your makes who and hair, your do you how and
be to Frasers the upon look I for sake, friend’s poor my for married,
most a was it yet And people. married other most as unhappy as about
could She delighted. all were We time. the at Janet for match desirable
nothing; had she and rich, was he for him, accept than otherwise do not
woman, young a wants and _exigeant_, and ill-tempered out turns he but
himself. as steady as be to five-and-twenty, of woman young beautiful a
how know to seem not does she well; him manage not does friend my And
say to which, irritation of spirit a is There it. of best the make to
call shall I house their In ill-bred. very certainly is worse, nothing
Even respect. with Parsonage Mansfield of manners conjugal the mind to
certain a and sister, my in confidence thorough a shew does Grant Dr.
_is_ there feel one makes which judgment, her for consideration
shall I Frasers. the with nothing see shall I that of but attachment;
Thomas Sir wife, a as sister own My Fanny. ever, for Mansfield at be
has Janet Poor perfection. of standards my are husband, a as Bertram
side: her on improper nothing was there yet and in, taken sadly been
of want no was there inconsiderately; match the into run not did she
during and proposals, his of consider to days three took She foresight.
whose her with connected everybody of advice the asked days three those
aunt, dear late my to applied especially and having, worth was opinion
and generally very judgment her made world the of knowledge whose
and acquaintance, her of people young the all by to up looked deservedly
were nothing if as seems This Fraser. Mr. of favour in decidedly was she
my for say to much so not have I comfort. matrimonial for security a
sake the for Blues the in man young nice very a jilted who Flora, friend
as Fanny, sense, much as about has who Stornaway, Lord horrid that of
character. blackguard a with and worse-looking, much but Rushworth, Mr.
even not has he for right, being her about time the at doubts my _had_ I
bye, the By wrong. was she sure am I now and gentleman, a of air the
I were But out. came she winter first the Henry for dying was Ross Flora
love in be to known have I whom women the all of you tell to attempt to
insensible you, only you, is It done. have never should I him, with
you are But indifference. like anything with him of think can who Fanny,
not.” are you see I no, No, yourself? profess you as insensible so

as moment that at face Fanny’s over blush a deep so indeed, was, There
mind. predisposed a in suspicion strong warrant might

its take shall Everything you. tease not will I creature! “Excellent
absolutely so not were you that allow must you Fanny, dear But, course.
not is It fancies. cousin your as asked question the have to unprepared
some subject, the on thoughts some had have must you that but possible
to trying was he that seen have must You be. might what to as surmises
you to devoted he not Was power. his in attention every by you please
received you Oh! necklace! the ball, the before then And ball? the at
I desire. could heart as conscious as were You meant. was it as just it
perfectly.” it remember

beforehand? necklace the of knew brother your that then, mean, you “Do
fair.” not was _that_ Crawford, Miss Oh!

am I thought. own his entirely, doing own his was It it! of “Knew
to delighted was I but head, my entered never had it that say to ashamed
sakes.” your both for proposal his on act

time the at afraid half not was I “that Fanny, replied say,” not will “I
frightened that look your in something was there for so, being its of
first--indeed, at it of unsuspicious as was I first; at not but me,
idea an had I had And here. sit I that as true as is It was. I indeed
your to As necklace. the accept to me induced have should nothing it, of
had I particularity: a of sensible was I certainly behaviour, brother’s
but weeks; three or two perhaps time, little some it of sensible been
being simply as down it put I nothing: meaning as it considered I then
any have to him wishing from as supposing from far as was and way, his
inattentive an been Crawford, Miss not, had I me. of thoughts serious
in family this of part some and him between passing was what of observer
not could I blind. not was I but quiet, was I autumn. and summer the
mean did which gallantries in himself allowed Crawford Mr. that see but
nothing.”

and flirt, sad a been then and now has He it. deny cannot I “Ah!
ladies’ young in making be might he havoc the for little very cared
fault; only his is it but it, for him scolded often have I affections.
any have ladies young few very that said, be to this is there and
one fixing of glory the Fanny, then, And for. caring worth affections
off pay to power one’s in it having of many; so by at shot been has who
to nature woman’s in not is it sure am I Oh! sex! one’s of debts the
triumph.” a such refuse

any with sports who man a of well think cannot “I head. her shook Fanny
than suffered more deal great a be often may there and feelings; woman’s
of.” judge can stander-by a

he when and mercy, your to entirely him leave I him. defend not do “I
But him. lecture you much how care not do I Everingham, at you got has
little a girls make to liking the fault, his that say, will I this
a as happiness wife’s a to dangerous so half not is him, with love in
to. addicted been never has he which himself, love in fall to tendency
way a in you to attached is he that believe truly and seriously do I And
his all with you loves he that before; woman any to was never he that
ever man any If possible. as ever for nearly as you love will and heart,
you.” for much as do will Henry think I ever, for woman a loved

say. to nothing had but smile, faint a avoid not could Fanny

Mary continued happier,” been have to ever Henry imagine cannot “I
brother’s your getting in succeeded had he when “than presently,
commission.”

here. feelings Fanny’s at push sure a made had She

him.” of kind very very, How yes. “Oh!

parties the know I for much, very himself exerted have must he know “I
favours; asking scorns and trouble, hates Admiral The move. to had he
same the in to attended be to claims men’s young many so are there and
put easily is determined, very not energy, and friendship a that way,
him.” see could we wish I be! must William creature happy a What by.

its all of distressing most the into thrown was mind Fanny’s Poor
always was William for done been had what of recollection The varieties.
and Crawford; Mr. against decision every of disturber powerful most the
watching first been had who Mary, till it of deeply thinking sat she
called suddenly else, something on musing then and complacently, her
all here you with talking sit to like should “I saying: by attention her
dear, my good-bye, so and below, ladies the forget not must we but day,
in part nominally shall we though for Fanny, excellent my amiable, my
take do I And here. you of leave take must I breakfast-parlour, the
meet we when that trusting and reunion, happy a for longing leave,
each to hearts our open may which circumstances under be will it again,
reserve.” of shadow or remnant any without other

accompanied manner, of agitation some and embrace, kind very very, A
words. these

tolerably there being of talks he soon: town in cousin your see shall “I
your and spring; the of course the in say, dare I Thomas, Sir and soon;
again meeting of sure am I Julia, and Rushworths, the and cousin, eldest
is one Fanny: ask, to favours two have I you. but all and again, and
will you that other, the And me. to write must You correspondence. your
gone.” being my for amends her make and Grant, Mrs. on call often

been have not rather would Fanny favours these of least, at first, The
it correspondence; the refuse to her for impossible was it but asked;
than readily more it to accede to not even her for impossible was
apparent much so resisting no was There authorised. judgment own her
fond a value to calculated peculiarly was disposition Her affection.
the was she it, of little so known hitherto having from and treatment,
towards gratitude was there Besides, Crawford’s. Miss by overcome more
her than painful less much so _tete-a-tete_ their made having for her,
predicted. had fears

without and reproaches without escaped had she and over, was It
case, the was that while and own; her still was secret Her detection.
everything. almost to herself resign could she thought she

and came Crawford Henry parting. another was there evening the In
the in previously being not spirits her and them; with time some sat
because him, towards while a for softened was heart her state, strongest
said scarcely he self, usual his unlike Quite feel. to seemed really he
him, for grieve must Fanny and oppressed, evidently was He anything.
of husband the were he till again him see never might she hoping though
woman. other some

would he hand, her take would he parting, of moment the to came it When
heard, she that nothing or however, nothing, said he it; denied be not
token a such that pleased better was she room, the left had he when and
passed. had friendship of

gone. were Crawfords the morrow the On



XXXVII CHAPTER

be should he that was object next Thomas’s Sir gone, Crawford Mr.
blank a find would niece his that hope great entertained he and missed;
or felt, had she time the at which attentions those of loss the in
flattering most its in consequence of tasted had She evil. an fancied,
into again sinking the it, of loss the that hope did he and form;
her watched He mind. her in regrets wholesome very awaken would nothing,
hardly He success. what with tell hardly could he but idea; this with
She not. or spirits her in difference any were there whether knew
his beyond were emotions her that retiring and gentle so always was
and not; did he that felt he her: understand not did He discrimination.
the on affected stood she how him tell to Edmund to applied therefore
had she than happy less or more were she whether and occasion, present
been.

father his thought and regret, of symptoms any discern not did Edmund
could days four or three first the supposing in unreasonable little a
any. produce

friend the sister, Crawford’s that was, Edmund surprised chiefly What
visibly more be not should her, to much so been had who companion and
so had and _her_, of seldom so spoke Fanny that wondered He regretted.
separation. this at concern her of say to voluntarily little

the now was who companion, and friend this sister, this was it Alas!
future Mary’s believed have could she If comfort. Fanny’s of bane chief
brother’s the determined was she as Mansfield with unconnected as fate
distant as be to thither return her hoped have could she if be, should
of light been have would she his, think to inclined much was she as
deeply more the observed, and recollected she more the but indeed; heart
Miss for train fairer a in now was everything that convinced she was
the side his On before. been ever had it than Edmund marrying Crawford’s
the objections, His equivocal. less hers on stronger, was inclination
tell could nobody away, done all seemed integrity, his of scruples
got equally were ambition her of hesitations and doubts the and how;
to imputed be only could It reason. apparent without equally over--and
love, to yielded feelings bad her and good His attachment. increasing
some as soon as town to go to was He them. unite must love such and
a within completed--perhaps were Lacey Thornton to relative business
once when and it; of talk to loved he going, of talked he fortnight;
be must acceptance Her rest. the doubt not could Fanny again, her with
remaining still feelings bad were there yet and offer; his as certain as
she independently, her, to sorrowful most it of prospect the made which
self. of independently believed,

amiable some of spite in Crawford, Miss conversation, last very their In
Crawford; Miss been still had kindness, personal much and sensations,
suspicion any without and bewildered, and astray led mind a shewn still
but love, might She light. itself fancying yet darkened, so; being of
there believed Fanny sentiment. other any by Edmund deserve not did she
be may she and them; between common in feeling second a scarcely was
Crawford’s Miss of chance the on looking for sages older by forgiven
Edmund’s if that thinking for desperate, nearly as improvement future
clearing in little so done already had love of season this in influence
finally be would worth his notions, her regulating and judgment, her
matrimony. of years in even her on wasted

circumstanced, so people young any for more hoped have might Experience
that nature Crawford’s Miss to denied have not would impartiality and
to her lead would which women of nature general the of participation
But own. her as respected and loved she man the of opinions the adopt
and them, from much very suffered she persuasions, Fanny’s were such as
pain. without Crawford Miss of speak never could

own his and hopes own his with on went meanwhile, Thomas, Sir
human of knowledge his all by right, a feeling still observations,
consequence and power of loss the of effect the see to expect to nature,
a producing lover the of attentions past the and spirits, niece’s his on
for account to able afterwards soon was he and return; their for craving
prospect the by this, all seeing indubitably and completely yet not his
to enough quite be to allow could he approach whose visitor, another of
days’ ten a obtained had William watching. was he spirits the support
the coming, was and Northamptonshire, to given be to absence, of leave
happiness his shew to made, latest the because lieutenants, of happiest
uniform. his describe and

too, there uniform his shew to delighted been have would he and came; He
the So duty. on except appearance its prohibited custom cruel not had
Fanny before that conjectured Edmund and Portsmouth, at remained uniform
freshness the all and freshness own its all it, seeing of chance any had
a into sunk be would It away. worn be must feelings wearer’s its of
worthless, more or unbecoming, more be can what for disgrace; of badge
or year a lieutenant a been has who lieutenant, a of uniform the than
Edmund, reasoned So him? before commanders made others sees and two,
Fanny’s placed which scheme a of confidant the him made father his till
glory his all in Thrush H.M.S. of lieutenant second the seeing of chance
light. another in

to back brother her accompany should she that was scheme This
occurred had It family. own her with time little a spend and Portsmouth,
desirable and right a as musings, dignified his of one in Thomas, Sir to
his consulted he mind, his up made absolutely he before but measure;
right. was what but nothing saw and way, every it considered Edmund son.
time; better a at done be not could and itself, in good was thing The
was This Fanny. to agreeable highly being it of doubt no had he and
be” shall it so “then decisive a and Thomas; Sir determine to enough
some with it from retiring Thomas Sir business; the of stage that closed
had he what above and over good of views and satisfaction, of feelings
had away her sending in motive prime his for son; his to communicated
again, parents her seeing her of propriety the with do to little very
certainly He happy. her making of idea any with all at nothing and
be to her wished certainly as he but willingly, go to her wished
little a that and ended; visit her before home of sick heartily
would Park Mansfield of luxuries and elegancies the from abstinence
estimate juster a to her incline and state, sober a into mind her bring
of comfort, equal and permanence, greater of home that of value the of
offer. the had she which

must he which understanding, niece’s his upon project medicinal a was It
in years nine or eight of residence A diseased. present at as consider
of powers her disordered little a had plenty and wealth of abode the
probability, all in would, house father’s Her judging. and comparing
be would she that trusted he and income; good a of value the her teach
had he experiment the for life, her all woman, happier and wiser the
devised.

strong a had have must she raptures, to addicted all at been Fanny Had
her when intended, was what understood first she when them of attack
brothers, and parents, the visiting of offer the her made first uncle
of life; her half almost divided been had she whom from sisters, and
with infancy, her of scenes the to months of couple a for returning
the and journey, her of companion and protector the for William
remaining his of hour last the to William see to continuing of certainty
been have must it delight, of bursts to way given ever she Had land. on
deep, quiet, a of was happiness her but delighted, was she for then,
always was she talker, great a never though and sort; heart-swelling
she moment the At strongly. most feeling when silence to inclined more
the with familiarised when Afterwards, accept. and thank only could
largely more speak could she opened, suddenly so enjoyment of visions
emotions were there still but felt; she what of Edmund and William to
all of remembrance The words. in clothed be not could that tenderness of
from torn being in suffered had she what of and pleasures, earliest her
be to if as seemed it and strength, renewed with her over came them,
the of out grown since had that pain every heal would again home at
many, so by loved circle, a such of centre the in be To separation.
affection feel to before; been ever had she than all by loved more and
who those of equal the herself feel to restraint; or fear without
safe Crawfords, the of mention all from peace at be to her; surrounded
This account. their on reproach a fancied be could which look every from
half but be could that fondness a with on dwelt be to prospect a was
acknowledged.

be might she perhaps (and _him_ from months two be too--to Edmund,
distance, a At good. her do must three) absence her make to allowed
perpetual the from safe and kindness, his or looks his by unassailed
confidence, his avoid to striving and heart, his knowing of irritation
should she state; properer a into herself reason to able be should she
there, everything arranging and London, in as him of think to able be
was Mansfield at bear to hard been have might What wretchedness. without
Portsmouth. at evil slight a become to

comfortable being Bertram’s aunt her of doubt the was drawback only The
be might she _there_ but else; one no to use of was She her. without
of part that and of; think to like not did she that degree a to missed
accomplish, to Thomas Sir for hardest the indeed, was, arrangement the
all. at accomplished have could _he_ only what and

on resolved really had he When Park. Mansfield at master was he But
long of dint by now and through; it carry always could he measure, any
Fanny’s of duty the on dwelling and explaining subject, the on talking
go; her let to wife his induce did he family, her seeing sometimes
Lady for conviction, than however, submission, from rather it obtaining
thought Thomas Sir that than more little very of convinced was Bertram
of calmness the In must. she that therefore and go, to ought Fanny
meditations, own her of flow impartial the in dressing-room, own her
any acknowledge not could she statements, bewildering his by unbiassed
done had who mother and father a near going ever Fanny’s for necessity
the to as And herself. to useful so was she while long, so her without
point the was discussion Norris’s Mrs. under which her, missing not
admitting against steadily very herself set she proved, be to attempted
thing. such any

He dignity. and conscience, reason, her to appealed had Thomas Sir
self-command and goodness her of it demanded and sacrifice, a it called
very be could Fanny that her persuade to wanted Norris Mrs. But such. as
as her to time own her all up give to ready being spared--_she_ well
missed. or wanted be really not could short, in requested--and,

are you say dare “I reply. Bertram’s Lady all was sister,” be, may “That
much.” very her miss shall I sure am I but right; very

offer to wrote Fanny Portsmouth. with communicate to was step next The
few kind--a so was short, though answer, mother’s her and herself;
prospect the in joy a motherly and natural so expressed lines simple
of views daughter’s the all confirm to as again, child her seeing of
a find now should she that her her--convincing with being in happiness
no shewn certainly had who “mama” the in friend affectionate and warm
suppose easily could she this but formerly; her for fondness remarkable
alienated probably had She fancy. own her or fault own her been have to
been or temper, fearful a of fretfulness and helplessness the by love
could many so among one any than share larger a wanting in unreasonable
forbear, to how and useful, be to how better knew she when Now, deserve.
incessant the by occupied longer no be could mother her when and
and leisure be would there children, little of full house a of demands
and mother what be soon should they and comfort, every for inclination
other. each to be to ought daughter

the be would It sister. his as plan the in happy as almost was William
he before moment last the to there her have to him to pleasure greatest
first his from in came he when still there her find perhaps and sailed,
before Thrush the see to much very so her wanted he besides, And cruise.
in sloop finest the certainly was Thrush harbour--the of out went she
too, dockyard, the in improvements several were there service--and the
her. shew to longed quite he which

a be would while a for home at being her that add to scruple not did He
everybody. to advantage great

of some want to seem we “but he; said is,” it how know not do “I
in always is house The father’s. my at orderliness and ways nice your
You sure. am I way, better a in going things set will You confusion.
to useful so be will you and be, to ought all it how mother my tell will
you. mind and love boys the make and Betsey, teach will you and Susan,
be!” all will it comfortable and right How

few very a but remained there arrived, answer Price’s Mrs. time the By
days those of one of part for and Mansfield; at spent be to more days
of subject the on alarm of deal good a in were travellers young the
Mrs. and of, talked be to came it of mode the when for journey, their
money brother-in-law’s her save to anxiety her all that found Norris
expensive less a for hints and wishes her of spite in that and vain, was
Thomas Sir saw she when post; travel to were they Fanny, of conveyance
the with struck was she purpose, the for notes William give actually
suddenly and carriage, the in third a for room being there of idea
poor her see and go to them, with go to inclination strong a with seized
she that say must She thoughts. her proclaimed She Price. sister dear
such be would it people; young the with go to mind a half than more had
for Price sister dear poor her seen not had she her; to indulgence an
in people young the to help a be would it and years; twenty than more
could she and them; for manage to head older her have to journey their
unkind very it feel would Price sister dear poor her thinking help not
opportunity. an such by come to not her of

idea. the at horror-struck were Fanny and William

at destroyed be would journey comfortable their of comfort the All
suspense Their other. each at looked they countenances woeful With once.
Mrs. dissuade. or encourage to interfered one No two. or hour an lasted
the to ended, it and herself; by matter the settle to left was Norris
could she that recollection the in niece, and nephew her of joy infinite
a was she that present; at Park Mansfield from spared be possibly not
to her for Bertram Lady and Thomas Sir to necessary too deal great
and week, a for even them leave to herself to it answer to able be
being of that to pleasure other every sacrifice certainly must therefore
them. to useful

for Portsmouth to taken though that her, to occurred fact, in had, It
own her paying avoid to her for possible hardly be would it nothing,
the all to left was Price sister dear poor her So again. back expenses
twenty another and opportunity, an such missing her of disappointment
begun. perhaps, absence, years’

of absence this journey, Portsmouth this by affected were plans Edmund’s
his as well as Park Mansfield to make to sacrifice a had too He Fanny’s.
he but London; to going be to time, this about intended, had He aunt.
most of else everybody when just mother and father his leave not could
felt effort, an with and them; leaving was comfort their to importance
which journey a longer two or week a for delayed he of, boasted not but
for happiness his fixing its of hope the with to forward looking was he
ever.

know must she that already, much so knew She it. of Fanny told He
discourse confidential other one of substance the made It everything.
to it feeling from affected more the was Fanny and Crawford; Miss about
mentioned be ever would name Crawford’s Miss which in time last the be
was she afterwards Once liberty. of remains any with them between
the in niece her telling been had Bertram Lady him. by to alluded
good a be to promising and often, and soon her to write to evening
added then moment, convenient a at Edmund, and herself; correspondent
anything have I when Fanny, you, to write shall _I_ “And whisper, a in
hear, to like will you think I that say to anything about, writing worth
she Had quarter.” other any from soon so hear not will you that and
she when face, his in glow the listened, she while meaning his doubted
decisive. been have would him, at up looked

Edmund from letter a That herself. arm to try must she letter this For
yet not had she that feel to began She terror! of subject a be should
progress the which sentiment and opinion of changes the all through gone
of world this in occasion circumstances of variation and time of
exhausted been yet not had mind human the of vicissitudes The changes.
her. by

last the eagerly, and willingly did she as going though Fanny! Poor
was heart Her wretchedness. be still must Park Mansfield at evening
house, the in room every for tears had She parting. at sad completely
because aunt, her to clung She inhabitant. beloved every for more much
struggling with uncle her of hand the kissed she her; miss would she
could she Edmund, for as and him; displeased had she because sobs,
with came moment last the when think, nor look, nor speak, neither
her giving was he knew she that over was it till not was it and _him_;
brother. a of farewell affectionate the

in early very begin to was journey the for overnight, passed this All
breakfast, at met party diminished small, the when and morning; the
stage. one advanced already as of talked were Fanny and William



XXXVIII CHAPTER

soon William, with being of happiness the and travelling, of novelty The
Park Mansfield when spirits, Fanny’s on effect natural their produced
and ended, was stage first their time the by and behind; left fairly was
of leave take to able was she carriage, Thomas’s Sir quit to were they
looks. cheerful with messages, proper back send and coachman, old the

end. no was there sister and brother the between talk pleasant Of
and mind, William’s of glee high the to amusement an supplied Everything
higher-toned their of intervals the in joke and frolic of full was he
the of praise in begin, not did they if ended, which of all subjects,
action an for schemes employed, be would she how conjectures Thrush,
of out lieutenant first the (supposing which force, superior some with
was lieutenant) first the to merciful very not was William and way, the
upon speculations or possible, as soon as step next the himself give to
only with home, at distributed generously be to was which prize-money,
comfortable, cottage little the make to enough of reservation the
life later and middle their all pass to were Fanny and he which in
together.

made Crawford, Mr. involved they as far as concerns, immediate Fanny’s
from and passed, had what knew William conversation. their of part no
towards cold so be should feelings sister’s his that lamented heart his
was he but characters; human of first the as consider must he whom man a
knowing and blame; to unable therefore and love, for all be to age an of
slightest the by her distress not would he subject, the on wish her
allusion.

She Crawford. Mr. by forgotten yet not herself suppose to reason had She
had which weeks three the within sister his from repeatedly heard had
been had there letter each in and Mansfield, leaving their since passed
It speeches. his like determined and warm himself, from lines few a
had she as unpleasant as quite found Fanny which correspondence a was
was affectionate, and lively writing, of style Crawford’s Miss feared.
reading into forced thus was she what of independent evil, an itself
read had she till rest never would Edmund for pen, brother’s the from
his to listen to had she then and him; to letter the of chief the
There attachments. her of warmth the and language, her of admiration
so recollection, of allusion, of message, of much so been fact, in had,
it suppose but not could Fanny that letter, every in Mansfield of much
of purpose a into forced herself find to and hear; to him for meant
the her bringing was which correspondence a into compelled kind, that
administer to her obliging and love, not did she man the of addresses
Here, mortifying. cruelly was did, she man the of passion adverse the to
the under longer no When advantage. promised removal present her too,
no have would Crawford Miss that trusted she Edmund, with roof same
at that and trouble, the overcome to enough strong writing for motive
nothing. into dwindle would correspondence their Portsmouth

proceeded Fanny others, hundred ten among these, as thoughts such With
could as expeditiously as and cheerfully, and safely journey her in
Oxford, entered They February. of month dirty the in hoped be rationally
they as college Edmund’s of glimpse hasty a only take could she but
where Newbury, reached they till anywhere stop no made and along, passed
enjoyments the up wound supper, and dinner uniting meal, comfortable a
day. the of fatigues and

no with and hour; early an at again off them saw morning next The
environs the in were and advanced, regularly they delays, no and events,
her, around look to Fanny for daylight yet was there while Portsmouth of
and drawbridge, the passed They buildings. new the at wonder and
guided as, fail to beginning only was light the and town; the entered
street, narrow a into rattled were they voice, powerful William’s by
small a of door the before up drawn and Street, High the from leading
Price. Mr. by inhabited now house

The apprehension. and hope all flutter; and agitation all was Fanny
in seemingly maidservant, trollopy-looking a stopped, they moment
on intent more and forward, stepped door, the at them for waiting
“The with, began immediately help, any them giving than news the telling
has officers the of one and sir, please harbour, of out gone is Thrush
years eleven of boy tall fine a by interrupted was She to--” here been
while and aside, maid the pushed house, the of out rushing who, old,
just are “You out, called himself, chaise-door the opening was William
went Thrush The half-hour. this you for looking been have We time. in
And sight. beautiful a was It her. saw I morning. this harbour of out
Campbell Mr. And two. or day a in orders her have will she think they
Thrush’s the of one got has he you: for ask to o’clock four at here was
in here be would you hoped and six, at her to off going is and boats,
him.” with go to time

was carriage, the of out her helped William as Fanny, at two or stare A
no made he but bestowed; brother this which notice voluntary the all
detailing in engaged entirely still though him, kissing her to objection
which in harbour, of out going Thrush’s the of particulars farther
of career his commence to being interest, of right strong a had he
time. very this at her in seamanship

the of entrance-passage narrow the in was Fanny and moment Another
true of looks with there her met who arms, mother’s her in and house,
they because more, the loved Fanny which features with and kindness,
sisters: two her were there and her, before Bertram’s aunt her brought
of youngest the Betsey, and fourteen, of girl fine well-grown a Susan,
with though way, their in her see to glad five--both about family, the
want. not did Fanny manner But her. receiving in manner of advantage no
satisfied. be should she her, love but they Would

conviction first her that small so parlour, a into taken then was She
stood she and better, something to passage-room a only being its of was
was there saw she when but on; invited be to expecting moment a for
she her, before habitation of signs were there that and door, other no
should they lest grieved and herself, reproved thoughts, her back called
enough long stay not could however, mother, Her suspected. been have
welcome to street-door, the to again gone was She anything. suspect to
you have But you. see to am I glad how William, dear my “Oh! William.
days three already; harbour of out gone is She Thrush? the about heard
about do to am I what know not do I and it; of thought any had we before
her have may she for time; in ready be never will they things, Sam’s
must you now And unawares. quite me takes It perhaps. to-morrow, orders
about worry a in quite here, been has Campbell too. Spithead for off be
comfortable a such had have to thought I do? we shall what now and you;
once.” at me upon comes everything here and you, with evening

for always was everything that her telling cheerfully, answered son Her
to obliged being in inconvenience own his of light making and best; the
soon. so away hurry

might I that harbour, in stayed had she rather much had I sure, be “To
ashore, boat a is there as but comfort; in you with hours few a sat have
Whereabouts it. for help no is there and once, at off go better had I
here’s matter; no But Canopus? the Near Spithead? at lay Thrush the does
Come, passage? the in stay we should why and parlour, the in Fanny
yet.” Fanny dear own your at looked hardly have you mother,

daughter her kissed kindly having Price Mrs. and came, both they In
natural very with began growth, her on little a commented and again,
travellers. as wants and fatigues their for feel to solicitude

I have? you will what now, and be! both must you tired how dears! “Poor
for watching been have I and Betsey come. never would you think to began
would what And eat? to anything get you did when And half-hour. this you
some for be would you whether tell not could I now? have to like you
have would I else or journey, your after tea, of dish a only or meat,
before here be will Campbell afraid am I now And ready. something got
is It hand. at butcher no have we and steak, a dress to time is there
off better were We street. the in butcher no have to inconvenient very
be can it as soon as tea some like would you Perhaps house. last our in
got.”

my Betsey, “Then, anything. to it prefer should they declared both They
and on; water the put has Rebecca if see and kitchen the into run dear,
could we wish I can. she as soon as tea-things the in bring to her tell
messenger.” little handy very a is Betsey but mended; bell the get

fine her before abilities her shew to proud alacrity, with went Betsey
sister. new

got, have we fire sad a “what mother, anxious the continued me!” “Dear
nearer, chair your Draw cold. with starved both are you say dare I and
told I sure am I about. been has Rebecca what think cannot I dear. my
taken have should you Susan, ago. hour an half coals some bring to her
fire.” the of care

fearless, a in Susan, said things,” my moving mama, upstairs, was “I
just but had you know “You Fanny. startled which tone, self-defending
I and room; other the have should I and Fanny sister my that settled
help.” any me give to Rebecca get not could

driver the first, bustles: various by prevented was discussion Farther
about Rebecca and Sam between squabble a was there then paid; be to came
all manage would he which trunk, sister’s his up carrying of manner the
voice loud own his himself, Price Mr. walked in lastly, and way; own his
his away kicked he kind oath the of something with as him, preceding
called and passage, the in bandbox daughter’s his and port-manteau son’s
the into walked he and however, brought, was candle no candle; a for out
room.

again down sank but him, meet to risen had feelings doubting with Fanny
With of. unthought and dusk, the in undistinguished herself finding on
instantly he voice, eager an and hand, son’s his of shake friendly a
the heard you Have you. see to Glad boy. my back, welcome began--“Ha!
the is Sharp morning. this harbour of out went Thrush The news?
here been has doctor The time! in just are you G--, By see! you word,
for off be to is and boats, the of one got has he you: for inquiring
Turner’s to been have I him. with go better had you so six, by Spithead
if wonder not should I done. be to way a in all is it mess; your about
if wind, this with sail cannot you but to-morrow: orders your had you
will you thinks Walsh Captain and westward; the to cruise to are you
I G--, By Elephant. the with westward, the to cruise a have certainly
you thought he that now, just saying, was Scholey old But may! you wish
whatever ready, are we well, Well, Texel. the to first sent be would
the in here being not by sight fine a lost you G--, by But happens.
out been have not would I harbour! of out go Thrush the see to morning
breakfast-time, at in ran Scholey Old pounds. thousand a for way the of
and up, jumped I out, coming was and moorings her slipped had she say to
beauty perfect a was there ever If platform. the to steps two but made
in anybody and Spithead, at lays she there and one; is she afloat,
platform the upon was I eight-and-twenty. an for her take would England
Endymion, the to close lays She her. at looking afternoon this hours two
hulk.” sheer the of eastward the to just Cleopatra, the and her between

myself. her put have should I where just “_that’s_ William, cried “Ha!”
is here sir; sister, my is here But Spithead. at berth best the It’s
see not do you dark so is “it forward; her leading and turning Fanny,”
her.”

now Price Mr. her, forgot quite had he that acknowledgment an With
observed and hug, cordial a her given having and daughter; his received
a wanting be would supposed he and woman, a into grown was she that
Fanny again. her forget to inclined much very seemed soon, husband
and language his by pained sadly feelings with seat, her to back shrunk
the of only and son, his to only on talked he and spirits; of smell his
subject, that in was he as interested warmly William, though Thrush,
long her and Fanny, of think father his make to tried once than more
journey. long and absence

was there as but obtained; was candle a longer, time some sitting After
kitchen, the from reports Betsey’s from nor, tea, of appearance no still
to determined William period, considerable a under any of hope much
for preparations necessary the make and dress, his change and go
comfort in tea his have might he that directly, board on removal his
afterwards.

eight about dirty, and ragged boys, rosy-faced two room, the left he As
coming and school, from released just it into rushed old, years nine and
of out gone was Thrush the that tell and sister, their see to eagerly
going Fanny’s since born been had Charles Charles. and Tom harbour;
particular a felt now and nurse, to helped often had she Tom but away,
she Tom but tenderly, very kissed were Both again. seeing in pleasure
had she baby the of features the trace to try to her, by keep to wanted
however, Tom, herself. of preference infant his of to, talked and loved,
talked be and stand to not home came he treatment: such for mind no had
from burst soon had boys both and noise; a make and about run to but to,
ached. temples her till parlour-door the slammed and her,

brothers two only remained there home; at were that all seen now had She
office public a in clerk a was whom of one Susan, and herself between
she though But Indiaman. an board on midshipman other the and London, in
all _heard_ yet not had she family, the of members the all _seen_ had
a her brought hour an of quarter Another make. could they noise the
of landing-place the from out calling soon was William more. deal great
distress in was He Rebecca. for and mother his for story second the
was key A again. find not did and there, left had he that something for
slight, some and hat, new his at got having of accused Betsey mislaid,
been had he which waistcoat, uniform his of alteration essential but
neglected. entirely him, for done have to promised

all themselves, defend to up went all Betsey and Rebecca, Price, Mrs.
as done be to was job the and loudest, Rebecca but together, talking
Betsey send to vain in trying William hurry; great a in could it as well
whole the was; she where troublesome being from her keep or again, down
plainly be could open, was house the in door every almost as which, of
the by intervals at drowned when except parlour, the in distinguished
down and up other each chasing Charles and Tom, Sam, of noise superior
hallooing. and about tumbling and stairs,

the of thinness and house the of smallness The stunned. almost was Fanny
of fatigue the to added that, her, to close so everything brought walls
to how knew hardly she agitation, recent her all and journey, her
having Susan for enough, tranquil was all room the _Within_ it. bear
herself and father her only soon were there others, the with disappeared
a of loan accustomary the newspaper, a out taking he, and remaining;
recollect to seeming without it, studying to himself applied neighbour,
the and himself between held was candle solitary The existence. her
had she but convenience; possible her to reference any without paper,
aching her from screened light the have to glad was and do, to nothing
contemplation. sorrowful broken, bewildered, in sat she as head,

a such not had she home, a such not was it alas! But, home. at was She
had right What unreasonable. was she herself; checked as--she welcome,
lost long so none, have could She family? her to importance of be to she
and been, had always they dearest, be must concerns William’s of! sight
herself, about asked or said little so have to Yet right. every had he
to her pain did It Mansfield! after made inquiry an scarcely have to
dear, much--the so done had who friends the forgotten; Mansfield have
Perhaps rest. the all up swallowed subject one here, But friends! dear
preeminently now be must Thrush the of destination The so. be must it
to was only _She_ difference. the shew might two or day A interesting.
in No, Mansfield. at so been have not would it thought she Yet blame.
and times of consideration a been have would there house uncle’s her
towards attention an propriety, a subject, of regulation a seasons,
here. not was there which everybody

half nearly for received these like thoughts which interruption only The
calculated all at not father’s, her of burst sudden a from was hour an
hallooing and thumping of pitch ordinary than more a At them. compose to
are they How dogs! young those take “Devil exclaimed, he passage, the in
fit is boy That rest! the all than louder voice Sam’s Ay, out! singing
I or pipe, confounded your stop Sam, there! you Holla, boatswain. a for
you.” after be shall

minutes five within though that disregarded, palpably so was threat This
down, sat and together room the into burst all boys three the afterwards
their than more anything of proof a as it consider not could Fanny
panting and faces hot their which fagged, thoroughly time the for being
each kicking still were they as especially prove, to seemed breaths
under immediately starts sudden at out hallooing and shins, other’s
eye. father’s their

for was it welcome: more something brought door the of opening next The
that seeing of despair to almost begun had she which tea-things, the
informed appearance inferior whose girl, attendant an and Susan evening.
upper the seen previously had she that surprise, great her to Fanny,
as looking, Susan meal; the for necessary everything in brought servant,
divided if as sister, her at glanced and fire the on kettle the put she
usefulness, and activity her shewing of triumph agreeable the between
“She office. an such by herself demean to thought being of dread the and
the make help and Sally hurry “to said, she kitchen,” the into been had
they when know not did she or butter, and bread the spread and toast,
something want must sister her sure was she and tea, got have should
journey.” her after

very be should she that own but not could She thankful. very was Fanny
if as it, making about set immediately Susan and tea, little a of glad
little a only with and herself; to all employment the have to pleased
her keeping at attempts injudicious few some and bustle, unnecessary
well. very herself acquitted could, she than order better in brothers
heart and head her body; her as refreshed much as was spirit Fanny’s
open, an had Susan kindness. well-timed such for better the soon were
her find to hoped Fanny and William, like was she countenance; sensible
herself. towards goodwill and disposition in him like

not followed reentered, William things of state placid more this In
lieutenant’s his in complete He, Betsey. and mother his by behind far
graceful more and firmer, taller, the all moving and looking uniform,
directly up walked face, his over smile happiest the with and it, for
in moment a for him at looked seat, her from rising who, Fanny, to
out sob to neck his round arms her threw then and admiration, speechless
pleasure. and pain of emotions various her

wiping and herself; recovered soon she unhappy, appear to not Anxious
parts striking the all admire and notice to able was tears, her away
of hopes cheerful his to spirits reviving with listening dress; his of
of even and sailed, they before day every of part some shore on being
sloop. the see to Spithead to her getting

a Thrush, the of surgeon the Campbell, Mr. in brought bustle next The
for and friend, his for call to came who man, young well-behaved very
hasty some with and chair, a found contrivance some with was there whom
another after and saucer; and cup a tea-maker’s, young the of washing
rising noise gentlemen, the between talk earnest of hour an of quarter
motion in all last at boys and men bustle, upon bustle and noise, upon
William ready, was everything off; setting for came moment the together,
spite in boys, three the for gone; were them of all and leave, took
Mr. and brother their see to determined entreaty, mother’s their of
to time same the at off walked Price Mr. and sally-port; the to Campbell
newspaper. neighbour’s his back carry

accordingly, and for; hoped be now might tranquillity like Something
tea-things, the away carry to on prevailed been had Rebecca when
a for looking time some room the about walked had Price Mrs. and
the in drawer a from out hunted last at Betsey which shirt-sleeve,
the and composed, well pretty were females of party small the kitchen,
ready Sam getting of impossibility the over again lamented having mother
friends the and daughter eldest her of think to leisure at was time, in
from. come had she

Bertram sister did earliest--“How the of one but began: inquiries few A
get to herself as plagued much as she “Was servants?” her about manage
and Northamptonshire, from away mind her led servants?”--soon tolerable
of character shocking the and grievances, domestic own her on it fixed
the were two own her believed she whom of servants, Portsmouth the all
forgotten all were Bertrams The completely. her engrossed worst, very
much also had Susan whom against Rebecca, of faults the detailing in
so seem did who and more, deal great a Betsey little and depose, to
help not could Fanny that recommendation, single a without thoroughly
year her when her with part to meant mother her that presuming modestly
up. was

her of rid be shall I hope I sure am “I Price; Mrs. cried year!” “Her
November. till up be not will that for year, a staid has she before
is it that Portsmouth, in dear, my pass, a such to come are Servants
hope no have I year. a half than more them keeps one if miracle a quite
should I Rebecca, with part to was I if and settled; being ever of
difficult very a am I think not do I yet And worse. something get only
is there for enough, easy is place the sure am I and please; to mistress
myself.” work the half do often I and her, under girl a always

a be not might there that convinced being from not but silent; was Fanny
Betsey, at looking sat now she As evils. these of some for found remedy
pretty very a sister, another of particularly think but not could she
into went she when younger much not there left had she whom girl, little
been had There afterwards. years few a died had who Northamptonshire,
had days early those in Fanny her. about amiable remarkably something
last at had death her of news the when and Susan; to her preferred
sight The afflicted. quite been time short a for had Mansfield, reached
would she but again, back Mary little of image the brought Betsey of
While world. the for her to alluding by mother her pained have not
was distance, small a at Betsey, ideas, these with her considering
the at it screen to meaning eyes, her catch to something out holding
Susan’s. from time same

to it shew and “come Fanny; said love?” my there, got you have “What
me.”

and own, her as it claiming Susan, jumped Up knife. silver a was It
protection, mother’s her to ran child the but away; it get to trying
evidently and warmly, very did she which reproach, only could Susan and
not was she that hard very was “It side. her on Fanny interest to hoping
had Mary sister little knife; own her was it knife; _own_ her have to
keep to it had have to ought she and deathbed, her upon her to it left
letting always was and her, from it kept mama But ago. long herself
would Betsey that be would it of end the and it; of hold get Betsey
that her _promised_ had mama though own, her for it get and it, spoil
hands.” own her in it have not should Betsey

tenderness and honour, duty, of feeling Every shocked. quite was Fanny
reply. mother’s her and speech sister’s her by wounded was

can how “now, voice, complaining a in Price, Mrs. cried Susan,” “Now,
you wish I knife. that about quarrelling always are You cross? so be you
to is Susan cross how Betsey; little Poor quarrelsome. so be not would
to you sent I when dear, my out, it taken have not should you But you!
so is Susan because it, touch to not you told I know You drawer. the
little Mary Poor Betsey. time, another it hide must I it. about cross
to me it gave she when contention of bone a such be would it thought
but could she soul! little Poor died. she before hours two only keep,
have Susan sister ‘Let prettily, so said she and heard, be to speak just
so was she dear! little Poor buried.’ and dead am I when mama, knife, my
through all bed, in her by lay it have would she that Fanny, it, of fond
Admiral Mrs. old godmother, good her of gift the was It illness. her
little Poor death. for taken was she before weeks six only Maxwell,
own My come. to evil from away taken was she Well, creature! sweet
good a such of luck the not have “_you_ her), (fondling Betsey”
people little such of think to off far too lives Norris Aunt godmother.
you.” as

to message a but Norris, aunt from convey to nothing indeed had Fanny
her learnt and girl, good a was god-daughter her that hoped she say
drawing-room the in murmur slight a moment one at been had There book.
sound second no but prayer-book; a her sending about Park Mansfield at
home gone had however, Norris, Mrs. purpose. a such of heard been had
but, idea; that with husband her of prayer-books old two down taken and
found was One off. went generosity of ardour the examination, upon
too be to other the and eyes, child’s a for print a small too have to
about. carry to her for cumbersome

first the accept to thankful was again, fatigued and fatigued Fanny,
at cry her finished had Betsey before and bed; to going of invitation
sister, of honour in extraordinary hour one only up sit to allowed being
boys the again; noise and confusion in below all leaving off, was she
and rum his for out calling father her cheese, toasted for begging
be. to ought she where never Rebecca and water,

scantily and confined the in spirits her raise to nothing was There
of smallness The Susan. with share to was she that chamber furnished
and passage the of narrowness the and indeed, below, and above rooms the
think to learned soon She imagination. her beyond her struck staircase,
house _that_ in Park, Mansfield at attic little own her of respect with
comfort. anybody’s for small too reckoned



XXXIX CHAPTER

her wrote she when feelings, niece’s his all seen have Thomas Sir Could
good a though for despaired; have not would he aunt, her to letter first
again, William seeing soon of hope the morning, pleasant a rest, night’s
Charles and Tom from house, the of state quiet comparatively the and
father her and own, his of project some on Sam school, to gone being
the on cheerfully herself express to her enabled lounges, usual his on
consciousness, perfect own her to still, were there home, of subject
felt she that half only seen have he Could suppressed. drawbacks many
of sure Crawford Mr. thought have would he week, a of end the before
sagacity. own his with delighted been and her,

place, first the In disappointment. all was it ended, week the Before
changed, had wind the orders, her had had Thrush The gone. was William
and Portsmouth; reaching their from days four within sailed was he and
and short a in twice, only him seen had she days those during
free no been had There duty. on ashore come had he when way, hurried
no dockyard, the to visit no ramparts, the on walk no conversation,
and planned had they that all of nothing Thrush, the with acquaintance
William’s except her, failed quarter that in Everything on. depended
back stepped He her. for was home leaving on thought last His affection.
tender, is She mother. Fanny, of care “Take say, to door the to again
of care take you, charge I us. of rest the like it rough to used not and
Fanny.”

not could Fanny was, in her left had he home the and gone: was William
of reverse very the respect every almost in herself, from it conceal
and disorder, noise, of abode the was It wished. have could she what
it as done was nothing place, right their in was Nobody impropriety.
her On hoped. had she as parents her respect not could She be. to ought
negligent more was he but sanguine, been not had confidence her father,
than coarser, manners his and worse, were habits his family, his of
no had he but abilities want not did He for. prepared been had she
only read he profession; his beyond information no and curiosity,
the dockyard, the of only talked he navy-list; the and newspaper the
was he drank, he and swore he Motherbank; the and Spithead, harbour,
approaching anything recall to able been never had She gross. and dirty
remained had There herself. of treatment former his in tenderness to
scarcely he now and loudness; and roughness of impression general a only
joke. coarse a of object the her make to but her, noticed ever

hoped had she _there_ greater: was mother her in disappointment Her
of being of scheme flattering Every nothing. almost found and much,
unkind; not was Price Mrs. ground. the to fell soon her to consequence
becoming and confidence, and affection her on gaining of instead but,
from kindness greater with met never daughter her dear, more and more
was nature of instinct The arrival. her of day first the on than her
Her source. other no had attachment Price’s Mrs. and satisfied, soon
nor leisure neither had she full; quite already were time her and heart
her. to much been had never daughters Her Fanny. on bestow to affection
the was Betsey but William, of especially sons, her of fond was She
most was she her To regarded. much ever had she whom girls her of first
darling; her Betsey pride; her was William indulgent. injudiciously
her of rest the all occupied Charles and Tom, Sam, Richard, John, and
These comforts. her and worries her alternately solicitude, maternal
her and house her to chiefly given was time her heart: her shared
busy was all bustle; slow of kind a in spent were days Her servants.
altering without it, lamenting and behindhand always on, getting without
regularity; or contrivance without economist, an be to wishing ways; her
and better, them make to skill without servants, her with dissatisfied
power any without them, indulging or reprimanding, or helping, whether
respect. their engaging of

Bertram Lady resembled more much very Price Mrs. sisters, two her Of
Mrs. of any without necessity, by manager a was She Norris. Mrs. than
disposition Her activity. her of any or it, for inclination Norris’s
of situation a and Bertram’s; Lady like indolent, and easy naturally was
suited more much been have would do-nothingness and affluence similar
her which one the of self-denials and exertions the than capacity her to
a good as just made have might She in. her placed had marriage imprudent
a been have would Norris Mrs. but Bertram, Lady as consequence of woman
income. small a on children nine of mother respectable more

scruple might She of. sensible be but not could Fanny this all of Much
was mother her that feel did and must she but words, the of use make to
taught neither who slattern, a dawdle, a parent, ill-judging partial, a
mismanagement of scene the was house whose children, her restrained nor
no talent, no had who and end, to beginning from discomfort and
her know to curiosity no herself; towards affection no conversation,
company her for inclination no and friendship, her of desire no better,
feelings. such of sense her lessen could that

home, her above appear to not and useful, be to anxious very was Fanny
education, foreign her by disinclined, or disqualified way any in or
about set therefore and comforts, its to help her contributing from
with late, and early working by and immediately; Sam for working
shipped was boy the that much so did despatch, great and perseverance
pleasure great had She ready. linen his half than more with last, at off
have would they how conceive not could but usefulness, her feeling in
her. without managed

went, he when regretted rather she was, he as overbearing and loud Sam,
errand any in employed be to glad and intelligent, and clever was he for
as given Susan, of remonstrances the spurning though and town; the in
and ill-timed with themselves, in reasonable very though were, they
services Fanny’s by influenced be to beginning was warmth, powerless
younger three the of best the that found she and persuasions; gentle and
as years many as least at being Charles and Tom him: in gone was ones
which reason, and feeling of age that from distant juniors his were they
to endeavouring of and friends, making of expediency the suggest might
smallest the making of despaired soon sister Their disagreeable. less be
address of means any by untameable quite were they _them_; on impression
a brought afternoon Every attempt. to time or spirits had she which
early very she and house; the over all games riotous their of return
half-holiday. constant Saturday’s of approach the at sigh to learned

her alphabet the think to up trained child, spoiled a too, Betsey,
and pleasure, her at servants the with be to left enemy, greatest
to ready as almost was she them, of evil any report to encouraged then
she temper Susan’s of and assist; or love to able being of despair
rash her mother, her with disagreements continual Her doubts. many had
least at were Betsey, with petulance and Charles, and Tom with squabbles
means no by were they admitting though that, Fanny to distressing so
to them push could that disposition the feared she provocation, without
to repose any affording from and amiable, from far be must length such
herself.

and head, her of out Mansfield put to was which home the was Such
the On feelings. moderated with Edmund cousin her of think to her teach
inmates, beloved its Mansfield, but nothing of think could she contrary,
The it. to contrast full in was now she where Everything ways. happy its
the all, above perhaps, and harmony, regularity, propriety, elegance,
remembrance her to brought were Mansfield, of tranquillity and peace
them to opposite everything of prevalence the by day, the of hour every
_here_.

and delicate temper and frame a to was, noise incessant in living The
harmony or elegance superadded no which evil an Fanny’s, like nervous
At all. of misery greatest the was It for. atoned entirely have could
bursts, abrupt no voice, raised no contention, of sounds no Mansfield,
course regular a in proceeded all heard; ever was violence, of tread no
everybody’s importance; due their had everybody orderliness; cheerful of
wanting, supposed ever be could tenderness If consulted. were feelings
little the to as and place; its supplied breeding good and sense good
they short, were they Norris, aunt by introduced sometimes irritations
with compared ocean, the to water of drop a as were they trifling, were
noisy, was everybody Here abode. present her of tumult ceaseless the
resembled which mother’s, her perhaps, (excepting, loud was voice every
fretfulness). into worn only Bertram’s, Lady of monotony soft the
out hallooed servants the and for, hallooed was wanted was Whatever
the banging, constant in were doors The kitchen. the from excuses their
nobody clatter, a without done was nothing rest, at never were stairs
spoke. they when attention command could nobody and still, sat

end the before her to appeared they as houses, two the of review a In
celebrated Johnson’s Dr. them to apply to tempted was Fanny week, a of
Mansfield though that say, and celibacy, and matrimony to as judgment
pleasures. no have could Portsmouth pains, some have might Park



XL CHAPTER

now Crawford Miss from hear to expecting not in enough right was Fanny
next Mary’s begun; had correspondence their which in rate rapid the at
she but last, the than interval longer decidedly a after was letter
great a felt be would interval an such that supposing in right not was
was She mind! of revolution strange another was Here herself. to relief
exile present her In come. did it when letter the receive to glad really
to wont been had that everything from distance and society, good from
heart her where set the to belonging one from letter a her, interest
was elegance, of degree some and affection, with written lived,
made was engagements increasing of plea usual The acceptable. thoroughly
have I that now “And earlier; her to written having not for excuse in
for reading, your worth be not will letter “my continued, she begun,”
four or three no end, the at love of offering little no be will there
for world, the in C. H. devoted most the from _passionnees_ lines
or ago, days ten Everingham to him called business Norfolk; in is Henry
travelling being of sake the for call, to pretended only he perhaps
his bye, the by and, is, he there But were. you that time same the at
in sister’s his of remissness any for account sufficiently may absence
Fanny? to write you do when Mary, ‘Well, no been has there for writing,
after last, At on. me spur to Fanny?’ to write to you for time it not Is
and Julia ‘dear cousins, your seen have I meeting, at attempts various
were we and yesterday, home at me found they Rushworth’; Mrs. dearest
other, each see to glad _very_ _seemed_ We again. other each see to glad
Shall say. to deal vast a had We little. a were we think really do I and
did I mentioned? was name your when looked Rushworth Mrs. how you tell I
quite not had she but self-possession, in wanting her think to use not
the in was Julia whole, the Upon yesterday. of demands the for enough
no was There of. spoken were you after least at two, the of looks best
and ‘Fanny,’ of spoke I that moment the from complexion the recovering
looks good of day Rushworth’s Mrs. But should. sister a as her of spoke
she Then 28th. the on party first her for cards have we come; will
Wimpole in houses best the of one open will she for beauty, in be will
and Lascelle’s, Lady was it when ago, years two it in was I Street.
then will she certainly and London, in know I any almost to it prefer
her for pennyworth her got has she that phrase, vulgar a use to feel,
will she hope I house. a such her afforded have not could Henry penny.
the moving with may, she as well as satisfied, be and it, recollect
background; the in best appear may king the though palace, a of queen
name your _force_ never shall I her, tease to desire no have I as and
hear I that all From degrees. by sober grow will She again. her upon
not do I but continue, Julia to attentions Wildenheim’s Baron guess, and
better. do to ought She encouragement. serious any has he that know
the in liking any imagine cannot I and catch, no is honourable poor A
a What nothing. has baron poor the and rants, his away take for case,
Your rants! his to equal but were rents his If makes! vowel a difference
There duties. parish by perchance, detained, slowly; moves Edmund cousin
unwilling am I converted. be to Lacey Thornton at woman old some be may
Fanny, sweet dear my Adieu! one. _young_ a for neglected myself fancy to
to reply in one pretty a me write London: from letter long a is this
all of account an me send and back, comes he when eyes, Henry’s gladden
sake.” his for disdain you whom captains young dashing the

for chiefly and letter, this in meditation for food great was There
it supplied, it uneasiness the all with yet, and meditation; unpleasant
about things and people of her told it absent, the with her connected
would she and now, as curiosity much so felt never had she whom
Her week. every letter a such of sure been have to glad been have
higher of concern only her was Bertram aunt her with correspondence
interest.

for amends make all at could that Portsmouth, in society any for As
father’s her of circle the within none were there home, at deficiencies
she satisfaction: smallest the her afford to acquaintance mother’s and
shyness own her overcome to wish could she favour whose in nobody saw
pert, all women the coarse, all her to appeared men The reserve. and
received she as contentment little as gave she and underbred; everybody
ladies young The acquaintance. new or old to either introductions from
her of consideration in respect, some with first at her approached who
termed they what by offended soon were family, baronet’s a from coming
fine wore nor pianoforte the on played neither she as for, “airs”;
of right no admit observation, farther on could, they pelisses,
superiority.

home, of evils the for received Fanny which consolation solid first The
any gave which and approve, entirely could judgment her which first the
of hope a and Susan, of knowledge better a in was durability, of promise
herself, to pleasantly behaved always had Susan her. to service of being
astonished had manners general her of character determined the but
to began she before fortnight a least at was it and her, alarmed and
saw Susan own. her from different totally so disposition a understand
of girl a That right. it set to wanted and home, at wrong was much that
the in err should reason, unassisted own her on only acting fourteen,
disposed more became soon Fanny and wonderful; not was reform, of method
distinguish early so could which mind the of light natural the admire to
led. it which to conduct of faults the severely censure to than justly,
system, same the pursuing and truths, same the on acting only was Susan
and supine more her which but acknowledged, judgment own her which
be to tried Susan asserting. from shrunk have would temper yielding
Susan that and cried; and away gone have only could _she_ where useful,
would were, they as bad things, that perceive; could she useful was
and mother her both that and interposition, such for but worse been have
indulgence offensive very of excesses some from restrained were Betsey
vulgarity. and

the reason of point in had Susan mother, her with argument every In
off. her buy to tenderness maternal any there was never and advantage,
had she her around evil producing ever for was which fondness blind The
to present or past affection for gratitude no was There known. never
others. the to excesses its with bear better her make

her before Susan placed gradually and evident, gradually became this All
manner her That respect. and compassion mingled of object an as sister
ill-chosen often measures her wrong, very times at however, wrong, was
Fanny indefensible, often very language and looks her and ill-timed, and
rectified. be might they hope to began she but feel; to cease not could
and opinion; good her for wished and her to up looked found, she Susan,
it as new Fanny, to was authority of office an like anything as new
did she one, any informing or guiding of capable herself imagine to was
for exercise to endeavour and Susan, to hints occasional give to resolve
what and everybody, to due was what of notions juster the advantage her
had education favoured more own her which herself, for wisest be would
her. in fixed

originated it, of use and consciousness the least at or influence, Her
of hesitations many after which, Susan, by kindness of act an in
occurred early very had It to. up herself worked last at she delicacy,
for peace restore perhaps, might, money of sum small a that her to
was now it as canvassed knife, silver the of subject sore the on ever
herself, of possession in was she which riches the and continually,
was she as able as her made parting, at pounds 10 her given having uncle her
favours, confer to unused wholly so was she But generous. be to willing
bestowing or evils, removing in unpractised so poor, very the on except
elevate to appearing of fearful so and equals, her among kindnesses
determine to time some took it that home, at lady great a as herself
It present. a such make to her in unbecoming be not would it that
and Betsey, for bought was knife silver a last: at however, made, was
advantage every it giving newness its delight, great with accepted
full the in established was Susan desired; be could that other the over
got had she now that declaring handsomely Betsey own, her of possession
and again; _that_ want never should she herself, prettier much so one
Fanny which mother, satisfied equally the to conveyed seemed reproach no
a answered: thoroughly deed The impossible. be to feared almost had
the was it and away, done entirely was altercation domestic of source
to more something her giving and her, to heart Susan’s opening of means
pleased delicacy: had she that shewed Susan in. interested be and love
for struggling been had she which property of mistress be to was she as
been had judgment sister’s her that feared yet she years, two least at
struggled so having for her designed was reproof a that and her, against
house. the of tranquillity the for necessary purchase the make to as

for herself blamed fears, her acknowledged She open. was temper Her
the understanding Fanny, hour that from and warmly; so contended having
to inclined was she fully how perceiving and disposition her of worth
the again feel to began judgment, her to refer and opinion good her seek
a to useful being of hope the entertain to and affection, of blessing
advice, gave She it. deserving much so and help, of need in much so mind
so given and understanding, good a by resisted be to sound too advice
she and temper, imperfect an irritate to not as considerately and mildly
unfrequently. not effects good its observing of happiness the had
and obligation the all seeing while who, one by expected not was More
sympathetic with also saw forbearance, and submission of expediency
like girl a to grating hourly be must that all feeling of acuteness
Susan that became--not soon subject the on wonder greatest Her Susan.
her against impatience and disrespect into provoked been have should
good many so knowledge, better much so that knowledge--but better
midst the in up brought that, and all; at hers been have should notions
opinions proper such formed have should she error, and negligence of
her direct to Edmund cousin no had had who she, be; to ought what of
principles. her fix or thoughts

to advantage material a was them between begun thus intimacy The
the of deal great a avoided they upstairs, together sitting By each.
it think to learned Susan and peace, had Fanny house; the of disturbance
but fire; a without sat They employed. quietly be to misfortune no
the suffered she and Fanny, to even familiar privation a was that
of point only the was It room. East the of it by reminded because less
was there prospect, and furniture, light, space, In resemblance.
the at sigh a heaved often she and apartments; two the in alike nothing
By there. comforts various and boxes, and books her all of remembrance
at upstairs, morning the of chief the spend to came girls the degrees
remembrance the days, few a after but talking, and working in only first
it found Fanny that stimulative and potent so grew books said the of
father’s her in none were There again. books for try to not impossible
its found hers of some and daring, and luxurious is wealth but house;
being at amazed subscriber; a became She library. circulating a to way
to way, every in doings own her at amazed persona_, propria _in anything
improvement one’s any having be to And books! of chuser a renter, a be
Fanny and nothing, read had Susan was. it so But choice! her in view in
a inspire and pleasures, first own her in share a her give to longed
herself. in delighted she which poetry and biography the for taste

the of some bury to moreover, hoped, she occupation this In
her if mind her seize to apt too were which Mansfield, of recollections
might it hoped time, this at especially and, busy; were only fingers
London, to Edmund pursuing from thoughts her diverting in useful be
was he knew she letter, last aunt’s her of authority the on whither,
notification promised The ensue. would what of doubt no had She gone.
neighbourhood the within knock postman’s The head. her over hanging was
banish could reading if and terrors, daily its bring to beginning was
gained. something was it hour, an half even for idea the



XLI CHAPTER

had Fanny and town, in supposed be might Edmund since gone was week A
drawn be to conclusions different three were There him. of nothing heard
of each fluctuation; in was mind her which between silence, his from
been had going his Either probable. most the held being times at them
Miss seeing of opportunity no procured yet had he or delayed, again
letter-writing! for happy too was he or alone, Crawford

weeks four nearly been now having Fanny time, this about morning, One
and over think to failed never she which point a Mansfield, from
as remove, to preparing were Susan and she as day, every calculate
they whom visitor, a of knock the by stopped were they upstairs, usual,
the to going in alertness Rebecca’s from avoid, not could they felt
other. any beyond her interested always which duty a door,

turning just was Fanny that voice a was it voice; gentleman’s a was It
room. the into walked Crawford Mr. when about, pale

she and upon; called really when act always will hers, like sense, Good
her recall and mother, her to him name to able been had she that found
could she though friend,” “William’s of that as name, the of remembrance
syllable a uttering of capable herself believed have previously not
as only there known being his of consciousness The moment. a such at
and however, him, introduced Having support. some was friend William’s
might visit this what of occurred that terrors the reseated, all being
of point the on herself fancied she and overpowering, were to lead
away. fainting

first at had who visitor, their alive, herself keep to trying While
and wisely was ever, as countenance a animated as with her approached
he while recover, to time her giving and away, eyes his keeping kindly
attending and her, addressing mother, her to entirely himself devoted
with time same the at propriety, and politeness utmost the with her to
his making was which least, at interest of friendliness, of degree a
perfect. manner

of sight the by Warmed best. their at also were manners Price’s Mrs.
to appearing of wish the by regulated and son, her to friend a such
gratitude--artless, with overflowing was she him, before advantage
out, was Price Mr. unpleasing. be not could gratitude--which maternal
to enough recovered just was Fanny much. very regretted she which
of sources other many her to for it; regret not could _she_ that feel
he which in home the for shame of one severe the added was uneasiness
no was there but weakness, the for herself scold might She her. found
more yet been have would she and ashamed, was She away. it scolding
rest. the all of than father her of ashamed

tire; never could Price Mrs. which on subject a William, of talked They
could heart her even as commendation his in warm as was Crawford Mr. and
life; her in man a agreeable so seen never had she that felt She wish.
he as agreeable so and great so that, find to astonished only was and
the to visit a on neither Portsmouth to down come be should he was,
going of intention the with yet nor commissioner, the nor port-admiral,
she that all of Nothing dockyard. the seeing of nor island, the to over
employment the or importance, of proof the as of think to used been had
the late it reached had He Portsmouth. to him brought had wealth, of
had Crown, the at staying was two, or day a for come was before, night
since acquaintance his of two or officer navy a with met accidentally
coming. in kind that of object no had but arrival, his

unreasonable not was it information, this all given had he time the By
was she and to; spoken and at looked be might Fanny that suppose to
hour an half spent had he that hear and eye, his bear to able tolerably
had she that London; leaving his before evening the sister his with
he that writing; for time no had had but love, kindest and best her sent
spent having hour, an half even for Mary seeing in lucky himself thought
Norfolk, from return his after London, in hours twenty-four scarcely
in been had town, in was Edmund cousin her that again; off set he before
but himself, him seen not had he that days; few a understood, he town,
dine, to was and Mansfield, at well all them left had well, was he that
Frasers. the with yesterday, as

circumstance; last-mentioned the to even collectedly, listened Fanny
the and certainty; any at be to mind worn her to relief a seemed it nay,
without internally, passed settled,” all is it time this by “then words,
blush. faint a than emotion of evidence more

her which in subject a Mansfield, about more little a talking After
of expediency the at hint to began Crawford apparent, most was interest
year the of season that at and morning, lovely a was “It walk. early an
everybody for wisest was it that off, turned often so morning fine a
soon he nothing, producing hints such and exercise”; their delay to not
her and Price Mrs. to recommendation positive a to proceeded
an to came they Now time. of loss without walk their take to daughters
of out stirred ever scarcely appeared, it Price, Mrs. understanding.
large her with seldom, could she owned she Sunday; a of except doors,
her persuade then, not, she “Would walk. a for time find family,
pleasure the him allow and weather, such of advantage take to daughters
complying. very and obliged greatly was Price Mrs. them?” attending of
they place; sad a was Portsmouth confined; much very were daughters “Her
town, the in errands some had they knew she and out; get often not did
that was, consequence the And do.” to glad very be would they which
distressing--found and awkward, was--strange, it as strange Fanny,
Street High the towards walking minutes, ten within Susan, and herself
Crawford. Mr. with

were they for confusion; upon confusion pain, upon pain soon was It
whose father, her met they before Street High the in hardly
and, stopt; He Saturday. being its from better the not was appearance
Mr. to him introduce to obliged was Fanny looked, he as ungentlemanlike
Crawford Mr. which in manner the of doubt a have not could She Crawford.
must He altogether. disgusted and ashamed be must He struck. be must
the for inclination smallest the have to cease and up, her give soon
to affection his wanting much so been had she though yet, and match;
the as bad as almost be would that cure of sort a was this cured, be
United the in lady young a scarcely is there believe I and complaint;
sought being of misfortune the with up put rather not would who Kingdoms
vulgarity the by away driven him have than man, agreeable clever, a by
relations. nearest her of

any with father-in-law future his regard not could probably Crawford Mr.
to and instantly, Fanny (as but dress; in model a for him taking of idea
a man, different very a was father her discerned) relief, great her
respected highly most this to behaviour his in Price Mr. different very
manners His home. at family own his in was he what from stranger,
grateful, were they passable: than more were polished, not though now,
and father, attached an of those were expressions his manly; animated,
there and air, open the in well very did tones loud his man; sensible a
compliment instinctive his was Such heard. be to oath single a not was
it what consequence the be and, Crawford; Mr. of manners good the to
soothed. infinitely were feelings immediate Fanny’s might,

Mr. of offer an was civilities gentlemen’s two the of conclusion The
Crawford, Mr. which dockyard, the into Crawford Mr. take to Price’s
though such, as intended was what favour a as accepting of desirous
the much so be to hoping and again, and again dockyard the seen had he
if of, himself avail to disposed gratefully very was Fanny, with longer
or somehow was it as and fatigue; the of afraid not were Prices Miss the
were they that upon, acted least at or inferred, or ascertained, other
for but and go; to all were they dockyard the to afraid, all at not
the without directly, thither turned have would Price Mr. Crawford, Mr.
He Street. High the in errands daughters’ his for consideration smallest
they shops the to go to allowed be should they that however, care, took
Fanny for long, them delay not did it and visit; to expressly out came
before that for, waited be or impatience, excite to bear little so could
upon begin than more do could door, the at stood they as gentlemen, the
in now three-deckers of number the settle or regulations, naval last the
proceed. to ready were companions their commission,

walk the and once, at dockyard the for forward set to then were They
a opinion--in Crawford’s Mr. to conducted--according been have would
it, of regulation entire the allowed been Price Mr. had manner, singular
up keep and follow, to left been have would found, he girls, two the as
their at together on walked they while could, they as not, or them with
occasionally, improvement some introduce to able was He pace. hasty own
walk not would absolutely he wished; he extent the to means no by though
was Price Mr. when crowd, any or crossing any at and them; from away
of care take Sue, come, Fan; come, girls; “Come, out, calling only
particular his them give would he lookout!” sharp a keep yourselves;
attendance.

happy some upon reckon to began he dockyard, the in fairly Once
brother a by joined soon very were they as Fanny, with intercourse
how of survey daily his take to come was who Price’s, Mr. of lounger
than companion worthy more far a prove must who and on, went things
satisfied well very seemed officers two the time a after and himself;
never-failing and equal of matters discussing and together, about going
yard, the in timbers some upon down sat people young the while interest,
to went all they which stocks the in vessel a board on seat a found or
not could Crawford rest. of want in conveniently most was Fanny at. look
could he but down; sit to ready more or fatigued more her wished have
the was age Susan’s of girl quick-looking A away. sister her wished have
all Bertram, Lady from different totally world: the in third worst very
her. before point main the introducing no was there and ears; and eyes
letting and agreeable, generally only being with himself content must He
and now indulgence, the with entertainment, of share her have Susan
Fanny. conscious and better-informed the for hint or look a of then,
time, some been had he there of: talk to mostly had he what was Norfolk
schemes. present his from importance in rising was there everything and
importing without society, no place, no from come could man a Such
use, of all were acquaintance his and journeys his amuse; to something
somewhat Fanny, For her. to new quite way a in entertained was Susan and
had he parties the of agreeableness accidental the than related was more
into going his of reason particular the approbation, her For in. been
been had It given. was year, of time unusual this at all, at Norfolk
welfare the which in lease a of renewal the to relative business, real
had He stake. at was family believed--industrious and--he large a of
bias to meaning of dealing; underhand some of agent his suspected
and himself, go to determined had he and deserving; the against him
done had gone, had He case. the of merits the investigate thoroughly
his than more to useful been had foreseen, had he than good more even
himself congratulate to able now was and comprehended, had plan first
agreeable secured had he duty, a performing in that feel to and it, upon
some to himself introduced had He mind. own his for recollections
acquaintance making begun had he before; seen never had he whom tenants
been had estate, own his on though existence, very whose cottages with
It Fanny. at aimed, well and aimed, was This him. to unknown hitherto
as acting been had he here properly; so speak him hear to pleasing was
Nothing oppressed! the and poor the of friend the be To do. to ought he
an him giving of point the on was she and her; to grateful more be could
something a adding his by off frightened all was it when look, approving
guide a friend, a assistant, an have to soon hoping his of pointed too
that somebody a Everingham: for charity or utility of plan every in
ever had it than object dearer a it about all and Everingham make would
yet. been

was She things. such say not would he wished and away, turned She
been had she than qualities good more have might he allow to willing
out turning his of possibility the feel to began She suppose. to wont
her, to unsuited completely be ever must and was he but last; at well
her. of think to not ought and

would it that and Everingham, of said been had enough that perceived He
could He Mansfield. to turned and else, something of talk to well as be
and attention her back bring to topic a was that better; chosen have not
or hear to her to indulgence real a was It instantly. almost looks her
the knew who everybody from divided long so Now Mansfield. of speak to
it, mentioned he when friend a of voice the quite it felt she place,
and beauties its of praise in exclamations fond her to way the led and
her allowed inhabitants its to tribute honourable his by and comforts,
her of speaking in eulogium, warmest the in heart own her gratify to
the having as aunt her and good, and clever was that all as uncle
tempers. sweet all of sweetest

looked he so; said he himself; Mansfield to attachment great a had He
there; time his of much, very much, spending of hope the with forward
very a upon built particularly He neighbourhood. the in or there, always
he so: be would it that felt he year; this there autumn and summer happy
last. the to superior infinitely autumn and summer a it; upon depended
of circumstances with but social, as diversified, as animated, As
undescribable. superiority

society a “what continued; he Lacey,” Thornton Sotherton, “Mansfield,
fourth a perhaps, Michaelmas, at And houses! those in comprised be will
so everything of vicinity the in hunting-box small some added: be may
Bertram Edmund as Lacey, Thornton in partnership any to as for dear;
two objections: two foresee I hope I proposed, good-humouredly once
plan.” that to objections irresistible excellent, fair,

passed, was moment the when though here; silenced doubly was Fanny
acknowledged the into herself forced not had she that regret could
say to him encouraged and meaning, his of half one of comprehension
must she which subject a was It Edmund. and sister his of more something
be soon would it from shrunk that weakness the and of, speak to learn
unpardonable. quite

time had or wished, they that all seen had friend his and Price Mr. When
walk their of course the in and return; to ready were others the for,
that Fanny telling for privacy minute’s a contrived Crawford Mr. back,
down come was he that her; see to was Portsmouth in business only his
could he because and only, hers and account, her on days of couple a for
and sorry; really sorry, was She separation. total longer a endure not
wished she which things other three or two the and this of spite in yet
seen had she since improved altogether him thought she said, not had he
people’s other to attentive and obliging, gentle, more much was he him;
so him seen never had she Mansfield; at been ever had he than feelings
could father her to behaviour his agreeable; being _near_ agreeable--so
the in proper and kind particularly something was there and offend, not
next the wished She improved. decidedly was He Susan. of took he notice
not was it but day; one for only come had he wished she over, day
of talking of pleasure the expected: have would she as bad very so
great! very so was Mansfield

one and pleasure, another for him thank to had she parted, they Before
taking of honour the them do to him asked father Her kind. trivial no of
horror, of thrill one only for time had Fanny and them, with mutton his
was He engagement. prior a by prevented himself declared he before
met had he next; the and day that for both already dinner to engaged
should he denied; be not would who Crown the at acquaintance some with
etc., morrow, the on again them on waiting of however, honour, the have
so escaping from felicity actual of state a in parted--Fanny they so and
evil! an horrible

their all see and dinner-party, family their join him had have To
Rebecca’s and cookery Rebecca’s dreadful! been have would deficiencies,
pulling and restraint, without table at eating Betsey’s and waiting,
yet not was herself Fanny what were chose, she as about everything
nice was _She_ meal. tolerable a make to often her for to inured enough
of school a in up brought been had _he_ but delicacy, natural from only
epicurism. and luxury



XLII CHAPTER

Mr. when day next the church for off setting just were Prices The
was he them; join to but stop, to not came, He again. appeared Crawford
he what exactly was which chapel, Garrison the to them with go to asked
together. thither walked all they and intended, had

no them given had Nature advantage. to seen now were family The
their in them dressed Sunday every and beauty, of share inconsiderable
to comfort this brought always Sunday attire. best and skins cleanest
mother poor Her ever. than more it felt she Sunday this on and Fanny,
she as sister Bertram’s Lady being of unworthy very so look not did now
of think to heart the to her grieved often It look. to apt too but was
little so made had nature where that think to them; between contrast the
mother, her that and much, so made have should circumstances difference,
an have should junior, her years some and Bertram, Lady as handsome as
slatternly, so comfortless, so faded, and worn more much so appearance
tolerably and creditable very a her made Sunday But shabby. so
of family fine a with abroad coming Price, Mrs. cheerful-looking
only and cares, weekly her of respite little a feeling children,
with by pass Rebecca or danger, into run boys her saw she if discomposed
hat. her in flower a

to not care took Crawford Mr. but divide, to obliged were they chapel In
continued still he chapel after and branch; female the from divided be
ramparts. the on party family the in one made and them, with

Sunday fine every ramparts the on walk weekly her took Price Mrs.
and service morning after directly going always year, the throughout
her met she there place: public her was It dinner-time. till staying
the of badness the over talked news, little a heard acquaintance,
ensuing. days six the for spirits her up wound and servants, Portsmouth

Miss the consider to happy most Crawford Mr. went; now they Thither
long, there been had they before and charge; peculiar his as Prices
believed have not could Fanny how, saying no was there other, or somehow
his, under each of arm an with them between walking was he but it,
her made It it. to end an put or prevent to how know not did she and
and day the in enjoyments were there yet but time, a for uncomfortable
felt. be would which view the in

in April was it but March; really was It lovely. uncommonly was day The
for clouded occasionally sun, bright and wind, soft brisk air, mild its
such of influence the under beautiful so looked everything and minute; a
at ships the on other each pursuing shadows the of effects the sky, a
sea, the of hues ever-varying the with beyond, island the and Spithead
ramparts the against dashing and glee its in dancing water, high at now
charms of combination a such altogether produced sound, a fine so with
circumstances the of careless almost gradually her made as Fanny, for
would she arm, his without been she had Nay, them. felt she which under
two a for strength wanted she for it, needed she that known have soon
week’s a upon did, generally it as coming, kind, this of saunter hours’
being of effect the feel to beginning was Fanny inactivity. previous
to as ground lost had she exercise; regular usual her from debarred
the and Crawford Mr. for but and Portsmouth; in being her since health
now. up knocked been have soon would weather the of beauty

They herself. like felt he view, the of and day, the of loveliness The
wall, the against leaning taste, and sentiment same the with stopt often
Edmund, not was he considering and admire; and look to minutes, some
charms the to open sufficiently was he that allow but not could Fanny
few a had She admiration. his express to able well very and nature, of
advantage take sometimes could he which then, and now reveries tender
looks these of result the and detection; without face her in look to of
than blooming less was face her ever, as bewitching as though that was,
be to like not did and well, very was she _said_ She be. to ought it
her that convinced was he all, in all it take but otherwise; supposed
not could therefore and comfortable, be not could residence present
at again being her for anxious growing was he and her, for salutary be
so be must her, seeing in his and happiness, own her where Mansfield,
greater. much

he. said think?” I month, a here been have “You

left I since to-morrow weeks four only is It month. a quite not “No;
Mansfield.”

a that call should I reckoner. honest and accurate most a are “You
month.”

evening.” Tuesday till here arrive not did “I

not?” is visit, months’ two a be to is it “And

less.” be not will it suppose I months. two of talked uncle My “Yes.

you?” for comes Who again? back conveyed be to you are how “And

Perhaps aunt. my from yet it about nothing heard have I know. not do “I
fetched be to me for convenient be not may It longer. stay to be may I
end.” months’ two the at exactly

I Mansfield, know “I replied, Crawford Mr. reflection, moment’s a After
of danger the know I _you_. towards faults its know I way, its know
the to way give comforts your have to as forgotten, far so being your
aware am I family. the in being single any of convenience imaginary
settle cannot Thomas Sir if week, after week here left be may you that
you, for maid aunt’s your sending or himself, coming for everything
he which arrangements the of alteration slightest the involving without
Two do. not will This year. a of quarter next the for down laid have may
enough. quite weeks six think should I allowance; ample an is months
to himself addressing he, said health,” sister’s your considering am I
She to. unfavourable Portsmouth of confinement the think I “which Susan,
do, I as well as her know you When exercise. and air constant requires
to never ought she that and does, she that agree will you sure am I
If, country. the of liberty and air free the from banished long be
unwell, growing yourself find “you Fanny), to again (turning therefore”
without Mansfield, to returning your about arise difficulties any and
regarded be not must _that_ ended, be to months two the for waiting
or strong less all at yourself feel you if consequence, any of as
her give it, know sister my let only will and usual, than comfortable
take and down, come immediately will I and she hint, slightest the only
which with pleasure the and ease the know You Mansfield. to back you
occasion.” the on felt be would that all know You done. be would this

off. it laugh to tried but him, thanked Fanny

I And know. perfectly you “as replied, he serious,” perfectly am “I
indisposition. to tendency any concealing cruelly be not will you hope
only long so for power; your in be not shall it _not_; shall you Indeed,
I and well,’ am ‘I Mary, to letter every in say, positively you as
be you shall only long so falsehood, a write or speak cannot you know
well.” as considered

degree a to distressed and affected was but again, him thanked Fanny
of certain be to even or much, say to her for impossible it made that
He walk. their of close the towards was This say. to ought she what
own their of door the at only them left and last, the to them attended
pretended therefore and dinner, to going be to them knew he when house,
elsewhere. for waited be to

all after Fanny detaining still he, said tired,” so not were you wish “I
Is health. stronger in you left I wish house--“I the in were others the
going of idea an half have I town? in you for do can I anything there
sure am I Maddison. about satisfied not am I soon. again Norfolk into
own his of cousin a get and possible, if me on impose to means still he
an to come must I else. somebody for design I which mill, certain a into
tricked be not will I that know him make must I him. with understanding
will I that north: the on than more any Everingham, of side south the on
before. him with enough explicit not was I property. own my of master be
his of credit the to as both estate, an on does man a such mischief The
great a have I inconceivable. is poor, the of welfare the and employer
on once at everything put and directly, Norfolk into back go to mind
a is Maddison from. swerved afterwards be cannot as footing a such
try not does he provided him, displace to wish not do I fellow; clever
no has who man a by duped be to simple be would it but _me_; displace to
a me give him let to simple than worse and me, dupe to creditor of right
man, honest an of instead tenant, a for fellow griping hard-hearted,
than worse be not it Would already. promise a half given have I whom to
it?” advise you Do go? I Shall simple?

right.” is what well very know You advise! “I

Your right. is what know always I opinion, your me give you When “Yes.
right.” of rule my is judgment

we if ourselves, in guide better a all have We so. say not do no! “Oh,
a you wish I Good-bye; be. can person other any than it, to attend would
to-morrow.” journey pleasant

town?” in you for do can I nothing there “Is

you.” to obliged much am I “Nothing;

anybody?” for message no you “Have

my cousin, my see you when and please; you if sister, your to love “My
I suppose I that say to as good so be would you wish I Edmund, cousin
him.” from hear soon shall

excuses his write will I negligent, or lazy is he if and “Certainly;
myself.”

pressed He detained. longer no be would Fanny for more, no say could He
next the away while to went _He_ gone. was and her, at looked hand, her
best the till acquaintance, other his with could, he as hours three
and enjoyment, their for ready was afforded inn capital a that dinner
immediately. one simple more her to in turned _she_

have he could and character; different very a bore fare general Their
in endured she exercise, of that besides privations, many how suspected
much not were looks her that wondered have would he house, father’s her
Rebecca’s to equal little so was She them. found he than affected more
with were, all they as table, to brought hashes, Rebecca’s and puddings
knives half-cleaned not and plates, half-cleaned of accompaniments such
heartiest her defer to constrained often very was she that forks, and
and biscuits for evening the in brothers her send could she till meal
day the in late too was it Mansfield, at up nursed being After buns.
all, known he had Thomas, Sir though and Portsmouth; at hardened be to
starved, being of way promising most the in niece his thought have might
good Crawford’s Mr. for value juster much a into body, and mind both
his push to feared have probably would he fortune, good and company
cure. the under die might she lest farther, experiment

tolerably Though day. the of rest the all spirits of out was Fanny
low. being help not could she again, Crawford Mr. seeing not of secure
in though, and friend; a of nature the of somebody with parting was It
deserted now was she if as seemed it gone, him have to glad light, one
and Mansfield; from separation renewed of sort a was it everybody; by
with frequently being and town, to returning his of think not could she
hate her made as envy to akin near so feelings without Edmund, and Mary
them. having for herself

a her; around passing anything from abatement no had dejection Her
with not was he if happened always as father’s, her of two or friend
till o’clock six from and there; evening long long, the spent them,
She grog. or noise of intermission little was there nine, half-past
Mr. in fancied still she which improvement wonderful The low. very was
the within anything of comfort administering to nearest the was Crawford
she circle a different how in considering Not thoughts. her of current
she contrast, to owing be might much how nor him, seeing just been had
regardful and gentle more astonishingly being his of persuaded quite was
in so be not it must things, little in if And, formerly. than others of
now he as feeling very so comfort, and health her for anxious So great?
supposed fairly be it not might seemed, really and himself, expressed
her? to distressing so suit a in persevere longer much not would he that



XLIII CHAPTER

the on London, to back, travelling was Crawford Mr. that presumed was It
days two and Price’s; Mr. at him of seen was more nothing for morrow,
letter following the by Fanny to ascertained fact a was it afterwards,
the with account, another on her, by read and opened sister, his from
curiosity:-- anxious most

to down been has Henry that Fanny, dearest my you, inform to have “I
the to you with walk delightful a had he that you; see to Portsmouth
day, next the on dwelt be to more still one and Saturday, last dockyard
sweet your and sea, sparkling the air, balmy the when ramparts; the on
harmony, delicious most the in altogether were conversation and looks
retrospect. in even ecstasy raise to are which sensations afforded and
information. my of substance the be to is understand, I as well as This,
communicated, be to is else what know not do I but write, me makes He
his and walks, said two these and Portsmouth, to visit said this except
a yours, of sister fair a to especially family, your to introduction
her taking ramparts, the on party the of was who fifteen, of girl fine
but much, writing for time not have I love. in presume, I lesson, first
of letter mere a be to is this for had, I if place of out be would it
information, necessary conveying of purpose the for penned business,
Fanny, dear dear, My evil. of risk without delayed be not could which
till me to listen should You you! to talk would I how here, you had I if
is it but more; tired still were you till me advise and tired, were you
will I so paper, on mind great my of part hundredth a put to impossible
news no have I like. you what guess to you leave and altogether, abstain
plague to bad too be would it and course; of politics, have You you. for
ought I time. my up fill that parties and people of names the with you
was I but party, first cousin’s your of account an you sent have to
just was everything that it, suffice ago; long too is it now and lazy,
been have must connexions her of any that style a in be, to ought it as
the her did manners and dress own her that and witness, to gratified
it and house, a such for mad is Fraser, Mrs. friend, My credit. greatest
Easter; after Stornaway Lady to go I miserable. _me_ make not would
very is S. Lord fancy I happy. very and spirits, high in seems she
so him think not do I and family, own his in pleasant and good-humoured
not will He worse. many sees one least, did--at I as ill-looking very
what hero, last-mentioned the Of Edmund. cousin your of side the by do
suspicious. look would it entirely, name his avoided I If say? I shall
that and times, three or two him seen have we that then, say, will I
appearance. gentlemanlike his with struck much very are here friends my
town in men three but knows she declares judge) bad (no Fraser Mrs.
he when confess, must I and air; and height, person, a good so have who
and him, with compare to none were there day, other the here dined
dress of distinction no is there Luckily sixteen. of party a were we
affectionately.” Yours but--but--but tales, tell to nowadays

more head my into gets he fault: Edmund’s was (it forgot almost had “I
and Henry from say to had I thing material very one good) me does than
dear My Northamptonshire. into back you taking our about mean myself--I
looks. pretty your lose to Portsmouth at stay not do creature, little
aunt poor My health. and beauty of ruin the are sea-breezes vile Those
Admiral the which sea, the of miles ten within if affected felt always
service your at am I so. was it know I but believed, never course of
would we and scheme, the like should I notice. hour’s an at Henry’s, and
perhaps and way, our in Everingham you shew and circuit, little a make
St. of inside the seeing and London, through passing mind not would you
such at me from Edmund cousin your keep Only Square. Hanover George’s,
word one letter! long a What tempted. be to like not should I time: a
upon again Norfolk into going of idea some has find, I Henry, more.
permitted be possibly cannot this but approve; _you_ that business some
till spared be anyhow cannot he is, that week; next of middle the before
man a of value The evening. that party a have _we_ for 14th, the after
conception no have can you what is occasion, an such on Henry, like
the see will He inestimable. be to word my upon it take must you so of;
and curiosity, little a for--having sorry not am I own which Rushworths,
it.” acknowledge not will he he--though has think I so

deliberately, read be to eagerly, through run be to letter a was This
greater in everything leave to and reflection, much for matter supply to
that was, it from drawn be to certainty only The ever. than suspense
How spoken. yet not had Edmund place. taken yet had decisive nothing
without act might or act, to meant she how felt, really Crawford Miss
what quite were her to importance his whether meaning; her against or
were it lessened, if whether, separation; last the before been had it
endless for subjects were itself, recover to or more, lessen to likely
come, to days many and day that on of thought be to and conjecture,
oftenest the returned that idea The conclusion. any producing without
by staggered and cooled herself proving after Crawford, Miss that was
much too end the in herself prove yet would habits, London to return a
than ambitious more be to try would She up. him give to him to attached
would she tease, would she hesitate, would She allow. would heart her
accept. finally would she but deal, great a require would she condition,

she town--that, in house A expectation. frequent most Fanny’s was This
Crawford Miss what saying no was there Yet impossible. be must thought,
The worse. and worse grew cousin her for prospect The ask. not might
an What appearance! his of only speak and him, of speak could who woman
of commendations the from support deriving be To attachment! unworthy
was Fanny year! a half intimately him known had who _She_ Fraser! Mrs.
Mr. to only related which letter the of parts Those her. of ashamed
Mr. Whether slightly. comparison, in her, touched herself, and Crawford
no certainly was 14th the after or before Norfolk into went Crawford
_would_ he thought she considered, everything though, hers, of concern
a secure to endeavour should Crawford Miss That delay. without go
of line worst her in all was Rushworth, Mrs. and him between meeting
would _he_ hoped she but ill-judged; and unkind grossly and conduct,
such no acknowledged He curiosity. degrading such any by actuated be not
better for credit him given have to ought sister his and inducement,
own. her than feelings

receiving after town from letter another for impatient more yet was She
by unsettled so was days few a for and before; been had she than this
usual her that come, might what and come, had what by altogether, it
could She suspended. much were Susan with conversation and readings
her remembered Crawford Mr. If wished. she as attention her command not
he that likely, most likely, very it thought she cousin, her to message
his with consistent most be would it events; all at her to write would
gradually it till idea, this of rid got she till and kindness; usual
days four or three of course the in appearing letters no by off, wore
state. anxious restless, most a in was she more,

be must Suspense succeeded. composure like something a length, At
her make and out, her wear to allowed be not must and to, submitted
she and more, something exertions own her something, did Time useless.
in interest same the awakened again and Susan, to attentions her resumed
them.

early the of any without though and her, of fond very growing was Susan
disposition a with Fanny, in strong so been had which books in delight
for information to or pursuits, sedentary to inclined less much
_appearing_ not of desire a strong so had she sake, information’s
most a her made understanding, clear good a with as, ignorant,
Fanny’s oracle. her was Fanny pupil. thankful profitable, attentive,
essay, every to addition important most a were remarks and explanations
dwelt times former of her told Fanny What history. of chapter every or
sister her paid she and Goldsmith; of pages the than mind her on more
author. printed any of that to style her preferring of compliment the
wanting. was reading of habit early The

as high so subjects on always not were however, conversations, Their
none matters, lesser of and hour; their had Others morals. or history
Park, Mansfield as them, between long so remained or often, so returned
ways the amusements, the manners, the people, the of description a
and genteel the for taste innate an had who Susan, Park. Mansfield of
indulge but not could Fanny and hear, to eager was well-appointed,
wrong; not was it hoped She theme. a beloved so on dwelling in herself
everything of admiration great very Susan’s time, a after though,
into go to longing earnest and house, uncle’s her in done or said
which feelings exciting for her blame to almost seemed Northamptonshire,
gratified. be not could

sister; elder her than home for fitted better little very was Susan Poor
that feel to began she this, understand to thoroughly grew Fanny as and
a have would happiness her came, Portsmouth from release own her when
of capable so girl a That behind. Susan leaving in drawback material
her distressed hands, such in left be should good everything made being
what to, her invite to home a have to likely _she_ Were more. and more
Mr. return to her for possible been it had And be! would it blessing a
objecting from far very being his of probability the regard, Crawford’s
own her all of increase greatest the been have would measure a such to
his fancy could and good-tempered, really was he thought She comforts.
pleasantly. most sort that of plan a into entering



XLIV CHAPTER

one the when gone, nearly very were months two the of weeks Seven
Fanny’s into put was expected, long so Edmund, from letter the letter,
a for herself prepared she length, its saw and opened, she As hands.
towards praise and love of profusion a and happiness of detail minute
the were These fate. his of mistress now was who creature fortunate the
contents--

told Crawford before. written not have I that me Fanny,--Excuse Dear “My
to impossible it found I but me, from hear to wishing were you that me
my understand would you that myself persuaded and London, from write
been have not should they lines, happy few a sent have I Could silence.
returned am I power. my in ever was nature that of nothing but wanting,
are hopes My it. left I when than state assured less a in Mansfield to
you of fond very So already. this of aware probably are You weaker. much
enough you tell should she that natural most is it is, Crawford Miss as
be not will I mine. at guess tolerable a furnish to feelings own her of
in confidences Our communication. own my making from however, prevented,
soothing something is There questions. no ask I clash. not need you
unhappy whatever that and friend, same the have we that idea the in
love our in united are we us, between exist may opinion of differences
and are, now things how you tell to me to comfort a be will It you. of
been have I have. to said be can I plans if plans, present my are what
(for her saw and London, in weeks three was I Saturday. since returned
be could that Frasers the from attention every had I often. very London)
with carrying in reasonable not was I say dare I expected. reasonably
her was It Mansfield. of that like all at intercourse an of hopes me
been she Had meeting. of unfrequency any than rather however, manner,
from but complaint, no made have should I her, see did I when different
I what unlike so was reception first my altered: was she first very the
directly. again London leaving on resolved almost had I that hoped, had
and character, her of side weak the know You particularise. not need I
She me. torturing were which expressions and sentiments the imagine may
the all giving were who those by surrounded and spirits, high in was
like not do I mind. lively too her to sense bad own their of support
entirely married has who woman, vain cold-hearted, a is She Fraser. Mrs.
marriage, her in unhappy evidently though and convenience, from
or temper, or judgment, of faults to not disappointment her places
than affluent less all, after being, her to but age, of disproportion
Stornaway, Lady sister, her than especially acquaintance, her of many
ambitious, and mercenary everything of supporter determined the is and
her upon look I enough. ambitious and mercenary only be it provided
life her of misfortune greatest the as sisters two those with intimacy
be she Could years. for astray her leading been have They mine. and
the for it, of despair not do I sometimes them!--and from detached
of fond very are They side. their on principally me to appears affection
think I When you. loves she as them love not does she sure am I but her;
judicious, her of whole the and indeed, you, to attachment great her of
creature, different very a appears she sister, a as conduct upright
too a for myself blame to ready am I and noble, everything of capable
She Fanny. up, her give cannot I manner. playful a of construction harsh
If wife. a as of think ever could I whom world the in woman only the is
should I course of me, for regard some had she that believe not did I
not is she that convinced am I it. believe do I but this, say not
It individual. any of jealousy no have I preference. decided a without
jealous am I that altogether world fashionable the of influence the is
higher not are ideas Her fear. I that wealth of habits the is It of.
incomes our what beyond are they but warrant, may fortune own her than
could I here. even however, comfort, is There authorise. could united
my of because than enough, rich not because her lose to bear better
sacrifices, to equal not affection her prove only would That profession.
refused, am I if and, asking; in justified scarcely am I fact, in which,
are trust, I prejudices, Her motive. honest the be will think, I that,
arise, they as exactly thoughts my have You were. they as strong so not
will it but contradictory, sometimes are they perhaps Fanny; dear my
a is it begun, once Having mind. my of picture faithful less a be not
Connected up. her give cannot I feel. I all you tell to me to pleasure
Crawford Mary up give to be, to are hope, I and, are, already we as
to me; to dear most those of some of society the up give to be would
other any under whom, friends and houses very the from myself banish
must I Mary of loss The consolation. for to turn should I distress,
a it Were Fanny. of and Crawford of loss the comprehending as consider
it, bear to how know should I hope I refusal, actual an thing, decided
course the in and heart, my on hold her weaken to endeavour to how and
bear must I refused, I Were nonsense. writing am I years--but few a of
truth. the is This her. for try to cease never can I am, I till and it;
have I means? likeliest the be may What _how_? is question only The
sometimes and Easter, after again London to going of thought sometimes
she now, Even Mansfield. to returns she till nothing doing on resolved
at is June but June; in Mansfield in being of pleasure with speaks
nearly have I her. to write shall I believe I and distance, great a
certainty early an at be To letter. by myself explaining on determined
Considering irksome. miserably is state present My object. material a is
of method best the decidedly be will letter a think I everything,
and say, not could I that much write to able be shall I explanation.
her on resolves she before reflection for time her giving be shall
an of than reflection of result the of afraid less am I and answer,
in lie would danger greatest My am. I think I impulse; hasty immediate
own my help to unable distance a at I and Fraser, Mrs. consulting her
where and consultation, of evil the all to exposes letter A cause.
an in may, adviser an decision, perfect of short anything is mind the
must I regret. afterwards may it what do to it lead moment, unlucky
own my of full letter, long This little. a over matter this think
Fanny. a of friendship the even tire to enough be will alone, concerns
more am I party. Fraser’s Mrs. at was Crawford saw I time last The
a not is There him. of hear and see I that all with satisfied more and
his to up acts and mind, own his knows thoroughly He wavering. of shadow
eldest my and him see not could I quality. inestimable an resolutions:
me, told once you what recollecting without room same the in sister
was There friends. as meet not did they that acknowledge I and
back draw him saw I spoke. scarcely They side. her on coolness marked
former any resent should Rushworth Mrs. that sorry was I and surprised,
opinion my hear to wish will You Bertram. Miss to slight supposed
of appearance no is There wife. a as comfort of degree Maria’s of
in twice dined I together. well pretty on get they hope I unhappiness.
mortifying is it but oftener, there been have might and Street, Wimpole
London enjoy to seems Julia brother. a as Rushworth with be to
are We here. less have but there, enjoyment little had I exceedingly.
I than more you miss I wanted. much very are You party. lively a not
from hear to hopes and love, best her desires mother My express. can
find to sorry am I and hour, every almost you of talks She soon. you
means father My you. without be to likely is she more weeks many how
has he when Easter, after till be not will it but himself, you fetch to
must this but hope, I Portsmouth, at happy are You town. in business
opinion your have may I that home, at you want I visit. yearly a be not
improvements extensive for heart little have I Lacey. Thornton about
certainly shall I think I mistress. a have ever will it that know I till
leave they Bath; to go Grants the that settled quite is It write.
be to enough comfortable not am I it. of glad am I Monday. on Mansfield
an such that luck of out feel to seems aunt your but anybody; for fit
hers.--Yours of instead pen my to fall should news Mansfield of article
Fanny.” dearest my ever,

was again,” letter a for wish will never certainly I no, will, never “I
but bring they do “What this. finished she as declaration secret Fanny’s
it? bear I shall How Easter! after till Not sorrow? and disappointment
hour!” every me of talking aunt poor my And

but could, she as well as thoughts these of tendency the checked Fanny
was Thomas Sir that idea the starting of minute a half within was she
subject main the for As herself. to and aunt her to both unkind, quite
was She irritation. soothe to that in nothing was there letter, the of
no is “There Edmund. against anger and displeasure into vexed almost
blinded, is He settled? it not is “Why she. said delay,” this in good
truths had having after can, nothing eyes; his open will nothing and
and poor be and her, marry will He vain. in long so him before
be to cease him make not do influence her that grant God miserable.
me!’ of fond very “‘So again. letter the over looked She respectable!”
Her brother. her and herself but nobody loves She all. nonsense ‘tis
led have to likely as quite is She years! for astray her leading friends
but another; one corrupting been perhaps, all, have They astray. _them_
less the is she them, of is she than her of fonder much so are they if
in woman only ‘The flattery. their by except hurt, been have to likely
it. believe firmly I wife.’ a as of think ever could he whom world the
his refused, or Accepted life. whole his govern to attachment an is It
as consider must I Mary of loss ‘The ever. for her to wedded is heart
know not do you Edmund, Fanny.’ and Crawford of loss the comprehending
connect not did you if connected be never would families The me.
this of end an be there Let once. at it Finish write. write, Oh! them!
yourself.” condemn commit, Fix, suspense.

long be to resentment to akin near too were however, sensations, Such
sorrowful. and softened more soon was She soliloquies. Fanny’s guiding
treatment, confidential his expressions, kind his regard, warm His
a was It everybody. to good too only was He strongly. her touched
and world, the for had have but not would she which short, in letter,
it. of end the was This enough. valued be never could which

say, to much having without letter-writing, to addicted all at Everybody
must least, at world female the of proportion large a include will which
capital a such having in luck of out was she that Bertram Lady with feel
Bath, to going Grants the of certainty the as news Mansfield of piece
admit will and it, of advantage no make could she when time a at occur
the to fall it see to her to mortifying very been have must it that
the at possible as concisely as treated and son, thankless her of share
largest the over spread to it having of instead letter, long a of end
the in shone rather Bertram Lady though For own. her of page a of part
other of want the from marriage, her in early having line, epistolary
Parliament, in being Thomas’s Sir of circumstance the and employment,
for formed and correspondents, keeping and making of way the into got
a that so style, amplifying common-place, creditable, very a herself
without entirely do not could she her: for enough was matter little very
and niece; her to even about, write to something have must she any;
and symptoms gouty Grant’s Dr. of benefit the all lose to soon so being
of deprived be to her upon hard very was it calls, morning Grant’s Mrs.
to. them put could she uses epistolary last the of one

Bertram’s Lady her. for preparing however, amends, rich a was There
Edmund’s of receipt the from days few a Within came. luck good of hour
thus-- beginning aunt, her from one had Fanny letter,

alarming very some communicate to pen my up take Fanny,--I Dear “My
concern”. much you give will doubt no make I which intelligence,

acquaint to pen the up take to have to than better deal great a was This
the for journey, intended Grants’ the of particulars the all with her
pen the for occupation promise to nature a of was intelligence present
her of illness dangerous the than less no being come, to days many for
hours few a express by notice received had they which of son, eldest
before.

where Newmarket, to men young of party a with London from gone had Tom
and fever; a on brought had drinking of deal good a and fall neglected a
himself by left been had move, to unable being up, broke party the when
and sickness of comforts the to men young these of one of house the at
soon being of Instead servants. of only attendance the and solitude,
disorder his hoped, then had he as friends, his follow to enough well
of ill so thought he before long not was it and considerably, increased
despatched letter a have to physician his as ready as be to as himself
Mansfield. to

observed suppose,” may you as intelligence, distressing “This
us agitated “has it, of substance the giving after ladyship, her
alarmed greatly being from ourselves prevent cannot we and exceedingly,
fears Thomas Sir state whose invalid, poor the for apprehensive and
brother his attending proposes kindly Edmund and critical; very be may
on me leave not will Thomas Sir that add to happy am I but immediately,
shall We me. for trying too be would it as occasion, distressing this
he hope and trust I but circle, small our in Edmund miss greatly
be might than state alarming less a in invalid poor the find will
shortly, Mansfield to him bring to able be will he that and apprehended,
every on best thinks and done, be should proposes Thomas Sir which
to able be soon will sufferer poor the myself flatter I and account,
I As injury. or inconvenience material without removal the bear
these under Fanny, dear my us, for feeling your of doubt little have
soon.” very again write will I circumstances, distressing

and warm more considerably indeed were occasion the on feelings Fanny’s
all. them for truly felt She writing. of style aunt’s her than genuine
small sadly the and him, attend to gone Edmund ill, dangerously Tom
care, other every out shut to cares were Mansfield, at remaining party
wonder to enough selfishness find just could She other. every almost or
came, summons this before Crawford Miss to written _had_ Edmund whether
affectionate purely not was that her with long dwelt sentiment no but
wrote she her: neglect not did aunt Her anxious. disinterestedly and
Edmund, from accounts frequent receiving were they again; and again
same the in Fanny, to transmitted regularly as were accounts these and
all fears, and hopes, trusts, of medley same the and style, diffuse
of sort a was It haphazard. at other each producing and following
not did Bertram Lady which sufferings The frightened. being at playing
comfortably very wrote she and fancy; her over power little had see
actually was Tom till invalids, poor and anxiety, and agitation, about
altered his beheld had eyes own her and Mansfield, to conveyed
for preparing previously been had she which letter a Then appearance.
feeling real of language the in style, different a in finished was Fanny
my come, just is “He spoken. have might she as wrote she then alarm; and
that him, see to shocked so am I and upstairs; taken is and Fanny, dear
am I Tom! Poor ill. very been has he sure am I do. to what know not do I
Thomas; Sir is so and frightened, much very and him, for grieved quite
Sir But me. comfort to here were you if be should I glad how and
his consider must we says and to-morrow, better be will he hopes Thomas
journey.”

not was bosom maternal the in awakened now solicitude real The
and Mansfield, to removed be to impatience extreme Tom’s over. soon
little been had which family and home of comforts those experience
being his induced probably had health, uninterrupted in of thought
week a for and on, came fever of return a as early, too thither conveyed
seriously very all were They ever. than state alarming more a in was he
who niece, her to terrors daily her wrote Bertram Lady frightened.
between time her all pass and letters, upon live to said be now might
to-morrow’s. to forward looking and to-day of that from suffering
tenderness her cousin, eldest her for affection particular any Without
of purity the and him, spare not could she that feel her made heart of
how considered she when solicitude, keener a yet added principles her
been. (apparently) had life his self-denying little how useful, little

common more on as this, on listener and companion only her was Susan
else Nobody sympathise. to and hear to ready always was Susan occasions.
an above family a in illness as evil an remote so in interested be could
two, or question brief a beyond Price, Mrs. even not off; miles hundred
the then and now and hand, her in letter a with daughter her saw she if
of deal great a in be must Bertram sister poor “My of, observation quiet
trouble.”

were blood of ties the situated, differently so and divided long So
their as tranquil as originally attachment, An nothing. than more little
for much as quite did Price Mrs. name. mere a become now was tempers,
or Three Price. Mrs. for done have would Bertram Lady as Bertram Lady
and Fanny except all or any away, swept been have might Prices four
perhaps or it; about little thought have would Bertram Lady and William,
very a being its of cant the lips Norris’s Mrs. from caught have might
have to Price sister dear poor their to blessing great a and thing happy
for. provided well so them



XLV CHAPTER

immediate Tom’s Mansfield, to return his from end week’s the about At
mother his make to as safe pronounced far so was he and over, was danger
suffering, his in him of sight the to used now being for easy; perfectly
beyond thinking never and best, the only hearing and state, helpless
hint, a at aptitude no and alarm for disposition no with heard, she what
medical little a for world the in subject happiest the was Bertram Lady
complaint; his been had fever the subdued; was fever The imposition.
nothing think could Bertram Lady again. well be soon would he course of
few a received she till security, aunt’s her shared Fanny and less,
his of idea clearer a her give to purposely written Edmund, from lines
which apprehensions the with her acquaint and situation, brother’s
some to respect with physician the from imbibed had father his and he
departure the on frame the seize to seemed which symptoms, hectic strong
be not should Bertram Lady that best it judged They fever. the of
unfounded; prove would hoped, be to was it which, alarms by harassed
were They truth. the know not should Fanny why reason no was there but
lungs. his for apprehensive

sickroom the and patient the her shewed Edmund from lines few very A
paper of sheets Bertram’s Lady all than light stronger and juster a in
have not might who house the in one any hardly was There do. could
who one not herself; than better observation, personal from described,
glide but nothing do could She son. her to times at useful more not was
or to, talked be or talk to able when but him; at look and quietly in
by him worried aunt His preferred. he companion the was Edmund to, read
or conversation his down bring to how not knew Thomas Sir and cares, her
in all was Edmund feebleness. and irritation of level the to voice his
that find must and least, at so him believe certainly would Fanny all.
the as appeared he when ever than higher was him of estimation her
only not was There brother. suffering a of cheerer supporter, attendant,
now she as also, was there assist: to illness recent of debility the
raise, and calm to depressed much spirits affected, much nerves learnt,
properly be to mind a be must there that added imagination own her and
guided.

than hope to inclined more was she and consumptive, not were family The
Miss but Crawford; Miss of thought she when except cousin, her for fear
her to and luck, good of child the being of idea the her gave Crawford
only the Edmund have to luck good be would it vanity and selfishness
son.

Edmund’s forgotten. not was Mary fortunate the chamber sick the in Even
actually had I last, my of subject the “On postscript. this had letter
changed now have I but illness, Tom’s by away called when letter a begun
better, is Tom When friends. of influence the trust to fear and mind, my
go.” shall I

any scarcely with continued, it so and Mansfield, of state the was Such
his to Edmund by added occasionally line A Easter. till change,
was amendment Tom’s information. Fanny’s for enough was letter mother’s
slow. alarmingly

sorrowfully most had Fanny as year, this late particularly came Easter
leaving of chance no had she that learning first on considered,
her of nothing heard yet had she and came, It it. after till Portsmouth
precede to was which London, to going the of even return--nothing
no was there but her, for wish a expressed often aunt Her return. her
supposed She depended. all whom on uncle the from message no notice,
delay terrible a cruel, a was it but son, his leave yet not could he
three almost be soon would it on; coming was April of end The her. to
that and all, them from absent been had she that two, of instead months,
them loved she which penance, of state a in passing been had days her
say yet could who and understand; thoroughly would they hope to well too
her? fetch or of think to leisure be might there when

such were them, with be to longings her impatience, her eagerness, Her
her. before ever for Tirocinium Cowper’s of two or line a bring to as
her on continually was home,” her wants she desire intense what “With
not could she which yearning a of description truest the as tongue,
keenly. more feel to bosom schoolboy’s any suppose

her it call to loved had she Portsmouth, to coming been had she When
had word the home; going was she that saying of fond been had home,
to applied be must it but was, still it so and her, to dear very been
Mansfield Portsmouth; was Portsmouth home. the now was _That_ Mansfield.
secret her of indulgence the in arranged so long been had They home. was
her find to than her to consolatory more was nothing and meditations,
being your regret much I say but cannot “I language: same the using aunt
I spirits. my to trying very so time, distressing this at home from
so home from absent be never may you wish sincerely and hope, and trust
it however, Still, her. to sentences delightful most were again,” long
to not careful her made parents her to Delicacy regale. private her was
go I “When always: was It house. uncle’s her of preference a such betray
do shall I Mansfield, to return I when or Northamptonshire, into back
grew longing the last at but so, was it while great a For so.” and so
what of talking herself found she and caution, overthrew it stronger,
reproached She aware. was she before home went she when do should she
mother. and father her towards fearfully looked and coloured, herself,
even or displeasure, of sign no was There uneasy. been have not need She
Mansfield. of jealousy any from free perfectly were They her. hearing of
there. be to as there herself wish to welcome as was She

not had She spring. of pleasures the all lose to Fanny to sad was It
April and March passing in lose to _had_ she pleasures what before known
progress and beginnings the much how before known not had She town. a in
mind, and body of both animation, What her. delighted had vegetation of
cannot, which season that of advance the watching from derived had she
increasing its seeing and unlovely, be capriciousness, its of spite in
her of divisions warmest the in flowers earliest the from beauties
and plantations, uncle’s her of leaves of opening the to garden, aunt’s
to trifle; no was pleasures such losing be To woods. his of glory the
noise, and closeness of midst the in was she because them, losing be
liberty, for substituted smells, bad air, bad confinement, have to
these even but worse: infinitely was verdure, and fragrance, freshness,
the from arose what with compared feeble, were regret to incitements
be to longing the and friends, best her by missed being of conviction
her! wanting were who those to useful

every to service of been have might she home, at been have she Could
all. to use of been have must she that felt She house. the in creature
it were and hand; or head of trouble some saved have must she all To
from her keeping Bertram, aunt her of spirits the supporting in only
officious restless, a of evil greater still the or solitude, of evil the
own her enhance to order in danger heightening be to apt too companion,
to loved She good. general a been have would there being her importance,
to talked have could she how aunt, her to read have could she how fancy
and was, what of blessing the feel her make to once at tried and her,
down and up walks many how and be; might what for mind her prepare
have might she messages many how and her, saved have might she stairs
carried.

remaining with satisfied be could sisters Tom’s that her astonished It
under now, had which illness an through time, a such at London in
return might _They_ weeks. several lasted danger, of degrees different
to difficulty no be could travelling chose; they when Mansfield to
away. keep still could both how comprehend not could she and _them_,
was Julia obligations, interfering any imagine could Rushworth Mrs. If
one from appeared It chose. she whenever London quit to able certainly
but wanted, if return to offered had Julia that letters aunt’s her of
was. she where remain rather would she that evident was It all. was this

war at much very London of influence the think to disposed was Fanny
Miss in it of proof the saw She attachments. respectable all with
been had Edmund to attachment _her_ cousins; her in as well as Crawford,
friendship her character; her of part respectable most the respectable,
now? sentiment either was Where blameless. been least at had herself for
had she that her, from letter any had had Fanny since long so was It
dwelt so been had which friendship the of lightly think to reason some
of or Crawford Miss of anything heard had she since weeks was It on.
was she and Mansfield, through except town, in connexions other her
had Crawford Mr. whether know never might she that suppose to beginning
from hear never might and met, they till not or again Norfolk into gone
received was letter following the when spring, this more any sister his
sensations-- new some create and old revive to

and silence, long my for can, you as soon as Fanny, dear my me, “Forgive
request modest my is This directly. me forgive could you if as behave
treated being upon depend I that good, so are you for expectation, and
I answer. immediate an beg to now write I and deserve, I than better
doubt, no you, and Park, Mansfield at things of state the know to want
the for feel to not brute a be should One it. give to able perfectly are
bad a has Bertram Mr. poor hear, I what from and in; are they distress
first. at illness his of little thought I recovery. ultimate of chance
to and with, fuss a made be to person of sort the as him upon looked I
concerned chiefly was and disorder, trifling any in himself fuss a make
that asserted confidently is it now but him; nurse to had who those for
that and alarming, most are symptoms the that decline, a in really is he
sure am I so, be it If it. of aware are least, at family, the of part
therefore and part, discerning that part, that in included be must you
need I informed. rightly been have I far how know me let to you entreat
but mistake, any been has there hear to be shall I rejoiced how say not
To trembling. help cannot I confess I that prevalent so is report the
most is days his of flower the in off cut man young fine a such have
quite am really I dreadfully. it feel will Thomas Sir Poor melancholy.
cunning, look and smile you see I Fanny, Fanny, subject. the on agitated
young Poor life. my in physician a bribed never I honour, my upon but,
the in less men young poor _two_ be will there die, to is he If man!
one, any to say I would voice bold and face fearless a with and world;
of deserving more hands no into fall could consequence and wealth that
of evil the but Christmas, last precipitation foolish a was It them.
many hide gilding and Varnish part. in out blotted be may days few a
real With name. his after Esquire the of loss the but be will It stains.
by me to Write overlooked. be might more mine, like Fanny, affection,
me Tell it. with trifle not do and anxiety, my of judge post, of return
do now, And fountainhead. the from it have you as truth, real the
own. your or feelings my either of ashamed be to yourself trouble not
and philanthropic are they natural, only not are they me, Believe
do not would Edmund’ ‘Sir whether conscience, your to it put I virtuous.
‘Sir.’ possible other any than property Bertram the all with good more
are you but you, troubled have not would I home at been Grants the Had
being not sisters his truth, the for to apply can I one only the now
Aylmers the with Easter the spending been has R. Mrs. reach. my within
and returned; yet not is and know), you sure be to (as Twickenham at
forget I but Square, Bedford near live who cousins the with is Julia
I however, either, to apply immediately I Could street. and name their
along all have they that me strikes it because you, prefer still should
their shut to as up, cut amusements own their have to unwilling so been
last not will holidays Easter R.’s Mrs. suppose I truth. the to eyes
Aylmers The her. to holidays thorough are they doubt no longer; much
but nothing have can she away, husband her and people; pleasant are
to down dutifully going his promoting for credit her give I enjoyment.
one in agree dowager the and she will how but mother; his fetch to Bath,
not Do him. from say to nothing have I so hand, at not is Henry house?
this for but ago, long again town in been have would Edmund think you
Mary.” ever, illness?--Yours

he but in, walked Henry when letter my folding begun actually had “I
decline a knows R. Mrs. it. sending my prevent to intelligence no brings
Street Wimpole to returns she morning: this her saw he apprehended; is
any with uneasy yourself make not do Now come. is lady old the to-day;
He Richmond. at days few a spending been has he because fancies queer
this At you. but nobody for cares he assured Be spring. every it does
the contriving in only occupied and you, see to wild is he moment very
In yours. to conduce pleasure his making for and so, doing for means
about Portsmouth at said he what eagerly, more and repeats, he proof,
Dear soul. my all with it in him join I and home, you conveying our
good. all us do will It come. to us tell and directly, write Fanny,
our to trouble no be and know, you Parsonage, the to go can I and He
them see to gratifying be really would It Park. Mansfield at friends
to use infinite of be might society of addition little a and again, all
there, wanted so be to yourself feel must you yourself, to as and them;
when away, are--keep you as conscience--conscientious in cannot you that
give to patience or time not have I returning. of means the have you
every and each of spirit the that satisfied be messages; Henry’s half
affection.” unalterable is one

extreme her with letter, this of part greater the at disgust Fanny’s
together, Edmund cousin her and it of writer the bring to reluctance
impartially judging of incapable felt) she (as her made have would
herself, To not. or accepted be might offer concluding the whether
perhaps herself, finding be To tempting. most was it individually,
the of image an was Mansfield, to transported days, three within
be to drawback material a been have would it but felicity, greatest
the at conduct, and feelings whose in persons to felicity such owing
feelings, sister’s the condemn: to much so saw she moment, present
thoughtless _his_ ambition, cold-hearted _her_ conduct, brother’s the
Mrs. of perhaps, flirt the acquaintance, the still him have To vanity.
Happily, him. of better thought had She mortified. was She Rushworth!
opposite between decide and weigh to left not was she however,
to occasion no was there right; of notions doubtful and inclinations
She not. or asunder Mary and Edmund keep to ought she whether determine
uncle, her of awe Her everything. settled which to, apply to rule a had
to plain instantly it made him, with liberty a taking of dread her and
he If proposal. the decline absolutely must She do. to had she what her
was return early an offer to even and her; for send would he wanted,
She justify. to seemed have would anything hardly which presumption a
uncle, “Her negative. decided a gave but Crawford, Miss thanked
had illness cousin’s her as and her; fetch to meant understood, she
necessary, all at thought being her without weeks many so continued
she that and present, at unwelcome be would return her suppose must she
encumbrance.” an felt be should

exactly was time this at state cousin’s her of representation Her
convey would supposed she as such and it, of belief own her to according
was she everything of hope the correspondent her of mind sanguine the to
seemed, it clergyman, a being for forgiven be would Edmund for. wishing
all was suspected, she this, and wealth; of conditions certain under
himself congratulate to ready so was he which prejudice of conquest the
money. but consequence of nothing think to learnt only had She upon.



XLVI CHAPTER

real a conveying was answer her that doubt not could Fanny As
of knowledge her from expectation, in rather was she disappointment,
second no though and again; urged being of temper, Crawford’s Miss
feeling same the still had she week, a of space the for arrived letter
come. did it when

little containing its on decide instantly could she it, receiving On
haste of letter a of air the having its of persuaded was and writing,
enough were moments two and unquestionable; was object Its business. and
that notice her give to merely being its of probability the start to
all into her throw to and day, very that Portsmouth in be should they
two If case. a such in do to ought she what doubting of agitation the
disperse can third a difficulties, with surround can however, moments,
and Mr. of possibility the letter, the opened had she before and them;
permission his obtained and uncle her to applied having Crawford’s Miss
letter-- the was This ease. her giving was

write, I and me, reached just has rumour ill-natured scandalous, most “A
it should it, to credit least the giving against you warn to Fanny, dear
that and mistake, some is there it, upon Depend country. the into spread
and blameless, is Henry that rate, any at up; it clear will two or day a
a not Say you. but nobody of thinks _etourderie_, moment’s a of spite in
I till nothing whisper nothing, surmise nothing, hear it; of word
but proved nothing and up, hushed all be will it sure am I again. write
only are they life my lay would I gone, are they If folly. Rushworth’s
let you not would why But them. with Julia and Park, Mansfield to gone
etc.” it.--Yours, repent not may you wish I you? for come us

reached had rumour ill-natured scandalous, no As aghast. stood Fanny
strange this of much understand to her for impossible was it her,
Street Wimpole to relate must it that perceive only could She letter.
had imprudent very something that conjecture only and Crawford, Mr. and
to and world, the of notice the draw to quarter that in occurred just
it. heard she if apprehension, Crawford’s Miss in jealousy, her excite
the for sorry only was She her. for alarmed be not need Crawford Miss
far; so spread should report the if Mansfield, for and concerned parties
to themselves gone were Rushworths the If not. might it hoped she but
was it said, Crawford Miss what from inferred be to was as Mansfield,
at or them, preceded have should unpleasant anything that likely not
impression. any make should least

own his of knowledge a him give might it hoped she Crawford, Mr. to As
steadily being of capable not was he that him convince disposition,
persisting from him shame and world, the in woman one any to attached
herself. addressing in longer any

to and her, loved really he think to begun had She strange! very was It
sister his and common; than more something her for affection his fancy
some been have must there Yet else. nobody for cared he that said still
some been have must there cousin, her to attentions of display marked
regard to sort a of not was correspondent her since indiscretion, strong
one. slight a

from heard she till continue, must and was, she uncomfortable Very
her from letter the banish to impossible was It again. Crawford Miss
any to it of speaking by herself relieve not could she and thoughts,
much so with secrecy urged have not need Crawford Miss being. human
her to due was what of sense her to trusted have might she warmth;
cousin.

disappointed. was Fanny letter. second no brought and came day next The
her when but, morning; the all else little of think still could She
she usual, as newspaper daily the with afternoon the in back came father
that channel a such through elucidation any expecting from far so was
head. her of out moment a for was subject the

in evening first her of remembrance The musing. other in deep was She
candle No her. across came newspaper, his and father her of room, that
She horizon. the above half and hour an yet was sun The wanted. now was
rays sun’s the and there; months three been indeed, had, she that felt
still her made cheering, of instead parlour, the into strongly falling
different totally a her to appeared sunshine for melancholy, more
glare: a only was power its Here, country. the in and town a in thing
dirt and stains forward bring to but serving glare, sickly stifling, a
in gaiety nor health neither was There slept. have otherwise might that
cloud a in heat, oppressive of blaze a in sat She town. a in sunshine
by marked walls, the from wander only could eyes her and dust, moving of
where brothers, her by notched and cut table the to head, father’s her
wiped saucers and cups the cleaned, thoroughly never tea-board the stood
the and blue, thin in floating motes of mixture a milk the streaks, in
Rebecca’s even than greasy more minute every growing butter and bread
her and newspaper, his read father Her it. produced first had hands
was tea the while usual, as carpet ragged the over lamented mother
first was Fanny and it; mend would Rebecca wished and preparation, in
over considering and humphing after her, to out calling his by roused
town, in cousins great your of name the “What’s paragraph: particular a
Fan?”

sir.” “Rushworth, say, to her enabled recollection moment’s A

Street?” Wimpole in live they don’t “And

sir.” “Yes,

(holding There” all! that’s them, among pay to devil the there’s “Then,
I you. do relations fine such may good “much her); to paper the out
much too be may he matters; such of think may Thomas Sir what know don’t
But, less. the daughter his like to gentleman fine and courtier the of
as long as end rope’s the her give I’d _me_, to belonged she if G--! by
be would too woman and man for flogging little A her. over stand could I
things.” such preventing of way best the

newspaper the concern infinite with was “it that herself to read Fanny
of family the in _fracas_ matrimonial a world the to announce to had
long not had name whose R., Mrs. beautiful the Street; Wimpole of R. Mr.
become to promised had who and Hymen, of lists the in enrolled been
her quitted having world, fashionable the in leader a brilliant so
C., Mr. captivating and well-known the with company in roof husband’s
even known not was it and R., Mr. of associate and friend intimate the
gone.” were they whither newspaper the of editor the to

it mistake, a be must “it instantly; Fanny said sir,” mistake, a is “It
people.” other some mean must it true; be cannot

with spoke she shame; delaying of wish instinctive the from spoke She
not, did she what spoke she for despair, from sprung which resolution a
she as conviction of shock the been had It herself. believe not could
all, at spoken have could she how and her; on rushed truth The read.
to wonder of matter afterwards was breathed, have even could she how
herself.

answer. much her make to report the about little too cared Price Mr.
were ladies fine many so “but acknowledged; he lie,” a all be might “It
for answering no was there that way, that nowadays devil the to going
anybody.”

would “it plaintively; Price Mrs. said true,” not is it hope I “Indeed,
carpet, that about Rebecca to once spoken have I If shocking! very so be
And Betsey? I, not have times; dozen a least at spoke have I sure am I
work.” minutes’ ten be not would it

such of conviction the received it as Fanny’s, like mind a of horror The
can ensue, must that misery the of part some in take to began and guilt,
every but stupefaction; of sort a was it first, At described. be hardly
not could She evil. horrible the of perception her quickening was moment
Miss false. being paragraph the of hope, a indulge not dared she doubt,
line every make to as often so read had she which letter, Crawford’s
her of defence eager Her it. with conformity frightful in was own, her
agitation, evident her _up_, _hushed_ being its of hope her brother,
woman a was there if and bad; very something with piece a of all were
the of sin this trifle a as treat could who existence, in character of
it have to desire and over, it gloss to try would who magnitude, first
she Now woman! the be to Crawford Miss believe could she unpunished,
be to _said_ or gone, were _who_ to as mistake own her see could
Mr. and Rushworth Mrs. was it Rushworth; Mrs. and Mr. not was It gone.
Crawford.

no was There before. shocked been have to never herself to seemed Fanny
the misery, of pause a without passed evening The rest. of possibility
sickness of feelings from only passed She sleepless. totally was night
event The cold. to fever of fits hot from and horror; of shudderings to
revolted heart her when even moments were there that shocking, so was
married woman A be. not could it thought she when impossible: as it from
to _engaged_ even devoted, himself professing man a ago; months six only
families both family, whole the relation; near her other that another;
intimate all friends, all tie; upon tie by were they as connected
a gross too guilt, of confusion a horrible too was It together!
utter of state a in not nature, human for evil, of complication
so. was it her told judgment her yet of! capable be to barbarism,
_Maria’s_ vanity, his with wavering affections, unsettled _His_
it gave side, either on principle sufficient no and attachment, decided
fact. a it stampt letter Crawford’s Miss possibility:

views Whose injure? not it would Whom consequence? the be would What
Miss ever? for up cut not it would peace Whose affect? not it might
tread to perhaps, dangerous, was it but Edmund; herself, Crawford,
the to herself, confine to tried or herself, confined She ground. such
were it if all, envelop must which misery family indubitable simple,
mother’s The exposure. public and guilt certified of matter a indeed
Edmund’s; Tom’s, Julia’s, paused. she there father’s; the sufferings,
most fall would it whom on two the were They pause. longer yet a there
and honour of sense high and solicitude parental Thomas’s Sir horribly.
genuine and temper, unsuspicious principles, upright Edmund’s decorum,
to them for possible scarcely it think her made feeling, of strength
her to appeared it and disgrace; such under reason and life support
to blessing greatest the concerned, was alone world this as far as that,
annihilation. instant be would Rushworth Mrs. with kindred of one every

Two terrors. her weaken to next, the or day, next the happened Nothing
was There private. or public refutation, no brought and in, came posts
was there Crawford; Miss from first the away explain to letter second no
her for time full now was it though Mansfield, from intelligence no
indeed, had, She omen. evil an was This aunt. her from again hear to
so to reduced was and mind, her soothe to hope a of shadow the scarcely
except unkind, not mother, no as condition, a trembling and wan and low
the bring did day third the when overlooked, have could Price Mrs.
the bore It hands. her into put again was letter a and knock, sickening
Edmund. from came and postmark, London

you support God May wretchedness. present our know Fanny,--You “Dear
to nothing is there but days, two here been have We share! your under
last the of heard have not may You traced. be cannot They done. be
left She Yates. with Scotland to gone is she elopement; blow--Julia’s
would this time other any At it. entered we before hours few a London
heavy an is it yet nothing; seems it Now dreadfully. felt been have
is He hoped. be cannot More overpowered. not is father My aggravation.
your propose to desire, his by write, I and act; and think to able still
I sake. mother’s my for there you get to anxious is He home. returning
to hope and this, receive you after morning the Portsmouth at be shall
invite to you wishes father My Mansfield. for off set to ready you find
what say like; you as it Settle months. few a for you with go to Susan
at kindness his of instance an such feel will you sure am I proper; is
You it. confuse may I however meaning, his to justice Do moment! a such
evil the of end no is There state. present my of something imagine may
etc.” mail.--Yours, the by early me see will You us. upon loose let

one a such felt she had Never cordial. a wanted more Fanny had Never
to-morrow! Portsmouth leave to To-morrow! contained. letter this as
exquisitely being of danger greatest the in was, she felt she was, She
good such brought which evil The miserable. were many so while happy,
be To it. of insensible be to learn should she lest dreaded She her! to
leave with and comfort, a as for sent kindly, so for sent soon, so going
her set as blessings of combination a such altogether was Susan, take to
and pain, every distance to seemed time a for and glow, a in heart
those of even distress the sharing suitably of incapable her make
her affect could elopement Julia’s most. of thought she distress whose
not could it but shocked; and amazed was she little; but comparatively
herself call to obliged was She mind. her on dwell not could her, occupy
it or grievous, and terrible be to it acknowledge and it, of think to
joyful pressing agitating the all of midst the in her, escaping was
herself. to summons this attending cares

for employment, indispensable active employment, like nothing is There
melancholy, dispel may melancholy, even Employment, sorrow. relieving
even not that do, to much so had She hopeful. were occupations her and
of point last the to fixed Rushworth--now Mrs. of story horrible the
to time not had She before. done had it as her affect could certainty
her gone; be to hoping was she hours twenty-four Within miserable. be
got everything prepared, Susan to, spoken be must mother and father
The enough. long hardly was day the business; followed Business ready.
the by alloyed little very happiness too, imparting, was she happiness
consent joyful it--the precede briefly must which communication black
general her--the with going Susan’s to mother and father her of
the and regarded, seemed both of going the which with satisfaction
spirits. her support to serving all was herself, Susan of ecstasy

Price Mrs. family. the in felt little was Bertrams the of affliction The
to anything find to how but minutes, few a for sister poor her of talked
spoilt and boxes the all away took Rebecca because clothes, Susan’s hold
unexpectedly now Susan, for as and thoughts: her in more much was them,
personally nothing knowing and heart, her of wish first the in gratified
could she sorrowing--if were who those of or sinned, had who those of
be to ought as much as was it end, to beginning from rejoicing help
fourteen. at virtue human from expected

good the or Price, Mrs. of decision the for left really was nothing As
accomplished, duly and rationally was everything Rebecca, of offices
sleep much of advantage The morrow. the for ready were girls the and
was who cousin The impossible. was journey their for them prepare to
their visited than less have hardly could them towards travelling
and varying all other the happiness, all spirits--one agitated
perturbation. indescribable

his heard girls The house. the in was Edmund morning the in eight By
seeing immediately of idea The down. went Fanny and above, from entrance
all back brought suffering, be must he what of knowledge the with him,
to ready was She misery. in and her, near so He feelings. first own her
instantly; her met and alone, was He parlour. the entered she as sink
just words, these only with heart his to pressed herself found she and
could She now!” comfort only my sister; only my Fanny, “My articulate,
more. say he could minutes some for nor nothing; say

his though again, spoke he when and himself, recover to away turned He
and self-command, of wish the shewed manner his faltered, still voice
breakfasted? you “Have allusion. farther any avoiding of resolution the
each following questions were go?” Susan Does ready? be you shall When
When possible. as soon as off be to was object great His rapidly. other
own his of state the and precious; was time considered, was Mansfield
should he that settled was It motion. in only relief find him made mind
their for answered Fanny hour. an half in door the to carriage the order
already had He hour. an half in ready quite being and breakfasted having
the round walk would He meal. their for staying declined and ate,
to glad again; gone was He carriage. the with them join and ramparts,
Fanny. from even away get

he which emotions, violent under suffering evidently ill; very looked He
terrible was it but so, be must it knew She suppress. to determined was
her. to

same the at again house the entered he and came; carriage The
a be and family, the with minutes few a spend to time in just moment,
the which in manner tranquil the nothing--of saw he that witness--but
sitting their prevent to time in just and with, parted were daughters
activity, unusual much of dint by which, breakfast-table, the to down
door. the from drove carriage the as ready completely and quite was
first: her with character in was house father’s her in meal last Fanny’s
welcomed. been had she as hospitably as it from dismissed was she

barriers the passed she as gratitude and joy with swelled heart her How
be may smiles, broadest its wore face Susan’s how and Portsmouth, of
bonnet, her by screened and however, forwards, Sitting conceived. easily
unseen. were smiles those

often sighs deep Edmund’s one. silent a be to likely was journey The
opened have must heart his her, with alone been he Had Fanny. reached
into quite him drove presence Susan’s but resolution; every of spite in
be never could subjects indifferent on talk to attempts his and himself,
supported. long

catching sometimes and solicitude, never-failing with him watched Fanny
the but her; comforted which smile, affectionate an revived eye, his
the on him from word a hearing her without passed journey day’s first
a produced morning next The down. him weighing were that subjects
was Susan while Oxford, from out setting their before Just more. little
a of departure the of observation eager in window, a at stationed
and fire; the by standing were two other the inn, the from family large
from and looks, Fanny’s in alteration the by struck particularly Edmund,
an attributing house, father’s her of evils daily the of ignorance his
took event, recent the to _all_ attributing change, the of share undue
wonder--you “No tone, expressive very but low, a in said and hand, her
could loved, once had who man a How suffer. must it--you feel must
with----Fanny, compared new was regard _yours_--your But you! desert
_me_!” of think

brought and day, long a occupied journey their of division first The
much a at over was second the but Oxford; to up, knocked almost them,
the before long Mansfield of environs the in were They hour. earlier
hearts the place, beloved the approached they as and dinner-time, usual
her with meeting the dread to began Fanny little. a sank sisters both of
feel to Susan and humiliation; a dreadful so under Tom, and aunts
acquired lately her all manners, best her all that anxiety, some with
called being of point the on was here, practised was what of knowledge
new and vulgarisms old of breeding, ill and good of Visions action. into
silver upon much meditating was she and her; before were gentilities,
to awake everywhere been had Fanny finger-glasses. and napkins, forks,
the entered they when but February; since country the of difference the
was It sort. keenest the of were pleasures her and perceptions her Park
the and it, quitting her since months, three full months, three
lawns on everywhere fell eye Her summer. to winter from was change
fully not though trees, the and green; freshest the of plantations and
to known is beauty farther when state delightful that in were clothed,
more sight, the to given actually is much while when, and hand, at be
herself for was however, enjoyment, Her imagination. the for remains yet
leaning was he but him, at looked She it. share not could Edmund alone.
the if as closed, eyes with and ever, than gloom deeper a in sunk back,
must home of scenes lovely the and him, oppressed cheerfulness of view
out. shut be

enduring be must what of knowledge the and again; melancholy her made It
it as situated well and airy, modern, house, the even invested there,
aspect. melancholy a with was,

such with expected were they within party suffering the of one By
the passed scarcely had Fanny before. known never had she as impatience
drawing-room the from came Bertram Lady when servants, solemn-looking
said, neck, her on falling and step; indolent no with came her; meet to
comfortable.” be shall I now Fanny! “Dear



XLVII CHAPTER

themselves believing three the of each party, miserable a been had It
was Maria, to attached most as however, Norris, Mrs. miserable. most
dearest the favourite, first her was Maria sufferer. greatest the really
with wont been had she as contriving, own her been had match the all; of
almost it of conclusion this and say, and feel to heart of pride such
her. overpowered

to indifferent stupefied, quieted, creature, altered an was She
and nephew, and sister her with left being The passed. that everything
thrown entirely advantage an been had care, her under house the all
herself fancy even or dictate, or direct to unable been had she away;
been had powers active her affliction, by touched really When useful.
the her from received had Tom nor Bertram Lady neither and benumbed; all
them for more no done had She support. at attempt or support smallest
helpless, solitary, all been had They other. each for done had they than
established only others the of arrival the now and alike; forlorn and
there but relieved, were companions Her wretchedness. in superiority her
brother his to welcome as almost was Edmund _her_. for good no was
from comfort having of instead Norris, Mrs. but aunt; her to Fanny as
in whom, person the of sight the by irritated more the but was either,
the of daemon the as charged have could she anger, her of blindness the
happened. have not could this Crawford Mr. accepted Fanny Had piece.

more in her notice to spirits not had She grievance. a was too Susan
intruder, an and spy, a as her felt she but looks, repulsive few a than
aunt, other her By odious. most everything and niece, indigent an and
her give not could Bertram Lady kindness. quiet with received was Susan
have to sister, Fanny’s as her, felt she but words, many or time, much
Susan and her; like and kiss to ready was and Mansfield, at claim a
but nothing that aware perfectly came she for satisfied, than more was
provided so was and Norris; aunt from expected be to was ill-humour
from escape an blessings, of best that in strong so happiness, with
more deal great a against stood have could she that evils, certain many
others. the from with met she than indifference

the with acquainted get to herself, to deal good a left now was She
so in happily very days her spent and could, she as grounds and house
shut were her to attended have otherwise might who those while doing,
at them, on dependent quite person the with each occupied wholly or up,
own his bury to trying Edmund comfort; like everything for time, this
devoted Fanny and brother’s, his of relief the for exertions in feelings
than more with office former every to returning Bertram, aunt her to
seemed who one for enough do never could she thinking and zeal, former
her. want to much so

all was lament, and talk Fanny, with business dreadful the over talk To
hear and with, borne and to listened be To consolation. Bertram’s Lady
could that everything was return, in sympathy and kindness of voice the
The question. the of out was comforted otherwise be To her. for done be
but, deeply, think not did Bertram Lady comfort. no of admitted case
and points; important all on justly thought she Thomas, Sir by guided
neither and happened, had what enormity, its all in therefore, saw, she
little think to her, advise to Fanny required nor herself, endeavoured
infamy. and guilt of

time, a After tenacious. mind her was nor acute, not were affections Her
subjects, other to thoughts her direct to impossible not it found Fanny
Lady whenever but occupations; usual the in interest some revive and
as light, one in only it see could she event, the on fixed _was_ Bertram
wiped be to never disgrace a and daughter, a of loss the comprehending
off.

Her transpired. yet had which particulars the all her from learnt Fanny
letters some of help the with but narrator, methodical very no was aunt
could and herself, knew already she what and Thomas, Sir from and to
she as much as quite understand to able soon was she combine, reasonably
story. the attending circumstances the of wished

with Twickenham, to holidays, Easter the for gone, had Rushworth Mrs.
lively, of family a with: intimate grown just had she whom family a
to for suit, to discretion and morals of probably and manners, agreeable
having His times. all at access constant had Crawford Mr. house _their_
had Rushworth Mr. knew. already Fanny neighbourhood same the in been
and mother, his with days few a pass to Bath, to time this at gone been
any without friends these with was Maria and town, to back her bring
Street Wimpole from removed had Julia for Julia; even without restraint,
Thomas; Sir of relations some to visit a on before, weeks three or two
attribute to disposed now were mother and father her which removal a
the after soon Very account. Yates’s Mr. on convenience of view some to
letter a received had Thomas Sir Street, Wimpole to return Rushworths’
and hearing who London, in friend particular most and old an from
recommend to wrote quarter, that in him alarm to deal good a witnessing
his with influence his using and himself, London to coming Thomas’s Sir
to her exposing already was which intimacy the to end an put to daughter
uneasy. Rushworth Mr. making evidently and remarks, unpleasant

communicating without letter, this upon act to preparing was Thomas Sir
by followed was it when Mansfield, at creature any to contents its
almost the him to break to friend, same the from express sent another,
people. young the with stood then affairs which in situation desperate
been had Rushworth Mr. house: husband’s her left had Rushworth Mrs.
Mr. advice; his for Harding) (Mr. _him_ to distress and anger great in
indiscretion. flagrant very _least_ _at_ been had there feared Harding
He alarmingly. threatened senior, Rushworth, Mrs. of maidservant The
Mrs. of hope the with everything, quiet to power his in all doing was
by Street Wimpole in counteracted much so was but return, Rushworth’s
consequences worst the that mother, Rushworth’s Mr. of influence the
apprehended. be might

the of rest the from kept be not could communication dreadful This
had others the and him, with go would Edmund off, set Thomas Sir family.
followed what to only inferior wretchedness, of state a in left been
time that by was Everything London. from letters next the of receipt the
had mother, the Rushworth, Mrs. of servant The hope. a beyond public
be to not was mistress, her by supported and power, her in exposure
been had they time short the in even ladies, two The silenced.
her against elder the of bitterness the and disagreed; had together,
personal the from much as almost arise perhaps might daughter-in-law
sensibility from as treated been herself had she which with disrespect
son. her for

less been she had But unmanageable. was she be, might that However
the by guided always was who son, her with weight less of or obstinate,
the up, him shut and of hold get could who person the by speaker, last
appear not did Rushworth Mrs. for hopeless, been have still would case
concealed be to her conclude to reason every was there and again,
a for as house, uncle’s his quitted had who Crawford, Mr. with somewhere
herself. absenting her of day very the on journey,

hope the in town, in longer little a yet remained however, Thomas, Sir
lost was all though vice, farther from her snatching and discovering of
character. of side the on

but was There of. think to bear hardly could Fanny state present _His_
to misery of source a time this at not was who children his of one
his of shock the by heightened greatly been had complaints Tom’s him.
even that it, by back thrown much so recovery his and conduct, sister’s
were alarms her all and difference, the by struck been had Bertram Lady
additional the elopement, Julia’s and husband; her to off sent regularly
had force its though London, in arrival his on him met had which blow
saw She felt. sorely be knew, she must, moment, the at deadened been
any Under it. deplored he much how expressed letters His was. it that
it have to but alliance; unwelcome an been have would it circumstances
completion, its for chosen period a such and formed, clandestinely so
severely and light, unfavourable most a in feelings Julia’s placed
in done thing, bad a it called He choice. her of folly the aggravated
as yet was Julia though and time; worst the at and manner, worst the
but not could he vice, than folly as Maria than pardonable more
a of probabilities worst the opening as taken had she step the regard
set the of opinion his was Such sister’s. her like hereafter conclusion
herself. thrown had she which into

Edmund. in but comfort no have could He acutely. most him for felt Fanny
against displeasure His heart. his racking be must child other Every
now would Norris, Mrs. from differently reasoning trusted, she herself
fully have would Crawford Mr. justified. be should _She_ away. done be
material most though this, but him; refusing in conduct her acquitted
uncle’s Her Thomas. Sir to consolation poor be would herself, to
her or justification her could what but her; to terrible was displeasure
alone. Edmund on be must stay His him? for do attachment and gratitude

no father his gave Edmund that supposing in however, mistaken, was She
others the what than nature poignant less much a of was It pain. present
deeply very as happiness his considering was Thomas Sir but excited;
as it, by off cut friend; and sister his of offence the in involved
undoubted with pursuing been had he whom woman the from be, must he
but everything in who, and success; of probability strong and attachment
was He connexion. a eligible so been have would brother, despicable this
addition in behalf, own his on suffering be must Edmund what of aware
conjectured or seen had he town: in were they when rest, the all to
Miss with interview one that think to reason having and, feelings; his
increased only derived Edmund which from place, taken had Crawford
him get to others on as account that on anxious as been had distress,
with aunt, her to home Fanny taking in him engaged had and town, of out
in not was Fanny theirs. than less no benefit, and relief his to view a
Miss of secret the in not Thomas Sir feelings, uncle’s her of secret the
his with conversation her to privy been he Had character. Crawford’s
twenty her though him, to belong to her wished have not would he son,
forty. been had pounds thousand

admit not did Crawford Miss from divided ever for be must Edmund That
her same, the felt he that knew she till yet, and Fanny; with doubt a of
to wanted she but did, he thought She insufficient. was conviction own
which unreserve the with her to speak now would he If it. of assured be
consoling; most be would it before, her for much too been sometimes had
He alone. never him: saw seldom She be. to not was found she _that_ but
That inferred? be to was What her. with alone being avoided probably
this of share bitter and peculiar own his all to submitted judgment his
of subject a be to felt keenly too was it that but affliction, family
it but yielded, He state. his be must This communication. slightest the
be it would long Long, speech. of admit not did which agonies with was
a for hope could she or again, lips his passed name Crawford’s Miss ere
been. had as intercourse confidential such of renewal

till not was it and Thursday, on Mansfield reached They long. _was_ It
Sitting subject. the on her to talk to began Edmund that evening Sunday
of time very evening--the Sunday wet evening--a Sunday on her with
and opened, be must heart the hand, at is friend a if when, others all
who, mother, his except room, the in else one no told; everything
was it sleep, to herself cried had sermon, affecting an hearing after
to hardly beginnings, usual the with so, and speak; to not impossible
she if that declaration usual the and first, came what to as traced be
and brief, very be should he minutes, few a for him to listen would
not need she again; way same the in kindness her tax never certainly
entered he entirely: prohibited subject a be would it repetition; a fear
first the of sensations and circumstances relating of luxury the upon
quite was he sympathy affectionate whose of one to himself, to interest
convinced.

what and pain what concern, and curiosity what with listened, Fanny How
carefully how and watched, was voice his of agitation the how delight,
The imagined. be may himself, but object any on fixed were eyes own her
to invited been had He Crawford. Miss seen had He alarming. was opening
call; to him beg to Stornaway Lady from note a received had He her. see
interview last last, the be to meant was what as it regarding and
and shame of feelings the all with her investing and friendship, of
to gone had he known, have to ought sister Crawford’s which wretchedness
a for it made as devoted, so softened, so mind, of state a such in her
But last. the be should it that fears Fanny’s to impossible moments few
him, met had She over. were fears these story, his in proceeded he as
air; agitated an serious--even a serious--certainly a with said, he
had she sentence, intelligible one speak to able been had he before but
“‘I him. shocked had owned he which manner a in subject the introduced
talk us Let you. see to wanted ‘I she; said town,’ in were you heard
relations?’ two our of folly the equal can What business. sad this over
reproved. felt She spoke. looks my believe I but answer, not could I
then she voice and look graver a With feel! to quick how Sometimes
So expense.’ sister’s your at Henry defend to mean not do ‘I added,
be to fit hardly is fit, not is Fanny, on, went she how but began, she
upon dwell not would I words. her all recall cannot I you. to repeated
each. of _folly_ the at anger great was substance Their could. I if them
he whom woman a by on drawn being in folly brother’s her reprobated She
but adored; he woman the him lose must what do to for, cared never had
situation, a such sacrificing in Maria, poor of folly the more still
loved really being of idea the under difficulties, such into plunging
must I what Guess clear. indifference his made ago long had who man a by
given! folly than name harsher whom--no woman the hear To felt. have
no reluctance, No it! canvass to coolly so freely, so voluntarily, So
the what is This loathings? modest no say, I shall feminine, no horror,
so had nature whom woman a find we shall Fanny, where, For does. world
spoilt!” Spoilt, endowed? richly

calmness. desperate of sort a with on went he reflection, little a After
it saw She ever. for done have then and everything, you tell will “I
of want The exposure. by only stamped folly that and folly, as only
whole the for Richmond to down going his caution: of discretion, common
of power the in herself putting her Twickenham; at being her of time
the was it Fanny! short--oh, in detection, the was it servant; a
imprudence the was It reprobated. she which offence, the not detection,
give to brother her obliged and extremity, to things brought had which
her.” with fly to order in plan dearer every up

speak), to required herself (believing Fanny said what,” “And stopt. He
say?” you could “what

She stunned. man a like was I understood. be to nothing “Nothing,
you, of talk to began she then yes, you; of talk to began on, went
spoke she There a--. such of loss the might, she well as regretting,
thrown has ‘He you. to justice done always has she But rationally. very
would She again. see never will he as woman a ‘such she, said away,’
dearest My ever.’ for happy him made have would she him; fixed have
this by pain than pleasure more hope, I you, giving am I Fanny,
do You now. be can never what been--but have might what of retrospect
I and word, a look, a but me give do, you If silent? be to me wish not
done.” have

given. was word or look No

to seems it but wonder, to disposed all were “We he. said God,” “Thank
which heart the that Providence of appointment merciful the been have
and praise high with you of spoke She suffer. not should guile no knew
in for evil; of dash a alloy, was there here, even yet, affection; warm
is It him? have she not would ‘Why exclaim, could she it of midst the
accepted she Had her. forgive never shall I girl! Simple fault. her all
and marriage, of point the on been have now might they ought, she as him
object. other any want to busy too and happy too been have would Henry
again. Rushworth Mrs. with terms on be to pains no taken have would He
yearly in flirtation, standing regular a in ended all have would It
it believed have you Could Everingham.’ and Sotherton at meetings
opened.” are eyes My broken. is charm the But possible?

to way give to moment a such At cruel. “quite Fanny, said “Cruel!”
cruelty.” Absolute you! to and lightness, with speak to gaiety,

cruel a not is hers No, there. differ We it? call you do “Cruelty,
evil The feelings. my wound to meaning as her consider not do I nature.
being there of unsuspiciousness ignorance, total her in deeper: yet lies
to her to natural it made which mind of perversion a in feelings; such
used been had she as only speaking was She did. she as subject the treat
Hers speak. would else everybody imagined she as speak, others hear to
unnecessary give voluntarily not would She temper. of faults not are
think but cannot I myself, deceive may I though and one, any to pain
principle, of faults are would--Hers she feelings, my for me, for that
it Perhaps mind. vitiated corrupted, a and delicacy blunted of Fanny;
however. so, Not regret. to little so me leaves it since me, for best is
rather her, losing of pain increased the all to submit I would Gladly
so.” her told I do. I as her of think to have than

you?” “Did

so.” her told I her left I when “Yes;

together?” you were long “How

remained what that say to on went she Well, minutes. “Five-and-twenty
of spoke She them. between marriage a about bring to was done be to now
pause to obliged was He can.” I than voice steadier a with Fanny, it,
marry to Henry persuade must “‘We continued. he as once than more
shut having of certainty the and honour, with what ‘and she; said her,’
must he Fanny it. of despair not do I Fanny, from ever for out himself
with succeed to hope now could _he_ even that think not do I up. give
insuperable no find may we hope I therefore and stamp, her of one
and way; that go all shall small not is which influence, My difficulty.
of people family, own her by supported properly and married, once when
a to society in footing her recover may she are, they as respectability
admitted, be never would she know, we circles, some In degree. certain
those be always will there parties, large and dinners, good with but
more undoubtedly, is, there and acquaintance; her of glad be will who
advise I What formerly. than points those on candour and liberality
by cause own his injure him let not Do quiet. be father your that is,
any by If course. their take things let to him Persuade interference.
protection, Henry’s leave to induced is she his, of exertions officious
remain she if than her marrying his of chance less much be will there
trust Thomas Sir Let influenced. be to likely is he how know I him. with
his get he if but well; end all may it and compassion, and honour his to
hold.’” chief the destroying be will it away, daughter

watching Fanny, that affected much so was Edmund this, repeating After
the that sorry almost was concern, tender most but silent, with him
speak could he before long was It all. at on entered been had subject
have I done. have soon shall “I he, said Fanny,” “Now, last, At again.
speak, could I as soon As said. she that all of substance the you told
of state a such in coming possible, it supposed not had I that replied I
make to occur could anything that done, had I as house that into mind
almost in wounds deeper inflicting been had she that but more, suffer me
acquaintance, our of course the in had, I though That sentence. every
points, on opinions, our in difference some of sensible often been
the conceive to imagination my entered not had it moment, some of too,
in manner the That it. proved now had she as such be could difference
my and brother her by committed crime dreadful the treated she which
say), to not pretended I seduction greater the lay whom (with sister
every it giving itself, crime the of spoke she which in manner the but
they as only consequences ill its considering right; the but reproach
in impudence and decency of defiance a by overborne or braved be to were
compliance, a us to recommending all, above and all, of last and wrong;
the on sin, the of continuance the in acquiescence an compromise, a
brother, her of thought now I as thinking which, marriage a of chance
most together this all sought; than prevented be rather should
and before, her understood never had I that me convinced grievously
own my of creature the been had it mind, to related as far as that,
on dwell to apt too been had I that Crawford, Miss not imagination,
to less had I me; for best was it perhaps, That, past. months many for
any at must, which hopes feelings, friendship, a sacrificing in regret
confess would and must I that yet, And now. me from torn been have rate,
before, me to appeared had she what to her restored have I could that,
the for parting, of pain the of increase any prefer infinitely would I
is This esteem. and tenderness of right the me with carrying of sake
spoken not imagine, may you as but, it; of purport the said, I what
was She you. to it repeated have I as methodically or collectedly so
her saw I astonished. than astonished--more exceedingly astonished,
a saw I imagined I red. extremely turned She countenance. change
of wish a half struggle; short though great, a feelings: many of mixture
carried habit habit, but shame, of sense a half truths, to yielding
she as laugh, of sort a was It could. she if laughed have would She it.
last your of part it Was word. my upon lecture, good pretty ‘A answered,
and Mansfield at everybody reform soon will you rate this At sermon?
celebrated a as be may it next, you of hear I when and Lacey; Thornton
into missionary a as or Methodists, of society great some in preacher
so not was she but carelessly, speak to tried She parts.’ foreign
my from that reply, in said only I appear. to wanted she as careless
learn soon might she that hoped earnestly and well, her wished I heart
could we knowledge valuable most the owe not and justly, more think to
the to duty, our of and ourselves of knowledge the acquire, us of any
few a gone had I room. the left immediately and affliction, of lessons
said Bertram,’ ‘Mr. me. behind open door the heard I when Fanny, steps,
was it but smile; a with she, said Bertram,’ ‘Mr. back. looked I she.
playful saucy a passed, had that conversation the to ill-suited smile a
so appeared it least at me; subdue to order in invite to seeming smile,
still and resist, to moment the of impulse the was it resisted; I me. to
did I that regretted moment, a for sometimes, since, have I on. walked
our of end the been has such and right, was I know I but back, go not
been I have How been! it has acquaintance an what And acquaintance.
your for you thank I deceived! sister and brother in Equally deceived!
have will we now and relief, greatest the been has This Fanny. patience,
done.”

minutes five for that words, his on dependence Fanny’s was such And
or again, on came all it however, Then, done. _had_ they thought she
rousing Bertram’s Lady than less nothing and it, like very something
that Till conversation. a such close really could up thoroughly
had she how and alone, Crawford Miss of talk to continued they happened,
excellent how and her, made had nature delightful how and him, attached
now Fanny, earlier. hands good into fallen she had been, have would she
to adding in justified than more felt openly, speak to liberty at
his share what of hint some by character, real her of knowledge his
a for wish her in have to supposed be might health of state brother’s
Nature intimation. agreeable an not was This reconciliation. complete
to pleasanter deal vast a been have would It while. a for it resisted
was vanity his but attachment; her in disinterested more her had have
believe to submitted He reason. against long fight to strength a of not
this himself for reserving only her, influenced had illness Tom’s that
opposing of counteractions many the considering that thought, consoling
have could than him to attached _more_ been certainly had she habits,
Fanny right. doing near more been sake his for and expected, been
their in agreed quite also were they and same; the exactly thought
such which impression, indelible the effect, lasting the of opinion
abate undoubtedly would Time mind. his on make must disappointment a
he which thing of sort a was it still but sufferings, his of somewhat
with meeting ever his to as and of; better the entirely get could never
with but named be to impossible too was could--it who woman other any
to. cling to had he that all was friendship Fanny’s indignation.



XLVIII CHAPTER

subjects odious such quit I misery. and guilt on dwell pens other Let
fault in greatly not everybody, restore to impatient can, I as soon as
rest. the all with done have to and comfort, tolerable to themselves,

knowing, of satisfaction the have I time, very this at indeed, Fanny, My
happy a been have must She everything. of spite in happy been have must
the for felt, she thought or felt, she that all of spite in creature
force must that delight of sources had She her. around those of distress
was she useful, was she Park, Mansfield to returned was She way. their
back came Thomas Sir when and Crawford; Mr. from safe was she beloved;
of state melancholy then his in given be could that proof every had she
as happy and regard; increased and approbation perfect his of spirits,
of any without happy been have still would she her, make must this all
Crawford. Miss of dupe the longer no was Edmund for it,

suffering was He himself. happy from far very was Edmund that true is It
for wishing and was, what over grieving regret, and disappointment from
with was it but sorry; was and so, was it knew She be. never could what
in much so and ease, to tending so satisfaction, on founded so sorrow a
not might who few are there that sensation, dearest every with harmony
it. for gaiety greatest their exchange to glad been have

his in errors of conscious and parent, a Thomas, Sir poor Thomas, Sir
he that felt He suffer. to longest the was parent, a as conduct own
sentiments daughter’s his that marriage; the allowed have to not ought
authorising in culpable him render to him to known sufficiently been had
and expedient, the to right the sacrificed had he doing so in that it;
were These wisdom. worldly and selfishness of motives by governed been
almost do will time but soften; to time some required that reflections
for side Rushworth’s Mrs. on arose comfort little though and everything;
than greater found be to was comfort occasioned, had she misery the
less a became match Julia’s children. other his in supposed had he
humble, was She first. at it considered had he than business desperate
really being of desirous Yates, Mr. and forgiven; be to wishing and
guided. be and him to up look to disposed was family, the into received
less becoming his of hope a was there but solid; very not was He
any at and quiet; and domestic tolerably least at being his of trifling,
debts his and more, rather estate his finding in comfort was there rate,
as treated and consulted being in and feared, had he than less, much
who Tom, in also comfort was There to. attending worth best friend the
and thoughtlessness the regaining without health, his regained gradually
his for ever for better the was He habits. previous his of selfishness
advantages two think: to learned had he and suffered, had He illness.
the from arising self-reproach the and before; known never had he that
accessory himself felt he which to Street, Wimpole in event deplorable
an made theatre, unjustifiable his of intimacy dangerous the all by
want no with six-and-twenty, of age the at which, mind his on impression
became He effects. happy its in durable was companions, good or sense of
not and quiet, and steady father, his to useful be: to ought he what
himself. for merely living

place could Thomas Sir as soon as quite and indeed! comfort was Here
his to contributing was Edmund good, of sources such on dependence
given had he which in point only the in improvement by ease father’s
and about wandering After spirits. his in before--improvement pain him
well so had he evenings, summer the all Fanny with trees under sitting
again. cheerful tolerably very be to as submission into mind his talked

their brought gradually which hopes the and circumstances the were These
and lost, was what of sense his deadening Thomas, Sir to alleviation
the from arising anguish the though himself; to him reconciling part in
never was daughters his of education the in errors own his of conviction
away. done entirely be to

young any of character the to unfavourable how aware became he late Too
had Julia and Maria which treatment opposite totally the be must people
and indulgence excessive the where home, at experiencing always been
own his with contrasted continually been had aunt their of flattery
what counteract to expecting in judged, had he ill how saw He severity.
he that saw clearly himself; in reverse its by Norris Mrs. in wrong was
in spirits their repress to them teaching by evil the increased but had
and him, to unknown disposition real their make to as so presence his
to able been had who person a to indulgences their all for them sending
of excess the and affection, her of blindness the by only them attach
praise. her

gradually he was, it as bad but, mismanagement; grievous been had Here
plan his in mistake direful most the been not had it that feel to grew
would time or _within_, wanting been have must Something education. of
active principle, that feared He effect. ill its of much away worn have
taught properly been never had they that wanting; been had principle,
can which duty of sense that by tempers and inclinations their govern to
religion, their in theoretically instructed been had They suffice. alone
distinguished be To practice. daily into it bring to required never but
youth, their of object authorised the accomplishments, and elegance for
the on effect moral no way, that influence useful no had have could
to directed been had cares his but good, be to them meant had He mind.
necessity the of and disposition; the not manners, and understanding the
any from heard never had they feared he humility, and self-denial of
them. profit could that lips

scarcely could he now which deficiency a deplore he did Bitterly
all with that feel, he did Wretchedly possible. been have to comprehend
brought had he education, expensive and anxious an of care and cost the
his or duties, first their understanding their without daughters his up
temper. and character their with acquainted being

were especially, Rushworth, Mrs. of passions strong and spirit high The
prevailed be to not was She result. sad their in only him to known made
continued they and him, marry to hoped She Crawford. Mr. leave to on
vain, was hope such that convinced be to obliged was she till together
conviction the from arising wretchedness and disappointment the till and
hatred, like so him for feelings her and bad, so temper her rendered
a induce then and punishment, other’s each while a for them make to as
separation. voluntary

happiness his all of ruin the as reproached be to him with lived had She
than him leaving in consolation better no away carried and Fanny, in
mind a such of misery the exceed can What them. divided _had_ she that
situation? a such in

a ended so and divorce; a procuring in difficulty no had Rushworth Mr.
end better any make to as circumstances such under contracted marriage
him, despised had She on. reckoned be to not luck good of effect the
The so. was it that aware much very been had he and another; loved and
passion, selfish of disappointments the and stupidity, of indignities
a did as conduct, his followed punishment His pity. little excite can
from released was _He_ wife. his of guilt deeper the punishment deeper
girl pretty other some till unhappy, and mortified be to engagement the
a on forward set might he and again, matrimony into him attract could
if state: the of trial prosperous more hoped, be to is it and, second,
she while luck; good and humour good with least at duped be to duped,
and retirement a to feelings stronger infinitely with withdraw must
character. or hope of spring second no allow could which reproach

and melancholy most of subject a became placed be could she Where
augment to seemed attachment whose Norris, Mrs. consultation. momentous
home at received her had have would niece, her of demerits the with
Mrs. and it; of hear not would Thomas Sir all. them by countenanced and
considering from greater, the much so was Fanny against anger Norris’s
his placing in persisted She motive. the as there residence _her_
her assured solemnly very Thomas Sir though account, _her_ to scruples
young no been there had question, in woman young no been there had that,
society the by endangered be to him, to belonging sex either of person
offered have never would he Rushworth, Mrs. of character the by hurt or
her. notice to it expect to as neighbourhood the to insult an great so
him, by protected be should she one, penitent a hoped he daughter, a As
do to encouragement every by supported and comfort, every in secured and
_that_ than farther but admitted; situations relative their which right,
would he and character, own her destroyed had Maria go. not could he
by restored, be could never what restore to attempt vain a by not,
be disgrace, its lessen to seeking in or vice, to sanction his affording
as family man’s another in misery such introducing to accessory anywise
himself. known had he

herself devote and Mansfield quit to resolving Norris’s Mrs. in ended It
them for formed being establishment an in and Maria, unfortunate her to
with together up shut where, private, and remote country, another in
judgment, no other the on affection, no side one on society, little
mutual their became tempers their that supposed reasonably be may it
punishment.

comfort supplementary great the was Mansfield from removal Norris’s Mrs.
day the from sinking been had her of opinion His life. Thomas’s Sir of
that from together transaction every in Antigua: from return his of
had she chat, in or business, in intercourse, daily their in period,
that him convincing and esteem, his in ground losing regularly been
considerably had he that or disservice, much her done had time either
He before. manners her with borne wonderfully and sense, her over-rated
there as worse, the much so was which evil, hourly an as her felt had
of part a seemed she life; with but ceasing its of chance no seemed
therefore, her, from relieved be To ever. for borne be must that himself
remembrances bitter left not she had that, felicity a great so was
to almost learning his of danger been have might there her, behind
good. a such produced which evil the approve

to able been never had She Mansfield. at one no by regretted was She
elopement, Rushworth’s Mrs. since and best; loved she those even attach
her make to as irritation such of state a in been had temper her
not Norris, aunt for tears had Fanny even Not tormenting. everywhere
ever. for gone was she when even

a to measure, some in owing, was Maria than better escaped Julia That
greater a in but circumstance, and disposition of difference favourable
flattered less aunt, very that of darling the less been having her to
second a but held had acquirements and beauty Her spoilt. less and
to inferior little a herself think to used always been had She place.
feelings, her two; the of easiest the naturally was temper Her Maria.
so her given not had education and controllable, more were quick, though
self-consequence. of degree a hurtful very

Crawford. Henry in disappointment the to best the submitted had She
over, was slighted being of conviction the of bitterness first the After
again; him of thinking not of way fair a in soon tolerably been had she
house Rushworth’s Mr. and town, in renewed was acquaintance the when and
herself withdrawing of merit the had had she object, Crawford’s became
friends, other her to visit a pay to time that chusing of and it, from
had This attracted. much too again being from herself secure to order in
had convenience Yates’s Mr. cousin’s. her to going in motive her been
some attentions his allowing been had She it. with do to nothing had
her not had and him; accepting ever of idea little very with but time,
her of dread increased her and did, it as forth burst conduct sister’s
consequence certain its imagining event, that on home, of and father
hastily her made restraint, and severity greater be would herself to
probable is it risks, all at horrors immediate such avoiding on resolve
any with eloped not had She succeeded. have never would Yates Mr. that
the her to appeared had It alarm. selfish of those than feelings worse
folly. Julia’s induced had guilt Maria’s done. be to thing only

example, domestic bad and independence early by ruined Crawford, Henry
Once long. too little a vanity cold-blooded a of freaks the in indulged
of way the into him led unmerited, and undesigned opening an by had, it
one of conquest the with satisfied been have he Could happiness.
exultation sufficient found have he could affections, woman’s amiable
and esteem the into himself working in reluctance, the overcoming in
of probability every been have would there Price, Fanny of tenderness
something. done already had affection His him. for felicity and success
her. over influence some him given already had him over influence Her
have would more that doubt no be can there more, deserved have he Would
which place, taken had marriage that when especially obtained, been
her subduing in conscience her of assistance the him given have would
have he Would together. often very them brought and inclination, first
reward a and reward, his been have must Fanny uprightly, and persevered,
Edmund’s from period reasonable a within bestowed, voluntarily very
Mary. marrying

to down going by ought, he knew he as and intended, he as done he Had
deciding been have might he Portsmouth, from return his after Everingham
Fraser’s Mrs. for stay to pressed was he But destiny. happy own his
to was he and consequence, flattering of made was staying his party;
and engaged, both were vanity and Curiosity there. Rushworth Mrs. meet
to unused mind a for strong too was pleasure immediate of temptation the
journey, Norfolk his defer to resolved he right: to sacrifice any make
its that or it, of purpose the answer should writing that resolved
received was Rushworth, Mrs. saw He staid. and unimportant, was purpose
have and repulsive, been have to ought which coldness a with her by
was he but ever; for them between indifference apparent established
smiles whose woman the by off thrown be to bear not could he mortified,
so subdue to himself exert must he command: his at wholly so been had
must he account; Fanny’s on anger was it resentment; of display a proud
her in again Bertram Maria Rushworth Mrs. make and it, of better the get
himself. of treatment

had perseverance animated by and attack, the began he spirit this In
gallantry, of intercourse, familiar of sort the re-established soon
the over triumphing in but views; his bounded which flirtation, of
both, them saved have might anger, in beginning though which, discretion
strong more side her on feelings of power the in himself put had he
attentions withdrawing no was there him; loved She supposed. had he than
little as with vanity, own his by entangled was He her. to dear avowedly
mind of inconstancy smallest the without and possible, as love of excuse
of knowledge a from Bertrams the and Fanny keep To cousin. her towards
been have not could Secrecy object. first his became passing was what
own. his for it felt he than credit Rushworth’s Mrs. for desirable more
Mrs. see to glad been have would he Richmond, from returned he When
imprudence; her of result the was followed that All more. no Rushworth
it, help not could he because last, at her with off went he and
more infinitely her regretting but moment, the at even Fanny regretting
had months few very a and over, was intrigue the of bustle the all when
the on value higher yet a place to contrast, of force the by him, taught
of excellence the and mind, her of purity the temper, her of sweetness
principles. her

just a in should disgrace, of punishment public the punishment, That
the of one not know, we is, offence the of share _his_ attend measure
is penalty the world this In virtue. to gives society which barriers
forward look to presuming without but wished; be could than equal less
of man a consider fairly may we hereafter, appointment juster a to
small no himself for providing be to Crawford, Henry like sense,
sometimes rise must that vexation regret: and vexation of portion
requited so having in wretchedness, to regret and self-reproach, to
most best, his forfeited so peace, family injured so hospitality,
had he whom woman the lost so and acquaintance, endeared and estimable,
loved. passionately as well as rationally

the families, two the alienate and wound to passed had what After
would neighbourhood close such in Grants and Bertrams the of continuance
some for latter, the of absence the but distressing; most been have
or necessity, the in fortunately very ended lengthened, purposely months
through Grant, Dr. removal. permanent a of practicability, the least at
to succeeded hopes, form to ceased almost had he which on interest an
leaving for occasion an affording as which, Westminster, in stall a
income of increase an and London, in residence for excuse an Mansfield,
who those to acceptable highly was change, the of expenses the answer to
staid. who those and went

some with gone have must loved, be and love to temper a with Grant, Mrs.
same the but to; used been had she people and scenes the from regret
her secure society, any and place, any in must disposition of happiness
Mary and Mary; offer to home a again had she and enjoy, to deal great a
and love, ambition, vanity, of enough friends, own her of enough had had
the of need in be to half-year, last the of course the in disappointment
tranquillity rational the and heart, sister’s her of kindness true
on brought had Grant Dr. when and together; lived They ways. her of
week, one in dinners institutionary great three by death, and apoplexy
against resolved perfectly though Mary, for together; lived still they
finding in long was again, brother younger a to herself attaching ever
at were who heir-apparents, idle or representatives, dashing the among
the satisfy could who one any £20,000, her and beauty, her of command the
manners and character whose Mansfield, at acquired had she taste better
learned there had she happiness domestic the of hope a authorise could
head. her of out sufficiently Bertram Edmund put or estimate, to

to not had He respect. this in her of advantage the greatly had Edmund
her succeed to worthy object an for affections vacant with wish and wait
to observing and Crawford, Mary regretting done he had Scarcely them. in
another such with meet ever should he that was it impossible how Fanny
of kind different very a whether him strike to began it before woman,
Fanny whether better: deal great a or well, as just do not might woman
smiles her all in him to important as dear, as growing not were herself
might it whether and been; ever had Crawford Mary as ways, her all and
warm her that her persuade to undertaking hopeful an possible, a be not
love. wedded for enough foundation be would him for regard sisterly and

may one every that occasion, this on dates from abstain purposely I
unconquerable of cure the that aware own, their fix to liberty at be
as much vary must attachments, unchanging of transfer the and passions,
that believe to everybody entreat only I people. different in time to
and so, be should it that natural quite was it when time the at exactly
and Crawford, Miss about care to cease did Edmund earlier, week a not
desire. could herself Fanny as Fanny marry to anxious as became

regard a been, long had his as indeed, her, for regard a such With
and helplessness, and innocence of claims endearing most the on founded
more be could what worth, growing of recommendation every by completed
been had he as her, protecting guiding, Loving, change? the than natural
degree a great so in mind her old, years ten being her since ever doing
an kindness, his on depending comfort her and care, his by formed
own his all by dearer interest, peculiar and close such of him to object
now there was what Mansfield, at else one any than her with importance
sparkling to eyes light soft prefer to learn should he that but add, to
confidentially, talking always and her, with always being And ones. dark
recent a which state favourable that in exactly feelings his and
in long very be not could eyes light soft those gives, disappointment
pre-eminence. the obtaining

to road this on so done had he that felt and out, set once Having
make or him stop to prudence of side the on nothing was there happiness,
of opposition of fears no deserving, her of doubts no slow; progress his
dissimilarity from happiness of hopes new drawing of need no taste,
no wanted habits and opinions, disposition, mind, Her temper. of
on reliance no present, the on self-deception no half-concealment,
had he infatuation, late his of midst the in Even improvement. future
it of sense his be must What superiority. mental Fanny’s acknowledged
nobody as but him; for good too only course of was She therefore? now,
in earnest steadily very was he them, for good too is what having minds
encouragement that possible not was it and blessing, the of pursuit the
it was, she as doubting anxious, Timid, wanting. long be should her from
times, at not, should hers as tenderness such that impossible still was
later a for remained it though success, of hope strongest the out hold
His truth. astonishing and delightful whole the him tell to period
a such of beloved the long so been have to himself knowing in happiness
language of strength any warrant to enough great been have must heart,
been have must it himself; to or her to it clothe could he which in
no which elsewhere happiness was there But happiness. delightful a
a of feelings the give to presume one no Let reach. can description
she which of affection that of assurance the receiving on woman young
hope. a entertain to herself allowed scarcely has

behind, difficulties no were there ascertained, inclinations own Their
Thomas’s Sir which match a was It parent. or poverty of drawback no
connexions, mercenary and ambitious of Sick forestalled. even had wishes
and temper, and principle of good sterling the more and more prizing
to remained that all securities strongest the by bind to anxious chiefly
on satisfaction genuine with pondered had he felicity, domestic of him
natural their finding friends young two the of possibility than more the
to disappointment of occurred had that all for other each in consolation
high the application, Edmund’s met which consent joyful the and either;
for Fanny of promise the in acquisition great a realised having of sense
the on opinion early his with contrast a such just formed daughter, a
as agitated, first been had coming girl’s little poor the when subject
mortals, of decisions and plans the between producing ever for is time
entertainment. neighbours’ their and instruction, own their for

kindness charitable His wanted. he that daughter the indeed was Fanny
rich a had liberality His himself. for comfort prime a rearing been had
deserved her by intentions his of goodness general the and repayment,
error an been had it but happier; childhood her made have might He it.
and harshness, of appearance the him given had which only judgment of
other, each knowing really on now, and love; early her of him deprived
at her settling After strong. very became attachment mutual their
of object the comfort, her to attention kind every with Lacey Thornton
it. from away her get to or there, her see to was day every almost

be not could she Bertram, Lady to been long had she as dear Selfishly
make could niece or son of happiness No _her_. by willingly with parted
because her, with part to possible was it But marriage. the wish her
niece, stationary the became Susan place. her supply to remained Susan
of readiness a by it for adapted well equally and so; be to delighted
sweetness by been had Fanny as usefulness, for inclination an and mind,
be never could Susan gratitude. of feelings strong and temper, of
as last and auxiliary, an as then Fanny, to comfort a as First spared.
appearance every with Mansfield, at established was she substitute, her
nerves happier and disposition fearless more Her permanency. equal of
understanding in quickness With there. her to easy everything made
to timidity natural no and with, deal to had she those of tempers the
all; to useful and welcome soon was she wishes, consequent any restrain
over influence her to naturally so succeeded removal Fanny’s after and
the perhaps, become, to gradually as aunt, her of comfort hourly the
excellence, Fanny’s in usefulness, _her_ In two. the of beloved most
general the in and fame, rising and conduct good continued William’s in
assisting all family, the of members other the of success and well-doing
Sir aid, and countenance his to credit doing and other, each advance to
he what in rejoice to reason repeated, ever for and repeated, saw Thomas
hardship early of advantages the acknowledge and all, them for done had
and struggle to born being of consciousness the and discipline, and
endure.

and fortune of want no and love, true and merit true much so With
as secure as appear must cousins married the of happiness the friends,
attached and life, domestic for formed Equally be. can happiness earthly
comfort; and affection of home the was home their pleasures, country to
Mansfield of acquisition the good, of picture the complete to and
been had they after just occurred Grant, Dr. of death the by living,
feel and income, of increase an want to begin to enough long married
inconvenience. an abode paternal the from distance their

there, Parsonage the and Mansfield; to removed they event that On
able been never had Fanny owners, former two its of each under which,
soon alarm, or restraint of sensation painful some with but approach to
as eyes, her in perfect thoroughly as and heart, her to dear as grew
long had Park Mansfield of patronage and view the within else everything
been.


END THE
have would infancy her in Morland Catherine seen ever had who one ﻿No
character the life, in situation Her heroine. an be to born her supposed
were disposition, and person own her mother, and father her of
being without clergyman, a was father Her her. against equally all
name his though man, respectable very a and poor, or neglected,
considerable a had He handsome. been never had he Richard--and was
least the in not was he livings--and good two besides independence
useful of woman a was mother Her daughters. his up locking to addicted
a with remarkable, more is what and, temper, good a with sense, plain
and born; was Catherine before sons three had She constitution. good
might anybody as world, the into latter the bringing in dying of instead
them see more--to children six have to on--lived lived still she expect,
family A herself. health excellent enjoy to and her, around up growing
are there where family, fine a called always be will children ten of
had Morlands the but number; the for enough legs and arms and heads
and plain, very general in were they for word, the to right other little
thin a had She any. as plain as life, her of years many for Catherine,
strong and hair, lank dark colour, without skin sallow a figure, awkward
heroism for unpropitious less not and person; her for much features--so
preferred greatly and plays, boy’s all of fond was She mind. her seemed
of enjoyments heroic more the to but dolls, to merely not cricket
a watering or canary-bird, a feeding dormouse, a nursing infancy,
gathered she if and garden; a for taste no had she Indeed rose-bush.
least mischief--at of pleasure the for chiefly was it all, at flowers
was she which those preferring always her from conjectured was it so
quite were abilities propensities--her her were Such take. to forbidden
anything understand or learn could never She extraordinary. as
often was she for then, even not sometimes and taught; was she before
in months three was mother Her stupid. occasionally and inattentive,
her all, after and Petition”; “Beggar’s the repeat to only her teaching
Catherine that Not did. she than better it say could Sally, sister, next
and Hare “The of fable the learnt she means; no stupid--by always was
her wished mother Her England. in girl any as quickly as Friends” Many
was she for it, like should she sure was Catherine and music; learn to
eight at so, spinnet; forlorn old the of keys the tinkling of fond very
Mrs. and it; bear not could and year, a learnt She began. she old years
in accomplished being daughters her on insist not did who Morland,
which day The off. leave to her allowed distaste, or incapacity of spite
life. Catherine’s of happiest the of one was music-master the dismissed
obtain could she whenever though superior; not was drawing for taste Her
odd other any upon seize or mother her from letter a of outside the
houses drawing by way, that in could she what did she paper, of piece
Writing another. one like much very all chickens, and hens trees, and
her mother: her by French father; her by taught was she accounts and
in lessons her shirked she and remarkable, not was either in proficiency
character!--for unaccountable strange, a What could. she whenever both
neither had she old, years ten at profligacy of symptoms these all with
ever scarcely stubborn, seldom was temper, bad a nor heart bad a
interruptions few with ones, little the to kind very and quarrelsome,
and confinement hated wild, and noisy moreover was she tyranny; of
the down rolling as world the in well so nothing loved and cleanliness,
house. the of back the at slope green

mending; were appearances fifteen, At ten. at Morland Catherine was Such
improved, complexion her balls; for long and hair her curl to began she
more gained eyes her colour, and plumpness by softened were features her
to way gave dirt of love Her consequence. more figure her and animation,
had she smart; grew she as clean grew she and finery, for inclination an
remark mother and father her hearing sometimes of pleasure the now
good-looking a quite grows “Catherine improvement. personal her on
now ears her caught which words were today,” pretty almost is girl--she
an is pretty almost look To sounds! the were welcome how and then; and
the plain looking been has who girl a to delight higher of acquisition
ever can cradle her from beauty a than life her of years fifteen first
receive.

children her see to wished and woman, good very a was Morland Mrs.
in occupied much so was time her but be; to ought they everything
were daughters elder her that ones, little the teaching and lying-in
wonderful very not was it and themselves; for shift to left inevitably
should her, about heroic nothing nature by had who Catherine, that
about running and horseback, on riding baseball, cricket, prefer
of books least at books--or to fourteen, of age the at country the
be could knowledge useful like nothing that provided information--for,
she reflection, no and story all were they provided them, from gained
seventeen to fifteen from But all. at books to objection any never had
heroines as works such all read she heroine; a for training in was she
so are which quotations those with memories their supply to read must
lives. eventful their of vicissitudes the in soothing so and serviceable

who those censure to learnt she Pope, From

woe.” of mockery the about “bear


that Gray, From

unseen, blush to born is flower a “Many
air.” desert the on fragrance its waste “And


that-- Thompson, From

task delightful a is “It
shoot.” to how idea young the teach “To


information--amongst of store great a gained she Shakespeare from And
that-- rest, the

air, as light “Trifles
strong, confirmation jealous, the to “Are,
Writ.” Holy of proofs “As


That

upon, tread we which beetle, poor “The
great as pang a feels sufferance corporal “In
dies.” giant a when “As


looks-- always love in woman young a that And

monument a on Patience “like
Grief.” at “Smiling


came she points other many in sufficient--and was improvement her far So
brought she sonnets, write not could she though for well; exceedingly on
throwing her of chance no seemed there though and them; read to herself
own her of pianoforte, the on prelude a by raptures into party whole a
very with performance people’s other to listen could she composition,
no had pencil--she the in was deficiency greatest Her fatigue. little
lover’s her of sketch a attempt to even enough drawing--not of notion
fell she There design. the in detected be might she that profile,
know not did she present At height. heroic true the of short miserably
the reached had She portray. to lover no had she for poverty, own her
call could who youth amiable one seen having without seventeen, of age
and passion, real one inspired having without sensibility, her forth
moderate very was what but admiration any even excited having without
be may things strange But indeed! strange was This transient. very and
was There out. searched fairly be cause their if for accounted generally
not was There baronet. a even no--not neighbourhood; the in lord one not
boy a supported and reared had who acquaintance their among family one
origin whose man young one door--not their at found accidentally
no parish the of squire the and ward, no had father Her unknown. was
children.

forty of perverseness the heroine, a be to is lady young a when But
happen will and must Something her. prevent cannot families surrounding
way. her in hero a throw to

the Fullerton, about property the of chief the owned who Allen, Mr.
Bath to ordered was lived, Morlands the where Wiltshire in village
good-humoured a lady, his constitution--and gouty a of benefit the for
will adventures if that aware probably and Morland, Miss of fond woman,
abroad, them seek must she village, own her in lady young a befall not
compliance, all were Morland Mrs. and Mr. them. with go to her invited
happiness. all Catherine and




2 CHAPTER


Morland’s Catherine of said already been has what to addition In
the all into launched be to about when endowments, mental and personal
be may it Bath, in residence weeks’ six a of dangers and difficulties
following the lest information, certain more reader’s the for stated,
is character her what of idea any giving of fail otherwise should pages
cheerful disposition her affectionate; was heart her that be, to meant
just manners kind--her any of affectation or conceit without open, and
pleasing, person her girl; a of shyness and awkwardness the from removed
and ignorant as about mind her pretty--and looks, good in when and,
is. usually seventeen at mind female the as uninformed

Mrs. of anxiety maternal the near, drew departure of hour the When
thousand A severe. most be to supposed naturally be will Morland
this from Catherine beloved her to evil of presentiments alarming
her drown and sadness, with heart her oppress must separation terrific
of advice and together; being their of two or day last the for tears in
her from flow course of must nature applicable and important most the
against Cautions closet. her in conference parting their in lips wise
young forcing in delight as baronets and noblemen such of violence the
relieve moment, a such at must, farm-house, remote some to away ladies
knew Morland Mrs. But so? think not would Who heart. her of fulness the
their of notion no entertained she that baronets, and lords of little so
her to danger of unsuspicious wholly was and mischievousness, general
the to confined were cautions Her machinations. their from daughter
up yourself wrap always will you Catherine, beg, “I points. following
and night; at rooms the from come you when throat, the about warm very
will I spend; you money the of account some keep to try would you wish I
purpose.” on book little this you give

will gentility common of lady young what (for Sarah rather or Sally,
can?), she as far as name her altering without sixteen of age the reach
confidante and friend intimate the time this at be situation from must
insisted neither she that however, remarkable, is It sister. her of
of promise her exacted nor post, every by writing Catherine’s on
detail a nor acquaintance, new every of character the transmitting
Everything produce. might Bath that conversation interesting every of
the of part the on done, was journey important this to relative indeed
seemed which composure, and moderation of degree a with Morlands,
the with than life, common of feelings common the with consistent rather
separation first the which emotions tender the susceptibilities, refined
instead father, Her excite. to always ought family her from heroine a of
an putting even or banker, his on order unlimited an her giving of
and guineas, ten only her gave hands, her into bank-bill pounds hundred
it. wanted she when more her promised

the and place, took parting the auspices, unpromising these Under
uneventful and quietness suitable with performed was It began. journey
lucky one nor them, befriended tempests nor robbers Neither safety.
occurred alarming more Nothing hero. the to them introduce to overturn
behind clogs her left once having of side, Allen’s Mrs. on fear, a than
groundless. be to proved fortunately that and inn, an at her

were eyes delight--her eager all was Catherine Bath. at arrived They
striking and fine its approached they as everywhere, there, here,
conducted which streets those through drove afterwards and environs,
already. happy felt she and happy, be to come was She hotel. the to them

Street. Pulteney in lodgings comfortable in settled soon were They

the that Allen, Mrs. of description some give to expedient now is It
hereafter will actions her manner what in judge to able be may reader
will, she how and work, the of distress general the promote to tend
desperate the all to Catherine poor reduce to contribute probably,
her by capable--whether is volume last a which of wretchedness
letters, her intercepting by jealousy--whether or vulgarity, imprudence,
doors. of out her turning or character, her ruining

can society whose females, of class numerous that of one was Allen Mrs.
world the in men any being there at surprise than emotion other no raise
beauty, neither had She them. marry to enough well them like could who
great a gentlewoman, a of air The manner. nor accomplishment, genius,
mind of turn trifling a and temper, good inactive quiet, of deal
sensible, a of choice the being her for account could that all were
fitted admirably was she respect one In Allen. Mr. like man intelligent
everywhere going of fond as being public, into lady young a introduce to
was Dress be. could lady young any as herself everything seeing and
our and fine; being in delight harmless most a had She passion. her
four or three after till place take not could life into entree heroine’s
chaperone her and worn, mostly was what learning in spent been had days
made too Catherine fashion. newest the of dress a with provided was
the arranged, were matters these all when and herself, purchases some
Her Rooms. Upper the into her usher to was which came evening important
care, with on put clothes her hand, best the by dressed and cut was hair
should she as quite looked she declared maid her and Allen Mrs. both and
uncensured pass to least at hoped Catherine encouragement, such With do.
it when welcome very always was it admiration, for As crowd. the through
it. on depend not did she but came,

ballroom the enter not did they that dressing in long so was Allen Mrs.
ladies two the and crowded, room the full, was season The late. till
repaired he Allen, Mr. for As could. they as well as in squeezed
themselves. by mob a enjoy to them left and card-room, the to directly
of comfort the for than gown new her of safety the for care more With
by men of throng the through way her made Allen Mrs. protegee, her
Catherine, allow; would caution necessary the as swiftly as door, the
within firmly too arm her linked and side, her at close kept however,
struggling a of effort common any by asunder torn be to friend’s her
the along proceed to that found she amazement utter her to But assembly.
it crowd; the from themselves disengage to way the means no by was room
that imagined had she whereas on, went they as increase to rather seemed
be and seats find easily should they door, the within fairly once when
from far was this But convenience. perfect with dances the watch to able
the even gained they diligence unwearied by though and case, the being
nothing saw they same; the just was situation their room, the of top
they Still ladies. the of some of feathers high the but dancers the of
exertion continued a by and view; in yet was better on--something moved
passage the in last at themselves found they ingenuity and strength of
than crowd of less something was there Here bench. highest the behind
the all of view comprehensive a had Morland Miss hence and below;
through passage late her of dangers the all of and her, beneath company
that time first the for began, she and sight, splendid a was It them.
had she but dance, to longed she ball: a at herself feel to evening,
do could she that all did Allen Mrs. room. the in acquaintance an not
you wish “I then, and now every placidly, very saying by case a such in
time some For partner.” a get could you wish dear--I my dance, could
were they but wishes; these for her to obliged felt friend young her
Catherine that ineffectual, totally so proved and often, so repeated
more. no her thank would and last, at tired grew

eminence the of repose the enjoy to however, able, long not were They
for motion in shortly was Everybody gained. laboriously so had they
feel to began Catherine rest. the like out squeeze must they and tea,
pressed continually being of tired was disappointment--she of something
to nothing possessed faces whose of generality the people, by against
she that unacquainted wholly so was she whom of all with and interest,
a of exchange the by imprisonment of irksomeness the relieve not could
in arrived last at when and captives; fellow her of any with syllable
to party no having of awkwardness the more yet felt she tea-room, the
saw They them. assist to gentleman no claim, to acquaintance no join,
more a for vain in them about looking after and Allen; Mr. of nothing
at table, a of end the at down sit to obliged were situation, eligible
do to anything having without placed, already were party large a which
other. each except to, speak to anybody or there,

having on seated, were they as soon as herself, congratulated Allen Mrs.
to shocking very been have would “It injury. from gown her preserved
muslin. delicate a such is It it? not “would she, said torn,” it have
I room, whole the in well so like I anything seen not have I part my For
you.” assure

single a have to “not Catherine, whispered is,” it uncomfortable “How
here!” acquaintance

very is “it serenity, perfect with Allen, Mrs. replied dear,” my “Yes,
indeed.” uncomfortable

if as look table this at ladies and gentlemen The do? we shall “What
their into ourselves forcing seem here--we came we why wondered they
party.”

large a had we wish I disagreeable. very is That do. we so “Aye,
here.” acquaintance

to.” go to somebody be would any--it had we wish “I

directly. them join would we anybody knew we if and dear; my true, “Very
now.” here were they wish year--I last here were Skinners The

you us, for tea-things no are Here is? it as away go better we not “Had
see.”

had we think I But provoking! very How indeed. are, there more “No
my is How crowd! a such in tumbled so gets one for still, sit better
afraid.” am I it, hurt has that push a me gave Somebody dear? my head,

sure you are Allen, Mrs. dear But, nice. very looks it indeed, “No,
you think I people? of multitude this all in know you nobody is there
somebody.” know must

acquaintance large a had I wish I did. I wish word--I my upon don’t, “I
be should I partner. a you get should I then and heart, my all with here
an What woman! strange-looking a goes There dance. you have to glad so
back.” the at Look is! it old-fashioned How on! got has she gown odd

their of one from tea of offer an received they time some After
light a introduced this and accepted, thankfully was it neighbours;
time only the was which it, offered who gentleman the with conversation
discovered were they till evening, the during them to spoke anybody that
over. was dance the when Allen Mr. by joined and

an had have you hope “I directly, he, said Morland,” Miss “Well,
ball.” agreeable

a hide to endeavouring vainly replied, she indeed,” agreeable “Very
yawn. great

could we wish “I wife; his said dance,” to able been had she wish “I
if be should I glad how saying been have I her. for partner a got have
had Parrys the if or last; of instead winter this here were Skinners the
I Parry. George with danced have might she once, of talked they as come,
partner!” a had not has she sorry so am

Allen’s Mr. was hope,” I evening another better do shall “We
consolation.

leave to over--enough was dancing the when disperse to began company The
the was now and comfort; some in about walk to remainder the for space
part distinguished very a played yet not had who heroine, a for time
five Every admired. and noticed be to evening, the of events the in
her for openings greater gave crowd, the of some removing by minutes,
her near been not had who men young many by seen now was She charms.
beholding on wonder rapturous with started however, one, Not before.
once she was nor room, the round ran inquiry eager of whisper no her,
and looks, good very in was Catherine Yet anybody. by divinity a called
have now would they before, years three her seen only company the had
handsome. exceedingly her thought

own her in for, admiration; some with and however, at, looked was She
words Such girl. pretty a be to her pronounced gentlemen two hearing,
pleasanter evening the thought immediately she effect; due their had
contented--she was vanity humble before--her it found had she than
a than praise simple this for men young two the to obliged more felt
celebration in sonnets fifteen for been have would heroine true-quality
and everybody, with humour good in chair her to went and charms, her of
attention. public of share her with satisfied perfectly




3 CHAPTER


visited; be to were duties--shops regular its brought now morning Every
be to pump-room the and at; looked be to town the of part new some
at looking hour, an for down and up paraded they where attended,
acquaintance numerous a of wish The one. no to speaking and everybody
after it repeated she and Allen, Mrs. with uppermost still was Bath in
at nobody knowing her of brought, morning every which proof, fresh every
all.

more was fortune here and Rooms; Lower the in appearance their made They
to introduced ceremonies the of master The heroine. our to favourable
Tilney. was name his partner; a as man young gentlemanlike very a her
a had tall, rather was twenty, and five or four about be to seemed He
not if and, eye, lively and intelligent very a countenance, pleasing
Catherine and good, was address His it. near very was handsome, quite
speaking for leisure little was There luck. high in herself felt
as him found she tea, at seated were they when but danced; they while
with talked He being. for credit him given already had she as agreeable
his in pleasantry and archness an was there spirit--and and fluency
After her. by understood hardly was it though interested, which manner
objects the from arose naturally as matters such on time some chatting
very been hitherto have with--“I her addressed suddenly he them, around
not have I here; partner a of attentions proper the in madam, remiss,
here ever were you whether Bath; in been have you long how you asked yet
and theatre, the Rooms, Upper the at been have you whether before;
been have I altogether. place the like you how and concert; the
these in me satisfy to leisure at now you are negligent--but very
directly.” begin will I are you If particulars?

sir.” trouble, that yourself give not need “You

set a into features his forming Then madam.” you, assure I trouble, “No
simpering a with added, he voice, his softening affectedly and smile,
madam?” Bath, in long been you “Have air,

laugh. to not trying Catherine, replied sir,” week, a “About

astonishment. affected with “Really!”

sir?” surprised, be you should “Why

must emotion some “But tone. natural his in he, said indeed!” “Why,
assumed, easily more is surprise and reply, your by raised be to appear
never you Were on. go us let Now other. any than reasonable less not and
madam?” before, here

sir.” “Never,

Rooms?” Upper the honoured yet you Have “Indeed!

Monday.” last there was I sir, “Yes,

theatre?” the to been you “Have

Tuesday.” on play the at was I sir, “Yes,

concert?” the “To

Wednesday.” on sir, “Yes,

Bath?” with pleased altogether you are “And

well.” very it like “Yes--I

again.” rational be may we then and smirk, one give must I “Now
to venture might she whether knowing not head, her away turned Catherine
but make shall gravely--“I he said me,” of think you what see “I laugh.
tomorrow.” journal your in figure poor a

journal!” “My

Lower the to went Friday, say: will you what exactly know I “Yes,
black trimmings--plain blue with robe muslin sprigged my wore Rooms;
a by harassed strangely was but advantage; much to shoes--appeared
distressed and him, with dance me make would who man, half-witted queer,
nonsense.” his by me

thing.” such no say shall I “Indeed

say?” to ought you what you tell I “Shall

please.” you “If

had King; Mr. by introduced man, young agreeable very a with danced “I
extraordinary most a him--seems with conversation of deal great a
to you wish I what is madam, That, him. of more know may I genius--hope
say.”

journal.” no keep I perhaps, “But,

by sitting not am I and room, this in sitting not are you “Perhaps
a keep Not possible. equally is doubt a which in points are These you.
your of tenour the understand to cousins absent your are How journal!
of compliments and civilities the are How one? without Bath in life
every down noted unless be, to ought they as related be to day every
remembered, be to dresses various your are How journal? a in evening
be to hair your of curl and complexion, your of state particular the and
to recourse constant having without diversities, their all in described
as ways ladies’ young of ignorant so not am I madam, dear My journal? a
which journaling of habit delightful this is it me; believe to wish you
ladies which for writing of style easy the form to contributes largely
writing of talent the that allows Everybody celebrated. generally so are
something, done have may Nature female. peculiarly is letters agreeable
keeping of practice the by assisted essentially be must it sure am I but
journal.” a

ladies “whether doubtingly, Catherine, said thought,” sometimes have “I
not should is--I That gentlemen! than letters better much so write do
side.” our on always was superiority the think

the that me to appears it judging, of opportunity had have I as far “As
three in except faultless, is women among letter-writing of style usual
particulars.”

they?” are what “And

a and stops, to inattention total a subject, of deficiency general “A
grammar.” of ignorance frequent very

the disclaiming of afraid been have not need I word! my “Upon
way.” that in us of highly too think not do You compliment.

better write women that rule general a as down it lay more no should “I
better draw or duets, better sing they that than men, than letters
excellence foundation, the is taste which of power, every In landscapes.
sexes.” the between divided fairly pretty is

“do she, said Catherine,” dear “My Allen: Mrs. by interrupted were They
already; hole a torn has it afraid am I sleeve; my of out pin this take
though gown, favourite a is this for has, it if sorry quite be shall I
yard.” a shillings nine but cost it

Tilney, Mr. said madam,” it, guessed have should I what exactly is “That
muslin. the at looking

sir?” muslins, understand you “Do

an be to allowed am and cravats, own my buy always I well; “Particularly
a of choice the in me trusted often has sister my and judge; excellent
a be to pronounced was it and day, other the her for one bought I gown.
a shillings five but gave I it. saw who lady every by bargain prodigious
muslin.” Indian true a and it, for yard

little so take commonly “Men genius. his by struck quite was Allen Mrs.
know to Allen Mr. get never can “I she; said things,” those of notice
your to comfort great a be must You another. from gowns my of one
sir.” sister,

madam.” am, I hope “I

gown?” Morland’s Miss of think you do what sir, pray, “And

not do I “but it; examining gravely he, said madam,” pretty, very is “It
fray.” will it afraid am I well; wash will it think

said almost had She so--” “be laughing, Catherine, said you,” can “How
“strange.”

told I so “and Allen; Mrs. replied sir,” opinion, your of quite am “I
it.” bought she when Morland Miss

other; or account some to turns always muslin madam, know, you then “But
or cap, a or handkerchief, a for it of out enough get will Morland Miss
sister my heard have I wasted. be to said be never can Muslin cloak. a
than more buying in extravagant been has she when times, forty so say
pieces.” to it cutting in careless or wanted, she

We here. shops good many so are there sir; place, charming a is “Bath
in shops good very have we what but not country; the in off sadly are
Allen Mr. way; long a is miles go--eight to far so is it but Salisbury,
than more be cannot it sure am I but nine; measured nine, is it says
one here Now, death. to tired back come fag--I a such is it and eight;
minutes.” five in thing a get and doors of out step can

and said; she what in interested seem to enough polite was Tilney Mr.
recommenced. dancing the till muslins of subject the on him kept she
indulged he that discourse, their to listened she as feared, Catherine
you are “What others. of foibles the with much too little a himself
ballroom; the to back walked they as he, said earnestly?” so of thinking
your head, the of shake that by for, hope, I partner, your of “not
satisfactory.” not are meditations

anything.” of thinking not was “I said, and coloured, Catherine

once at told be rather had I but sure; be to deep, and artful is “That
me.” tell not will you that

not.” will I then, “Well

to authorized am I as acquainted, be soon shall we now for you; “Thank
world the in nothing and meet, we whenever subject this on you tease
much.” so intimacy advances

the on parted, closed, assembly the when and, again; danced They
the continuing for inclination strong a with least, at side lady’s
her drank she while much, so him of thought she Whether acquaintance.
him of dream to as bed, for herself prepared and water, and wine warm
in than more no was it hope I but ascertained; be cannot there, when
a as true, be it if for most; at doze morning a or slumber, slight a
justified be can lady young no that maintained, has writer celebrated
be must it declared,* is love gentleman’s the before love in falling in
the before gentleman a of dream should lady young a that improper very
Tilney Mr. proper How her. of dreamt have to known first is gentleman
Allen’s Mr. entered perhaps yet not had lover a or dreamer a as be might
for acquaintance common a as objectionable not was he that but head,
the in early had he for satisfied; inquiry on was he charge young his
assured been had and was, partner her who know to pains taken evening
in family respectable very a of and clergyman, a being Tilney’s Mr. of
Gloucestershire.




4 CHAPTER


the pump-room the to hasten Catherine did eagerness usual than more With
the before there Tilney Mr. seeing of herself within secure day, next
smile no but smile; a with him meet to ready and over, were morning
Bath, in creature Every appear. not did Tilney demanded--Mr. was
the of periods different at room the in seen be to was himself, except
and in passing moment every were people of crowds hours; fashionable
nobody and about, cared nobody whom people down; and steps the up out,
Bath place delightful a “What absent. was only he and see; to wanted
after clock, great the near down sat they as Allen Mrs. said is,”
if be would it pleasant how “and tired; were they till room the parading
here.” acquaintance any had we

no had Allen Mrs. that vain in often so uttered been had sentiment This
now; advantage more with followed be would it hope to reason particular
“unwearied as attain,” would we nothing of “despair to told are we but
which with diligence unwearied the and gain”; would point our diligence
its have to length at was thing same the for wished day every had she
of lady a before minutes ten seated been she had hardly for reward, just
her at looking been had and her, by sitting was who age, own her about
complaisance great with her addressed minutes, several for attentively
time long a is it mistaken; be cannot I madam, think, “I words: these in
Allen?” name your not is but you, seeing of pleasure the had I since
hers pronounced stranger the was, readily it as answered, question This
of features the recognized immediately Allen Mrs. and Thorpe; be to
since once only seen had she whom intimate, and schoolfellow former a
this on joy Their ago. years many that and marriages, respective their
contented been had they since might, it well as great, very was meeting
Compliments years. fifteen last the for other each of nothing know to
away slipped had time how observing after and, passed; now looks good on
in meeting of thought had they little how together, last were they since
to proceeded they friend, old an see to was it pleasure a what and Bath,
and sisters, families, their to as intelligence give and inquiries make
receive to than give to ready more far together, both talking cousins,
Mrs. said. other the what of little very hearing each and information,
Allen, Mrs. over talker, a as advantage great one had however, Thorpe,
her of talents the on expatiated she when and children; of family a in
different their related she when daughters, her of beauty the and sons,
Merchant at Edward Oxford, at was John views--that and situations
respected and beloved more them of all sea--and at William and Taylors’,
Mrs. were, ever beings three other any than station different their in
press to triumphs similar no give, to information similar no had Allen
to forced was and friend, her of ear unbelieving and unwilling the on
consoling effusions, maternal these all to listen to appear and sit
that made, soon eye keen her which discovery, the with however, herself,
on that as handsome so half not was pelisse Thorpe’s Mrs. on lace the
own. her

three at pointing Thorpe, Mrs. cried girls,” dear my come “Here
“My her. towards moving then were arm, in arm who, females smart-looking
delighted so be will they them; introduce to long I Allen, Mrs. dear
young fine a she not is eldest; my Isabella, is tallest the you: see to
is Isabella believe I but too, admired much very are others The woman?
handsomest.” the

a for been had who Morland, Miss and introduced; were Thorpes Miss The
strike to seemed name The likewise. introduced was forgotten, time short
eldest the civility, great with her to speaking after and, all; them
brother her like excessively “How rest, the to aloud observed lady young
is!” Morland Miss

have should “I mother--and the cried indeed!” him of picture very “The
or two all, them by repeated was sister!” his for anywhere her known
Thorpe Mrs. but surprised; was Catherine moment a For over. times three
acquaintance their of history the begun scarcely had daughters her and
brother eldest her that remembered she before Morland, James Mr. with
of college, own his of man young a with intimacy an formed lately had
Christmas the of week last the spent had he that and Thorpe; of name the
London. near family, his with vacation

Miss the by said were things obliging many explained, being whole The
being of her; with acquainted better being of wish their of Thorpes
brothers, their of friendship the through friends, already as considered
the all with answered and pleasure, with heard Catherine which etc.,
amity, of proof first the as and, command; could she expressions pretty
and Thorpe, Miss eldest the of arm an accept to invited soon was she
this with delighted was Catherine room. the about her with turn a take
while Tilney Mr. forgot almost and acquaintance, Bath her of extension
for balm finest the certainly is Friendship Thorpe. Miss to talked she
love. disappointed of pangs the

free the which of subjects, those upon turned conversation Their
intimacy sudden a perfecting in do to much generally has discussion
and flirtations, balls, dress, as such ladies: young two between
Morland, Miss than older years four being however, Thorpe, Miss quizzes.
in advantage decided very a had informed, better years four least at and
those with Bath of balls the compare could she points; such discussing
rectify could London; of fashions the with fashions its Tunbridge, of
attire; tasteful of articles many in friend new her of opinions the
only who lady and gentleman any between flirtation a discover could
a of thickness the through quiz a out point and other; each on smiled
they whom to Catherine, from admiration due received powers These crowd.
might inspired naturally they which respect the and new; entirely were
Miss of gaiety easy the not had familiarity, for great too been have
this on delight of expressions frequent her and manners, Thorpe’s
left and awe, of feeling every down softened her, with acquaintance
be to not was attachment increasing Their affection. tender but nothing
when required, but pump-room, the in turns dozen a half with satisfied
Miss accompany should Thorpe Miss that together, it quitted all they
should they that and house; Allen’s Mr. of door very the to Morland
after hands, of shake lengthened and affectionate most a with part there
across other each see should they that relief, mutual their to learning,
next the chapel same the in prayers their say and night, at theatre the
Thorpe’s Miss watched and upstairs, directly ran then Catherine morning.
the admired window; drawing-room the from street the down progress
and figure her of air fashionable the walk, her of spirit graceful
had which chance the for might, she well as grateful, felt and dress;
friend. a such her procured

a was she one; rich very a not and widow, a was Thorpe Mrs.
Her mother. indulgent very a and woman, well-meaning good-humoured,
by ones, younger the and beauty, personal great had daughter eldest
and air, her imitating sister, their as handsome as be to pretending
well. very did style, same the in dressing

necessity the supersede to intended is family the of account brief This
past her of herself, Thorpe Mrs. from detail minute and long a of
occupy to expected be otherwise might which sufferings, and adventures
of worthlessness the which in chapters; following four or three the
had which conversations, and forth, set be might attorneys and lords
repeated. minutely be before, years twenty passed




5 CHAPTER


in evening, that theatre the at engaged much so not was Catherine
certainly they though Thorpe, Miss of smiles and nods the returning
eye inquiring an with look to forget to as leisure, her of much claimed
in looked she but reach; could eye her which box every in Tilney Mr. for
hoped She pump-room. the than play the of fonder no was Tilney Mr. vain.
weather fine for wishes her when and day; next the fortunate more be to
of doubt a felt hardly she morning, beautiful a seeing by answered were
inhabitants, its of house every empties Bath in Sunday fine a for it;
tell and about walk to occasion an such on appears world the all and
is. it day charming a what acquaintance their

eagerly Allens and Thorpes the over, was service divine as soon As
to pump-room the in enough long staying after and other; each joined
not was there that and insupportable, was crowd the that discover
Sunday every discovers everybody which seen, be to face genteel a
breathe to Crescent, the to away hastened they season, the throughout
arm Isabella, and Catherine Here company. better of air fresh the
unreserved an in friendship of sweets the tasted again arm, in
again but enjoyment; much with and much, talked they conversation;
was He partner. her reseeing of hope her in disappointed Catherine was
unsuccessful, equally was him for search every with; met be to nowhere
Lower nor Upper the at neither assemblies; evening or lounges morning in
the among nor perceivable; he was balls, undressed or dressed at Rooms,
name His morning. the of curricle-drivers the or horsemen, the walkers,
must He more. no do could curiosity and book, pump-room the in not was
so be would stay his that mentioned not had he Yet Bath. from gone be
a in becoming so always is which mysteriousness, of sort This short!
person his around imagination Catherine’s in grace fresh a threw hero,
the From him. of more know to anxiety her increased and manners, and
Bath in days two only been had they for nothing, learn could she Thorpes
which in however, subject, a was It Allen. Mrs. with met they before
every received she whom from friend, fair her with indulged often she
impression his and him; of think to continue to encouragement possible
very was Isabella weaken. to therefore suffered not was fancy her on
he that sure equally was and man, young charming a be must he that sure
therefore would and Catherine, dear her with delighted been have must
she “for clergyman, a being for better the him liked She return. shortly
like something and profession”; the to partial very herself confess must
not in wrong was Catherine Perhaps it. said she as her escaped sigh a
experienced not was she emotion--but gentle that of cause the demanding
when know to friendship, of duties the or love, of finesse the in enough
should confidence a when or for, called properly was raillery delicate
forced. be

found had She Bath. with satisfied happy--quite quite now was Allen Mrs.
family the them in find to as too lucky so been had acquaintance, some
had fortune, good of completion the as and, friend; old worthy most a of
Her herself. as dressed expensively so means no by friends these found
in acquaintance some had we wish “I longer, no were expressions daily
Mrs. with met have we am I glad “How into, changed were They Bath!”
two the of intercourse the promoting in eager as was she and Thorpe!”
never be; could themselves Isabella and charge young her as families,
of side the by it of chief the spent she unless day the with satisfied
was there which in but conversation, called they what in Thorpe, Mrs.
of resemblance any often not and opinion, of exchange any ever scarcely
Allen Mrs. and children, her of chiefly talked Thorpe Mrs. for subject,
gowns. her of

quick was Isabella and Catherine between friendship the of progress The
every through rapidly so passed they and warm, been had beginning its as
proof fresh no shortly was there that tenderness increasing of gradation
other each called They themselves. or friends their to given be to it of
pinned walked, they when arm in arm always were name, Christian their by
the in divided be to not were and dance, the for train other’s each up
they enjoyments, other of them deprived morning rainy a if and set;
shut and dirt, and wet of defiance in meeting in resolute still were
not will I for novels; Yes, together. novels read to up, themselves
novel-writers, with common so custom impolitic and ungenerous that adopt
the to performances, very the censure contemptuous their by degrading of
greatest their with adding--joining themselves are they which of number
scarcely and works, such on epithets harshest the bestowing in enemies
she if who, heroine, own their by read be to them permitting ever
pages insipid its over turn to sure is novel, a up take accidentally
the by patronized not be novel one of heroine the If Alas! disgust. with
I regard? and protection expect she can whom from another, of heroine
such abuse to reviewers the to it leave us Let it. of approve cannot
in talk to novel new every over and leisure, their at fancy of effusions
us Let groans. now press the which with trash the of strains threadbare
productions our Although body. injured an are we another; one desert not
any of those than pleasure unaffected and extensive more afforded have
has composition of species no world, the in corporation literary other
foes our fashion, or ignorance, pride, From decried. much so been
the of abilities the while And readers. our as many as almost are
who man the of or England, of History the of abridger nine-hundredth
and Pope, Milton, of lines dozen some volume a in publishes and collects
Sterne, from chapter a and Spectator, the from paper a with Prior,
of wish general a almost seems pens--there thousand a by eulogized are
and novelist, the of labour the undervaluing and capacity the decrying
to taste and wit, genius, only have which performances the slighting of
not novels--Do into look seldom novel-reader--I no am “I them. recommend
novel.” a for well very really is novels--It read often I that imagine
is It “Oh! Miss--?” reading, you are what “And cant. common the is Such
book her down lays she while lady, young the replies novel!” a only
or Cecilia, only is “It shame. momentary or indifference, affected with
greatest the which in work some only short, in or, Belinda”; or Camilla,
knowledge thorough most the which in displayed, are mind the of powers
the varieties, its of delineation happiest the nature, human of
the in world the to conveyed are humour, and wit of effusions liveliest
a with engaged been lady young same the had Now, language. best-chosen
she would proudly how work, a such of instead Spectator, the of volume
be must chances the though name; its told and book, the produced have
publication, voluminous that of part any by occupied being her against
of person young a disgust not would manner or matter the either which of
statement the in consisting often so papers its of substance the taste:
of topics and characters, unnatural circumstances, improbable of
language, their and living; anyone concern longer no which conversation
age the of idea favourable very no give to as coarse so frequently too,
it. endure could that




6 CHAPTER


in friends two the between place took which conversation, following The
nine or eight of acquaintance an after morning, one pump-room the
the of and attachment, warm very their of specimen a as given is days,
which taste literary and thought, of originality discretion, delicacy,
attachment. that of reasonableness the marked

five nearly arrived had Isabella as and appointment; by met They
dearest “My was, naturally address first her friend, her before minutes
at you for waiting been have I late? so you made have can what creature,
age!” this least

in was I thought I really but it; for sorry very am I indeed! you, “Have
long?” here been not have you hope I one. just but is It time. good very

hour. half this here been have I sure am I least. at ages ten These “Oh!
enjoy and room, the of end other the at down sit and go us let now, But
place, first the In you. to say to things hundred an have I ourselves.
off; set to wanted I as just morning, this rain would it afraid so was I
Do agonies! into me thrown have would that and showery, very looked it
in window shop a in imagine, can you hat prettiest the saw I know, you
ribbons coquelicot with only yours, like now--very just Street Milsom
what Catherine, dearest my But, it. for longed quite I green; of instead
on gone you Have morning? this all yourself with doing been you have
Udolpho?” with

the to got am I and woke; I since ever it reading been have I “Yes,
veil.” black

is what you tell not would I Oh! delightful! How indeed? you, “Are
know?” to wild you not Are world! the for veil black the behind

be not would me--I tell not do But be? it can what quite; Yes, “Oh!
is it sure am I skeleton, a be must it know I account. any upon told
like should I book! the with delighted am I Oh! skeleton. Laurentina’s
been not had it if you, assure I it. reading in life whole my spend to
world.” the all for it from away come have not would I you, meet to

finished have you when and you; to obliged am I much How creature! “Dear
list a out made have I and together; Italian the read will we Udolpho,
you.” for kind same the of more twelve or ten of

all?” they are What am! I glad How indeed! you, “Have

pocketbook. my in are, they here directly; names their you read will “I
the of Necromancer Warnings, Mysterious Clermont, Wolfenbach, of Castle
Mysteries. Horrid and Rhine, the of Orphan Bell, Midnight Forest, Black
time.” some us last will Those

all are they sure you are horrid, all they are but well; pretty “Yes,
horrid?”

a Andrews, Miss a mine, of friend particular a for sure; quite “Yes,
every read has world, the in creatures sweetest the of one girl, sweet
with delighted be would you Andrews, Miss knew you wish I them. of one
think I conceive. can you cloak sweetest the herself netting is She her.
not for men the with vexed so am I and angel, an as beautiful as her
it.” about amazingly all them scold I her! admiring

her?” admiring not for them scold you Do them! “Scold

are who those for do not would I nothing is There do. I that “Yes,
is it halves; by people loving of notion no have I friends. my really
told I strong. excessively always are attachments My nature. my not
to was he if that winter this assemblies our of one at Hunt Captain
allow would he unless him, with dance not would I night, all me tease
incapable us think men The angel. an as beautiful as be to Andrews Miss
the them show to determined am I and know, you friendship, real of
I you, of slightingly speak anybody hear to were I if Now, difference.
are you for likely, all at not is that but moment: a in up fire should
men.” the with favourite great a be to girl of kind the just

so?” say you can “How colouring. Catherine, cried dear!” “Oh,

exactly is which animation, much so have you well; very you know “I
amazingly something is there confess must I for wants, Andrews Miss what
parted we after just that you, tell must I Oh! her. about insipid
he sure am earnestly--I so you at looking man young a saw I yesterday,
Isabella again. disclaimed and coloured, Catherine you.” with love in is
are you is; it how see I but honour, my upon true, very is “It laughed.
gentleman, one of that except admiration, everybody’s to indifferent
more you”--speaking blame cannot I Nay, nameless. be shall who
is heart the Where understood. easily are feelings seriously--“your
the with pleased be can one little how well very know I attached, really
uninteresting, so insipid, so is Everything else. anybody of attention
comprehend perfectly can I object! beloved the to relate not does that
feelings.” your

Mr. about much very so think I that me persuade not should you “But
again.” him see never may I perhaps for Tilney,

sure am I it. of talk not do creature, dearest My again! him see “Not
so!” thought you if miserable be would you

very not was I that say to pretend not do I not. should I indeed, “No,
if as feel I read, to Udolpho have I while but him; with pleased much
dear My veil! black dreadful The Oh! miserable. me make could nobody
it.” behind skeleton Laurentina’s be must there sure am I Isabella,

but before; Udolpho read have never should you that me, to odd so is “It
novels.” to objects Morland Mrs. suppose I

herself; Grandison Charles Sir reads often very She not. does she “No,
way.” our in fall not do books new but

I not? it is book, horrid amazing an is That Grandison! Charles “Sir
volume.” first the through get not could Andrews Miss remember

very is it think I yet but all; at Udolpho like not is “It
entertaining.”

readable. been not had it thought I me; surprise You indeed! you “Do
head your on wear to what settled you have Catherine, dearest my But,
you. like exactly dressed be to events all at determined am I tonight?
know.” you sometimes, that of notice take men The

innocently. very Catherine, said do,” they if signify not does it “But

say. they what mind to never rule a it make I heavens! Oh, “Signify!
with them treat not do you if impertinent amazingly often very are They
distance.” their keep them make and spirit,

to well very behave always They that. observed never I Well, they? “Are
me.”

conceited most the are They airs. such themselves give They “Oh!
importance! much so of themselves think and world, the in creatures
always have I times, hundred a it of thought have I though by, the By
you Do man. a in complexion favourite your is what you ask to forgot
fair?” or dark best them like

I both, between Something it. about thought much never I know. hardly “I
dark.” very not and--and fair, Brown--not think.

your forgot not have I he. exactly is That Catherine. well, “Very
rather and eyes, dark with skin, brown Tilney--‘a Mr. of description
to as and eyes, light prefer I different. is taste my Well, hair.’ dark
must You other. any than better sallow a like know--I you complexion--do
acquaintance your of one with meet ever should you if me, betray not
description.” that answering

mean?” you do What you! “Betray

drop us Let much. too said have I believe I me. distress not do “Nay,
subject.” the

few a remaining after and complied, amazement, some in Catherine,
her interested what to reverting of point the on was silent, moments
Laurentina’s world, the in else anything than more rather time that at
sake! heaven’s “For saying, by her, prevented friend her when skeleton,
two are there know, you Do room. the of end this from away move us Let
really They hour. half this me at staring been have who men young odious
arrivals. the at look and go us Let countenance. of out quite me put
there.” us follow hardly will They

it names, the examined Isabella while and book; the to walked they Away
alarming these of proceedings the watch to employment Catherine’s was
men. young

so not are they hope I they? are way, this coming not are “They
am I coming. are they if know me let Pray us. follow to as impertinent
up.” look not will I determined

her assured pleasure, unaffected with Catherine, moments few a In
the left just had gentlemen the as uneasy, longer be not need she that
pump-room.

round. hastily turning Isabella, said gone?” they are way which “And
man.” young good-looking very a was “One

church-yard.” the towards went “They

you say what now, And them! of rid got have I glad amazingly am I “Well,
You hat? new my at looking and me, with Buildings Edgar’s to going to
it.” see to like should you said

overtake may we “perhaps added, she “Only,” agreed. readily Catherine
men.” young two the

presently, them by pass shall we haste, make we If that. mind Never “Oh!
hat.” my you show to dying am I and

our of danger no be will there minutes, few a wait only we if “But
all.” at them seeing

no have I you. assure I compliment, such any them pay not shall “I
spoil to way the is That respect. such with men treating of notion
them.”

therefore, and reasoning; such against oppose to nothing had Catherine
humbling of resolution her and Thorpe, Miss of independence the show to
pursuit in walk, could they as fast as immediately off set they sex, the
men. young two the of




7 CHAPTER


archway, the to pump-yard the through them conducted minute a Half
acquainted Everybody stopped. were they here but Passage; Union opposite
at Street Cheap crossing of difficulties the remember may Bath with
so nature, a impertinent so of street a indeed is it point; this
the and roads, Oxford and London great the with connected unfortunately
of parties which in passes never day a that city, the of inn principal
pastry, of quest in whether business, their important however ladies,
not are men, young of case) present the in (as even or millinery,
This carts. or horsemen, carriages, by other or side one on detained
Isabella by day, a times three least at lamented, and felt been had evil
it lament and feel to fated now was she and Bath; in residence her since
Passage, Union to opposite coming of moment very the at for more, once
the through proceeding were who gentlemen two the of view within and
they alley, interesting that of gutters the threading and crowds,
bad on along driven gig, a of approach the by crossing prevented were
that vehemence the all with coachman knowing-looking most a by pavement
his and companion, his himself, of lives the endanger fitly most could
horse.

them.” detest I “How up. looking Isabella, said gigs!” odious these “Oh,
she for duration, short of was just, so though detestation, this But
brother!” my and Morland Mr. “Delightful! exclaimed, and again looked

Catherine; by moment same the at uttered was James!” ‘Tis heaven! “Good
checked immediately was horse the eyes, men’s young the catching on and,
servant the and haunches, his on him threw almost which violence a with
was equipage the and out, jumped gentlemen the up, scampered now having
care. his to delivered

her received unexpected, wholly was meeting this whom by Catherine,
amiable very a of being he, and pleasure; liveliest the with brother
his on proof every gave her, to attached sincerely and disposition,
the while do, to leisure have could he which satisfaction, equal of side
notice; his challenging incessantly were Thorpe Miss of eyes bright
and joy of mixture a with paid, speedily were devoirs his her to and
more been she had Catherine, informed have might which embarrassment
simply less and feelings, people’s other of development the in expert
as quite friend her thought brother her that own, her by engrossed
herself. do could she as pretty

the about orders giving been had meantime the in who Thorpe, John
amends the received directly she him from and them, joined soon horses,
the touched carelessly and slightly he while for due; her were which
short a half and scrape whole a bestowed he her on Isabella, of hand
face plain a with who, height, middling of man young stout a was He bow.
wore he unless handsome too being of fearful seemed form, ungraceful and
easy were he unless gentleman a like much too and groom, a of dress the
be to allowed be might he where impudent and civil, be to ought he where
running been have we think you do long “How watch: his out took He easy.
Morland?” Miss Tetbury, from it

was it that her told brother Her distance.” the know not do “I
miles. twenty-three

inch.” an is it if twenty and “Five Thorpe. cried twenty!” and “Three
innkeepers, road-books, of authority the pleaded remonstrated, Morland
test surer a had he all; them disregarded friend his but milestones; and
time the “by he, said twenty,” and five be must it know “I distance. of
the of out drove we one; after half now is It it. doing been have we
man any defy I and eleven; struck clock town the as Tetbury at inn-yard
harness; in hour an miles ten than less go horse my make to England in
twenty-five.” exactly it makes that

we when o’clock ten only was “it Morland; said hour,” an lost have “You
Tetbury.” from came

This stroke. every counted I soul! my upon eleven, was It o’clock! “Ten
do Morland; Miss senses, my of out me persuade would yours of brother
in speed for made so animal an see ever you did horse; my at look but
driving was and carriage the mounted just had servant (The life?” your
only coming indeed half a and and hours Three blood! true “Such off.)
possible it suppose and creature, that at Look miles! twenty and three
can.” you if

sure.” be to hot, very look does “He

look but Church; Walcot to came we till hair a turned not had He “Hot!
horse that moves; he how see only loins; his at look forehand; his at
on. get will he and legs his tie hour: an miles ten than less go cannot
it? not is one, neat A Morland? Miss gig, my of think you do What
a for built was It month. a it had not have I town-built; hung; Well
ran he fellow; of sort good very a mine, of friend a man, Christchurch
it. with done have to convenient was it believe, I till, weeks, few a it
kind, the of thing light some for out looking be to then just happened I
to chanced I but too; curricle a on determined well pretty had I though
term: last Oxford, into driving was he as Bridge, Magdalen on him meet
as thing little a such want to happen you ‘do he, said Thorpe,’ ‘Ah!
it.’ of tired cursed am I but kind, the of one capital a is It this?
you do much how And ask?’ you do what man; your am ‘I I; said D--,’ ‘Oh!
Morland?” Miss did, he think

all.” at guess cannot I sure am “I

splashing-board, sword-case, trunk, seat, see; you “Curricle-hung,
good as iron-work the complete; see you all moulding, silver lamps,
directly, him with closed I guineas; fifty asked He better. or new, as
mine.” was carriage the and money, the down threw

I that things such of little so know “I Catherine, said sure,” am I “And
dear.” or cheap was it whether judge cannot

but say; dare I less, for it got have might I t’other; nor one “Neither
cash.” wanted Freeman poor and haggling, hate I

pleased. quite Catherine, said you,” of good-natured very was “That

friend, a by thing kind a doing of means the has one when it, D---- “Oh!
pitiful.” be to hate I

young the of movements intended the into place took now inquiry An
that decided was it going, were they whither finding on and, ladies;
their pay and Buildings, Edgar’s to them accompany should gentlemen the
so and way; the led Isabella and James Thorpe. Mrs. to respects
she was contentedly so lot, her with latter the was satisfied well
double the brought who him to walk pleasant a ensure to endeavouring
brother, friend’s her and friend, brother’s her being of recommendation
overtook they though that, feelings, her were uncoquettish and pure so
far so was she Street, Milsom in men young offending two the passed and
only them at back looked she that notice, their attract to seeking from
times. three

minutes’ few a after and, Catherine, with course of kept Thorpe John
find, will “You gig. his about conversation the renewed silence,
some by thing cheap a reckoned be would it Morland, Miss however,
day; next the more guineas ten for it sold have might I for people,
the at me with was Morland once; at sixty me bid Oriel, of Jackson,
time.”

horse your that forget you “but this; overheard who Morland, said “Yes,”
included.” was

Are hundred. a for horse my sell not would I it! d---- Oh, horse! “My
Morland?” Miss carriage, open an of fond you

am I but one; in being of opportunity an ever hardly have I very; “Yes,
it.” of fond particularly

day.” every mine in out you drive will I it; of glad am “I

the of doubt a from distress, some in Catherine, said you,” “Thank
offer. an such accepting of propriety

tomorrow.” Hill Lansdown up you drive will “I

rest?” want horse your not will but you; “Thank

nonsense; all today; miles twenty and three come only has He “Rest!
soon. so up them knocks nothing rest; as much so horses ruins nothing
day every hours four of average the at mine exercise shall I no; No,
here.” am I while

forty be will “That seriously. very Catherine said indeed!” you “Shall
day.” a miles

Lansdown up you drive will I Well, care. I what for fifty, Aye, “Forty!
engaged.” am I mind, tomorrow;

“My round. turning Isabella, cried be!” will that delightful “How
will you brother, afraid, am I but you; envy quite I Catherine, dearest
third.” a for room have not

sisters my drive to Bath to come not did I no; No, indeed! third “A
you.” of care take must Morland faith! joke, good a be would that about;

but two; other the between civilities of dialogue a on brought This
companion’s Her result. the nor particulars the neither heard Catherine
than more nothing to pitch animated hitherto its from sunk now discourse
every of face the on condemnation or praise of sentence decisive short a
as long as agreeing and listening after Catherine, and met; they woman
female youthful the of deference and civility the all with could, she
that to opposition in own its of opinion an hazarding of fearful mind,
is sex own her of beauty the where especially man, self-assured a of
which question a by subject the vary to length at ventured concerned,
read ever you “Have was, it thoughts; her in uppermost long been had
Thorpe?” Mr. Udolpho,

to else something have I novels; read never I I; Not Lord! Oh, “Udolpho!
do.”

question, her for apologize to going was ashamed, and humbled Catherine,
nonsense of full so all are “Novels saying, by her prevented he but
since out come one decent tolerably a been not has there stuff; and
the all for as but day; t’other that read I Monk; The except Jones, Tom
creation.” in things stupidest the are they others,

very so is it it; read to were you if Udolpho, like must you think “I
interesting.”

her Radcliffe’s; Mrs. be shall it any, read I if No, faith! I, “Not
nature and fun some reading; worth are they enough; amusing are novels
them.” in

some with Catherine, said Radcliffe,” Mrs. by written was “Udolpho
him. mortifying of fear the from hesitation,

that of thinking was I was; it so remember, I Aye, it? was sure; “No
about, fuss a such make they woman that by written book, stupid other
emigrant.” French the married who she

Camilla?” mean you suppose “I

at playing man old An stuff! unnatural such book; the that’s “Yes,
soon I but over, it looked and once volume first the up took I see-saw,
be must it stuff of sort what guessed I indeed do; not would it found
was I emigrant, an married had she heard I as soon as it: saw I before
it.” through get to able be never should I sure

it.” read never have “I

can you nonsense horridest the is it you; assure I loss, no had “You
at playing man’s old an but it in world the in nothing is there imagine;
not.” is there soul my upon Latin; learning and see-saw

poor on lost unfortunately was which of justness the critique, This
the and lodgings, Thorpe’s Mrs. of door the to them brought Catherine,
way gave Camilla of reader unprejudiced and discerning the of feelings
Mrs. met they as son, affectionate and dutiful the of feelings the to
Mother! “Ah, passage. the in above, from them descried had who Thorpe,
“Where hand. the of shake hearty a her giving he, said do?” you do How
witch. old an like look you makes It hat? a of quiz that get you did
look must you so you, with days few a stay to come I and Morland is Here
seemed address this And near.” somewhere beds good of couple a for out
she for heart, mother’s the of wishes fondest the all satisfy to
his On affection. exulting and delighted most the with him received
fraternal his of portion equal an bestowed then he sisters younger two
that observed and did, they how them of each asked he for tenderness,
ugly. very looked both they

friend James’s was he but Catherine; please not did manners These
by off bought further was judgment her and brother; Isabella’s and
that hat, new the see to withdrew they when her, assuring Isabella’s
John’s by and world, the in girl charming most the her thought John
she Had evening. that him with dance to parted they before her engaging
where but, little; done have might attacks such vainer, or older been
of steadiness uncommon requires it united, are diffidence and youth
girl charming most the called being of attraction the resist to reason
the and partner; a as engaged early very so being of and world, the in
with hour an sitting after Morlands, two the when that, was consequence
as James, and Allen’s, Mr. to together walk to off set Thorpes, the
my like you do how Catherine, “Well, said, them, on closed was door the
done, have would probably she as answering, of instead Thorpe?” friend
like not do “I case, the in flattery no and friendship no been there had
very seems he much; very him like “I replied, directly she all,” at him
agreeable.”

but rattle; a of little a lived; ever as fellow a good-natured as is “He
the like you do how and believe: I sex, your to him recommend will that
family?” the of rest

particularly.” Isabella indeed: much very “Very,

woman young of kind the just is she so; say you hear to glad very am “I
is and sense, good much so has she to; attached you see to wish could I
her; know to you wanted always I amiable; and unaffected thoroughly so
your in things highest the said She you. of fond very seems she and
Miss as girl a such of praise the and be; possibly could that praise
be “may affection, with hand her taking Catherine,” you, even Thorpe
of.” proud

delighted am and exceedingly, her love “I replied; she am,” I “Indeed
when her of anything mentioned hardly You too. her like you that find to
there.” visit your after me to wrote you

a be will you hope I myself. you see soon should I thought I “Because
girl; amiable most a is She Bath. in are you while together deal great
she her; of are family the all fond How understanding! superior a such
in admired be must she much how and favourite; general the evidently is
she?” not this--is as place a such

girl prettiest the her thinks Allen Mr. fancy; I indeed, much very “Yes,
Bath.” in

of judge better a is who man any know not do I and does; he say dare “I
my here, happy are you whether you ask not need I Allen. Mr. than beauty
it Thorpe, Isabella as friend and companion a such with Catherine; dear
sure, am I Allens, the and otherwise; be to you for impossible be would
you?” to kind very are

it come are you now and before; happy so was never I kind; very “Yes,
far so come to you of is it good how ever; than delightful more be will
me.” see to purpose on

conscience his qualified and gratitude, of tribute this accepted James
“Indeed, sincerity, perfect with saying by too, it accepting for
dearly.” you love I Catherine,

the sisters, and brothers concerning communications and Inquiries
now matters family other and rest, the of growth the some, of situation
digression small one only with continued, and them, between passed
Pulteney reached they till Thorpe, Miss of praise in part, James’s on
Allen, Mrs. and Mr. by kindness great with welcomed was he where Street,
latter the by summoned and them, with dine to former the by invited
tippet. and muff new a of merits the weigh and price the guess to
the accepting his prevented Buildings Edgar’s in pre-engagement A
he as soon as away hurry to him obliged and friend, one of invitation
parties two the of time The other. the of demands the satisfied had
then was Catherine adjusted, correctly being Room Octagon the in uniting
imagination frightened and restless, raised, a of luxury the to left
dressing of concerns worldly all from lost Udolpho, of pages the over
an of delay the on fears Allen’s Mrs. soothing of incapable dinner, and
even bestow to sixty in minute one only having and dressmaker, expected
the for engaged already being in felicity, own her of reflection the on
evening.




8 CHAPTER


Pulteney from party the however, dressmaker, the and Udolpho of spite In
James and Thorpes The time. good very in Rooms Upper the reached Street
having Isabella and them; before minutes two only there were Morland
most the with friend her meeting of ceremonial usual the through gone
and gown, her of set the admiring of haste, affectionate and smiling
in arm chaperones, their followed they hair, her of curl the envying
thought a whenever other each to whispering ballroom, the into arm,
hand the of squeeze a by ideas many of place the supplying and occurred,
affection. of smile a or

and seated; were they after minutes few a within began dancing The
very was sister, his as long as quite engaged been had who James,
the into gone was John but up; stand to Isabella with importunate
induce should declared, she nothing, and friend, a to speak to card-room
“I too. it join could Catherine dear her before set the join to her
sister dear your without up stand not would “I she, said you,” assure
the separated be certainly should we did I if for world; the all for
and gratitude, with kindness this accepted Catherine evening.” whole
who Isabella, when longer, minutes three for were they as continued they
his to again turned her, of side other the on James to talking been had
you, leave must I afraid am I creature, dear “My whispered, and sister
not will you know I begin; to impatient amazingly so is brother your
moment, a in back be will John say dare I and away, going my mind
little a though Catherine, out.” me find easily may you then and
the and opposition, any make to nature good much too had disappointed,
and hand friend’s her press to time only had Isabella up, rising others
younger The off. hurried they before love,” dear my “Good-bye, say,
Mrs. of mercy the to left was Catherine dancing, also being Thorpes Miss
help not could She remained. now she whom between Allen, Mrs. and Thorpe
longed only not she for Thorpe, Mr. of non-appearance the at vexed being
her of dignity real the as that, aware likewise was but dancing, be to
other of scores the with sharing was she known, be not could situation
partner. a wanting of discredit the all down sitting still ladies young
of appearance the wear to world, the of eye the in disgraced be To
the and innocence, all actions her purity, all is heart her while infamy
those of one is debasement, her of source true the another of misconduct
her and life, heroine’s the to belong peculiarly which circumstances
Catherine character. her dignifies particularly what it under fortitude
lips. her passed murmur no but suffered, she too; fortitude had

ten of end the at roused, was she humiliation, of state this From
Mr. but Thorpe, Mr. not seeing, by feeling, pleasanter a to minutes,
be to seemed he sat; they where place the of yards three within Tilney,
the and smile the therefore and her, see not did he but way, that moving
away passed Catherine, in raised reappearance sudden his which blush,
as and handsome as looked He importance. heroic her sullying without
and fashionable a to interest with talking was and ever, as lively
Catherine whom and arm, his on leant who woman, young pleasing-looking
away throwing unthinkingly thus sister; his be to guessed immediately
being by forever, her to lost him considering of opportunity fair a
it probable, and simple was what by only guided But already. married
not had he married; be could Tilney Mr. that head her entered never had
been had she whom to men married the like talked, not had he behaved,
sister. a acknowledged had he and wife, a mentioned never had he used;
sister’s his of conclusion instant the sprang circumstances these From
deathlike a of turning of instead therefore, and side; his by being now
sat Catherine bosom, Allen’s Mrs. on fit a in falling and paleness
little a only cheeks with and senses, her of use perfect the in erect,
usual. than redder

approach, to slowly, though continued, who companion, his and Tilney Mr.
and Thorpe; Mrs. of acquaintance an lady, a by preceded immediately were
stopped her, to belonging as they, her, to speak to stopping lady this
received instantly eye, Tilney’s Mr. catching Catherine, and likewise,
with it returned She recognition. of tribute smiling the him from
Mrs. and her to both spoke he nearer, still advancing then and pleasure,
see to happy very am “I acknowledged. civilly very was he whom by Allen,
her thanked He Bath.” left had you afraid was I indeed; sir, again, you
very the on week, a for it quitted had he that said and fears, her for
her. seeing of pleasure the had having his after morning

it for again, back be to sorry not are you say dare I and sir, “Well,
too. else everybody for indeed people--and young for place the just is
he sure am I that it, of sick being of talks he when Allen, Mr. tell I
is it that place, a agreeable very so is it for complain, not should
tell I year. of time dull this at home at than here be to better much
health.” his for here sent be to luck in quite is he him

place, the like to obliged be will Allen Mr. that madam, hope, I “And
him.” to service of it finding from

ours, of neighbour A will. he that doubt no have I sir. you, “Thank
quite away came and winter, last health his for here was Skinner, Dr.
stout.”

encouragement.” great give must circumstance “That

I so months; three here were family his and Skinner Dr. sir--and “Yes,
away.” get to hurry a in be not must he Allen Mr. tell

Allen, Mrs. to Thorpe Mrs. from request a by interrupted were they Here
Tilney Miss and Hughes Mrs. accommodate to little a move would she that
accordingly was This party. their join to agreed had they as seats, with
a after and them; before standing continuing still Tilney Mr. done,
This him. with dance to Catherine asked he consideration, minutes’ few
the to mortification severe produced was, it as delightful compliment,
occasion the on sorrow her expressed she denial, her giving in and lady;
her joined who Thorpe, had that it felt really she if as much very so
her thought have might he earlier, minute a half been afterwards, just
told then he which in manner easy very The acute. too rather sufferings
more her reconcile means any by not did waiting her kept had he that her
they while into entered he which particulars the did nor lot; her to
just had he whom friend the of dogs and horses the of up, standing were
her interest them, between terriers of exchange proposed a of and left,
the of part that towards often very looking her prevent to as much so
she whom to Isabella, dear her Of Tilney. Mr. left had she where room
nothing. see could she gentleman, that out point to longed particularly
and party, her all from separated was She sets. different in were They
another, succeeded mortification one acquaintance; her all from away
previously go to that lesson, useful this deduced she whole the from and
or dignity the either increase necessarily not does ball a to engaged
she this, as strain moralizing a such From lady. young a of enjoyment
round, turning and shoulder, the on touch a by roused suddenly was
and Tilney Miss by attended her, behind directly Hughes Mrs. perceived
this “for she, said Morland,” Miss pardon, your beg “I gentleman. a
said Thorpe Mrs. and Thorpe, Miss to get anyhow cannot I liberty--but
this in letting to objection least the have not would you sure was she
creature any to applied have not could Hughes Mrs. you.” by lady young
ladies young The Catherine. than her oblige to happy more room the in
of sense proper a expressing Tilney Miss other, each to introduced were
mind generous a of delicacy real the with Morland Miss goodness, such
having with satisfied Hughes, Mrs. and obligation; the of light making
party. her to returned charge, young her settled respectably so

agreeable very a and face, pretty a figure, good a had Tilney Miss
pretension, decided the all not had it though air, her and countenance;
Her elegance. real more had Thorpe’s, Miss of stylishness resolute the
nor shy neither were they breeding; good and sense good showed manners
and attractive, young, being of capable seemed she and open; affectedly
her, near man every of attention the fix to wanting without ball a at
inconceivable or delight ecstatic of feelings exaggerated without and
at interested Catherine, occurrence. trifling little every on vexation
desirous was Tilney, Mr. to relationship her and appearance her by once
she whenever therefore talked readily and her, with acquainted being of
saying for leisure and courage had and say, to anything of think could
by intimacy, speedy very a of way the in thrown hindrance the But it.
their prevented requisites, these of more or one of want frequent the
by acquaintance, an of rudiments first the through going than more doing
admired she much how Bath, liked other the well how themselves informing
or played, or drew, she whether country, surrounding and buildings its
horseback. on riding of fond was she whether and sang,

arm her found Catherine before concluded scarcely were dances two The
exclaimed, spirits great in who Isabella, faithful her by seized gently
for looking been have I creature, dearest My you. got have I last “At
you when set, this into come to you induce could What hour. this you
you.” without wretched quite been have I other? the in was I knew

not could I you? at get to me for possible it was how Isabella, dear “My
were.” you where see even

go Do me. believe not would he time--but the all brother your told I “So
stir not would vain--he in all I--but said Morland, Mr. her, for see and
immoderately so all are men you But Morland? Mr. so, it not Was inch. an
you Catherine, dear my degree, a such to him scolding been have I lazy!
such with ceremony upon stand never I know You amazed. quite be would
people.”

whispered head,” her round beads white the with lady young that at “Look
sister.” Tilney’s Mr. is “It James. from friend her detaching Catherine,

a What moment. this her at look me Let so! say don’t You Heavens! “Oh!
is where But beautiful! so half anything saw never I girl! delightful
this me to out him Point room? the in he Is brother? all-conquering her
listen. to not are you Morland, Mr. him. see to die I is. he if instant,
you.” about talking not are We

on?” going is What about? whispering this all is what “But

restless such have men You be. would it how knew I now, “There
be But nothing. ‘Tis indeed! women, of curiosity the of Talk curiosity!
matter.” the of all at anything know to not are you for satisfied,

think?” you do me, satisfy to likely that is “And

to signify it can What you. like anything knew never I declare I “Well,
therefore you; about talking are we Perhaps of. talking are we what you,
something hear to happen may you or listen, to not you advise would I
agreeable.” very not

original the time, some lasted which chatter, commonplace this In
well very was Catherine though and forgotten; entirely seemed subject
little a avoid not could she while, a for dropped it have to pleased
to desire impatient Isabella’s all of suspension total the at suspicion
would James dance, fresh a up struck orchestra the When Tilney. Mr. see
Mr. you, tell “I resisted. she but away, partner fair his led have
world. the all for thing a such do not would “I cried, she Morland,”
your what Catherine, dear my conceive, only teasing; so be you can How
though again, him with dance to me wants He do. to me wants brother
the against entirely and thing, improper most a is it that him tell I
change to not were we if place, the of talk the us make would It rules.
partners.”

as is it assemblies, public these “in James, said honour,” my “Upon
not.” as done often

carry, to point a have men you when But so? say you can how “Nonsense,
persuade me; support do Catherine, sweet My anything. at stick never you
shock quite would it that him Tell is. it impossible how brother your
it?” not would now thing; a such do me see to you

change.” better much had you wrong, it think you if but all; at not “No,

you yet and says, sister your what hear “you Isabella, cried “There,”
all set we if fault, my not is it that remember Well, her. mind not will
Catherine, dearest my along, Come bustle. a in Bath in ladies old the
regain to went, they off And me.” by stand and sake, heaven’s for
and away; walked had meanwhile, the in Thorpe, John place. former their
repeating of opportunity an Tilney Mr. give to willing ever Catherine,
her made once, her flattered already had which request agreeable the
hope the in could, she as fast as Thorpe Mrs. and Allen Mrs. to way
be to proved it when which, hope them--a with still him finding of
dear,” my “Well, unreasonable. highly been have to felt she fruitless,
had have you hope “I son, her of praise for impatient Thorpe, Mrs. said
partner.” agreeable an

madam.” agreeable, “Very

he?” not has spirits, charming has John it. of glad am “I

Allen. Mrs. said dear?” my Tilney, Mr. meet you “Did

he?” is where “No,

about, lounging of tired so was he said and now, just us with was “He
ask would he perhaps thought I so dance; and go to resolved was he that
you.” with met he if you,

looked not had she but round; looking Catherine, said be?” he can “Where
dance. the to lady young a leading him saw she before long round

Allen; Mrs. said you,” asked had he wish I partner; a got has He “Ah!
young agreeable very a is “he added, she silence, short a after and
man.”

“I complacently; smiling Thorpe, Mrs. said Allen,” Mrs. is, he “Indeed
agreeable more a not is there that mother, his am I though it, say must
world.” the in man young

comprehension the for much too been have might answer inapplicable This
moment’s a only after for Allen, Mrs. puzzle not did it but many; of
she say dare “I Catherine, to whisper a in said, she consideration,
son.” her of speaking was I thought

so by missed have to seemed She vexed. and disappointed was Catherine
not did persuasion this and view; in had had she object very the little
her to up came Thorpe John when reply, gracious very a to her incline
are I and you suppose I Morland, Miss “Well, said, and afterwards soon
again.” together it jig and up stand to

and, over; are dances two our you, to obliged much am I no; “Oh,
more.” any dance to mean not do and tired, am I besides,

with along Come people. quiz and about walk us let Then you? not “Do
two my room; the in quizzers greatest four the you show will I and me,
this them at laughing been have I partners. their and sisters younger
hour.” half

his quiz to off walked he last at and herself; excused Catherine Again
Mr. dull; very found she evening the of rest The himself. by sisters
his of that attend to tea, at party their from away drawn was Tilney
and her, near sit not did it, to belonging though Tilney, Miss partner;
the that together conversing in engaged much so were Isabella and James
one smile, one than friend her on more bestow to leisure no had latter
Catherine.” “dearest one and squeeze,




9 CHAPTER


evening the of events the from unhappiness Catherine’s of progress The
with dissatisfaction general a in first appeared It follows. as was
speedily which rooms, the in remained she while her, about everybody
This, home. go to desire violent a and weariness considerable on brought
extraordinary of direction the took Street, Pulteney in arriving on
to longing earnest an into changed appeased, was that when and hunger,
there when for distress; her of point extreme the was such bed; in be
and hours, nine lasted which sleep sound a into fell immediately she
fresh with spirits, excellent in revived, perfectly awoke she which from
her improve to was heart her of wish first The schemes. fresh and hopes
seek to resolution, first her almost and Tilney, Miss with acquaintance
one pump-room, the In noon. at pump-room the in purpose, that for her
had she building that and with, met be must Bath in arrived newly so
excellence, female of discovery the for favourable so found already
secret for adapted admirably so intimacy, female of completion the and
reasonably most was she that confidence, unlimited and discourses
plan Her walls. its within from friend another expect to encouraged
after book her to down quietly sat she settled, thus morning the for
employment same the and place same the in remain to resolving breakfast,
by incommoded little very habitude from and one; struck clock the till
and mind of vacancy whose Allen, Mrs. of ejaculations and remarks the
great a talked never she as that such, were thinking for incapacity
she while therefore, and, silent; entirely be never could she so deal,
she if thread, her broke or needle her lost she if work, her at sat
must she gown, her upon speck a saw or street, the in carriage a heard
or her answer to leisure at anyone were there whether aloud, it observe
haste in her drew rap loud remarkably a twelve, past half about At not.
there of Catherine inform to time she had scarcely and window, the to
servant, a only first the in door, the at carriages open two being
came Thorpe John before second, the in Thorpe Miss driving brother her
Have am. I here Morland, Miss “Well, out, calling upstairs, running
a of devil old the before; come not could We long? waiting been you
into, got be to fit thing a out finding eternity an such was coachmaker
out are we before down break they but one to thousand ten is it now and
was night, last ball famous A Allen? Mrs. do, you do How street. the of
confounded a in are others the for quick, be Morland, Miss Come, it? not
over.” tumble their get to want They off. be to hurry

to?” going all you are “Where Catherine. said mean?” you do “What

agree we not Did engagement! our forgot not have you Why, to? “Going
are We have! you head a What morning? this drive a take to together
Down.” Claverton up going

at looking Catherine, said remember,” I it, about said was “Something
you.” expect not did I really “but opinion; her for Allen Mrs.

made, have would you dust a what And one! good a That’s me! expect “Not
come.” not had I if

thrown entirely was meanwhile, friend, her to appeal silent Catherine’s
any conveying of habit the in all at being not Allen, Mrs. for away,
intended ever being its of aware not was look, a by herself expression
again Tilney Miss seeing of desire whose Catherine, and else; anybody by
who and drive, a of favour in delay short a bear moment that at could
as Thorpe, Mr. with going her in impropriety no be could there thought
to obliged therefore was James, with time same the at going was Isabella
for me spare you Can it? to say you do what ma’am, “Well, plainer. speak
go?” I Shall two? or hour an

most the with Allen, Mrs. replied dear,” my please, you as just “Do
get to off ran and advice, the took Catherine indifference. placid
allowed scarcely having reappeared, she minutes few very a In ready.
her in sentences short few a through get to enough time others two the
gig; his of admiration Allen’s Mrs. procured had Thorpe after praise,
hurried both they wishes, good parting friend’s her receiving then and
duty the whom to Isabella, cried creature,” dearest “My downstairs.
the into get could she before her called immediately friendship of
was I ready. getting hours three least at been have “you carriage,
a have I night. last had we ball delightful a What ill. were you afraid
to long I for in, get and haste make but you; to say to things thousand
off.” be

hear to soon too not but away, turned and orders her followed Catherine
quite I is! she girl sweet a “What James, to aloud exclaim friend her
her.” on dote

handed he as Thorpe, said Morland,” Miss frightened, be not will “You
off. setting first at little a about dance should horse my “if in, her
rest the take perhaps and two, or plunge a give likely, most will, He
spirits, of full is He master. his know soon will he but minute; a for
him.” in vice no is there but be, can as playful

too was it but one, inviting very a portrait the think not did Catherine
so, frightened; herself own to young too was she and retreat, to late
boasted animal’s the to trusting and fate, her to herself resigning
down sit Thorpe saw and down, peaceably sat she owner, its of knowledge
the at stood who servant the arranged, then being Everything her. by
they off and go,” him let “to voice important an in bid was head horse’s
or caper, a or plunge a without imaginable, manner quietest the in went
spoke escape, an happy so at delighted Catherine, one. like anything
immediately companion her and surprise; grateful with aloud pleasure her
entirely was it that her assuring by simple perfectly matter the made
the held then had he which in manner judicious peculiarly the to owing
had he which with dexterity and discernment singular the and reins,
that wondering help not could she though Catherine, whip. his directed
to necessary it think should he horse, his of command perfect such with
sincerely herself congratulated tricks, its of relation a with her alarm
that perceiving and coachman; a excellent so of care the under being on
without manner, quiet same the in on go to continued animal the
and vivacity, unpleasant any towards propensity smallest the showing
means no by hour) an miles ten was pace inevitable its (considering
and air of enjoyment the all to up herself gave fast, alarmingly
February, of day mild fine a in kind, invigorating most the of exercise
succeeded minutes several of silence A safety. of consciousness the with
very saying Thorpe’s by broken was it dialogue; short first their
not did Catherine he?” not Jew--is a as rich as is Allen “Old abruptly,
explanation, in adding question, his repeated he him--and understand
with.” are you man the Allen, “Old

rich.” very is he believe, I Yes, mean. you Allen, Mr. “Oh!

all?” at children no “And

any.” “No--not

he?” not is godfather, your is He heirs. next his for thing famous “A

No.” godfather! “My

them.” with much very always are you “But

much.” very “Yes,

enough, fellow old of kind good a seems He meant. I what is that “Aye,
for gouty not is he say; dare I time, his in well very lived has and
now?” day a bottle his drink he Does nothing.

a is He thing? a such of think you should Why No. day! a bottle “His
night?” last liquor in him fancy not could you and man, temperate very

liquor. in being men’s of thinking always are women You you! help “Lord
of sure am I bottle? a by overset is man a suppose not do you Why,
not would there day, a bottle their drink to was everybody if this--that
famous a be would It now. are there world the in disorders the half be
all.” us for thing good

it.” believe cannot “I

the not is There thousands. of saving the be would it Lord, “Oh!
to ought there that kingdom this in consumed wine the of part hundredth
help.” wants climate foggy Our be.

in drunk wine of deal great a is there that heard have I yet “And
Oxford.”

drinks Nobody you. assure I now, Oxford at drinking no is There “Oxford!
pints four his beyond goes who man a with meet hardly would You there.
at thing, remarkable a reckoned was it instance, for Now, utmost. the at
five about cleared we average an upon that rooms, my in party last the
way. common the of out something as upon looked was It head. a pints
with meet often not would You sure. be to stuff, good famous is Mine
will this But it. for account may that Oxford--and in it like anything
there.” drinking of rate general the of notion a you give just

that is, that “and warmly, Catherine said notion,” a give does it “Yes,
I However, did. you thought I than wine more deal great a drink all you
much.” so drink not does James sure am

which of reply, overpowering and loud a on brought declaration This
amounting exclamations, frequent the except distinct, very was part no
it when left, was Catherine and it, adorned which oaths, to almost
deal great a being there of belief strengthened a rather with ended,
brother’s her of conviction happy same the and Oxford, in drunk wine of
sobriety. comparative

and equipage, own his of merits the to reverted all then ideas Thorpe’s
horse his which with freedom and spirit the admire to on called was she
of excellence the as well as paces, his which ease the and along, moved
all in him followed She carriage. the of motion the gave springs, the
was him beyond or before go To could. she as well as admiration his
rapidity his subject, the of ignorance her and knowledge His impossible.
power; her of out that put herself of diffidence her and expression, of
echoed readily she but commendation, in new nothing out strike could she
them between settled finally was it and assert, to chose he whatever
most the altogether was equipage his that difficulty any without
the horse his neatest, the carriage his England, in kind its of complete
think, really not do “You coachman. best the himself and goer, best
the consider to time some after venturing Catherine, said Thorpe,” Mr.
the on variation little some offer to and decided, entirely as matter
down?” break will gig James’s “that subject,

in thing tittuppy little a such see ever you Did Lord! Oh! down! “Break
have wheels The it. about iron of piece sound a not is There life? your
Upon body! the for as least--and at years ten these out worn fairly been
the is It touch. a with yourself pieces to it shake might you soul, my
we God! Thank beheld! ever I business rickety little devilish most
fifty for it in miles two go to bound be not would I better. a got have
pounds.” thousand

us let pray “Then frightened. quite Catherine, cried heavens!” “Good
let Do on. go we if accident an with meet certainly will they back; turn
how him tell and brother, my to speak and stop Thorpe; Mr. back, turn us
is.” it unsafe very

if roll a get only will They that? in there is What lord! Oh, “Unsafe!
excellent be will it dirt; of plenty is there and down; break does it
how knows man a if enough, safe is carriage The it! curse Oh, falling.
twenty above last will hands good in sort that of thing a it; drive to
for undertake would I you! bless Lord out. worn fairly is it after years
nail.” a losing without again, back and York to it drive to pounds five

two reconcile to how not knew she astonishment; with listened Catherine
been not had she for thing; same the of accounts different very such
to know to nor rattle, a of propensities the understand to up brought
vanity of excess the falsehoods impudent and assertions idle many how
seldom who people matter-of-fact plain, were family own Her lead. will
contented being utmost, the at father, her kind; any of wit at aimed
habit the in not were they proverb; a with mother her and pun, a with
asserting of or importance, their increase to lies telling of therefore
the on reflected She next. the contradict would they what moment one at
the on once than more was and perplexity, much in time some for affair
real his into insight clearer a Thorpe Mr. from requesting of point
to appeared it because herself, checked she but subject; the on opinion
making in insights, clearer those giving in excel not did he that her
to joining and, ambiguous; made before had he which plain things those
and sister his suffer really not would he that consideration the this,
preserve easily might he which from danger a to exposed be to friend his
fact in be to carriage the know must he that last at concluded she them,
him By longer. no herself alarm would therefore and safe, perfectly
his of rest the all and forgotten; entirely seemed matter whole the
own his and himself with ended and began talk, rather or conversation,
and trifle a for bought had he which horses of her told He concerns.
had judgment his which in matches, racing of sums; incredible for sold
had he which in parties, shooting of winner; the foretold infallibly
his all than shot) good one having without (though birds more killed
with sport, day’s famous some her to described and together; companions
dogs the directing in skill and foresight his which in fox-hounds, the
which in and huntsman, experienced most the of mistakes the repaired had
life own his endangered never had it though riding, his of boldness the
difficulties, into others leading constantly been had moment, a for
many. of necks the broken had concluded calmly he which

unfixed and herself, for judging of habit the in was Catherine as Little
not could she be, to ought men what of notions general her were as
his of effusions the with bore she while doubt, a repress entirely
a was It agreeable. completely altogether being his of conceit, endless
by assured been had she and brother; Isabella’s was he for surmise, bold
spite in but sex; her all to him recommend would manners his that James
her over crept which company, his of weariness extreme the this, of
to unceasingly continued which and hour, an out been had they before
in her, induced again, Street Pulteney in stopped they till increase
his distrust to and authority, high such resist to degree, small some
pleasure. universal giving of powers

was Isabella of astonishment the door, Allen’s Mrs. at arrived they When
for day the in late too was it that finding on expressed, be to hardly
was It o’clock!” three “Past house: the into friend her attend to them
her believe neither would she And impossible! incredible, inconceivable,
no believe would she servant’s; the nor brother’s, her nor watch, own
his produced Morland till reality, or reason on founded it of assurance
then longer moment a doubted have to fact; the ascertained and watch,
and impossible; and incredible, inconceivable, equally been have would
a and hours two no that again, over and over protest, only could she
to on called was Catherine as before, swiftly so off gone ever had half
Isabella; please to even falsehood a tell not could Catherine confirm;
voice, dissenting friend’s her of misery the spared was latter the but
engrossed entirely feelings own Her answer. her for waiting not by
go to obliged herself finding on acute most was wretchedness her her;
conversation moment’s a had had she since ages was It home. directly
things of thousands such had she though and, Catherine; dearest her with
again; together be to never were they if as appeared it her, to say to
utter of eye laughing the and misery, exquisite most of smiles with so,
on. went and adieu friend her bade she despondency,

of idleness busy the all from returned just Allen Mrs. found Catherine
here dear, my “Well, with, greeted immediately was and morning, the
to power than inclination greater no had she which truth a are,” you
airing?” pleasant a had have you hope I “and dispute;

day.” nicer a had have not could we you; thank I ma’am, “Yes,

going.” all your at pleased vastly was she said; Thorpe Mrs. “So

then?” Thorpe, Mrs. seen have “You

met I there and gone, were you as soon as pump-room the to went I “Yes,
hardly was there says She together. talk of deal great a had we and her,
scarce.” uncommonly so is it morning, this market at got be to veal any

acquaintance?” our of else anybody see you “Did

Mrs. met we there and Crescent, the in turn a take to agreed we “Yes;
her.” with walking Tilney Miss and Mr. and Hughes,

you?” to speak they did And indeed? you “Did

seem They hour. an half for together Crescent the along walked we “Yes,
spotted pretty very a in was Tilney Miss people. agreeable very
very dresses always she that learn, can I what by fancy, I and muslin,
family.” the about deal great a me to talked Hughes Mrs. handsomely.

them?” of you tell she did what “And

else.” anything of talked hardly she indeed; deal vast A “Oh!

from?” come they Gloucestershire of part what you tell she “Did

kind good very are they But now. recollect cannot I but did; she “Yes,
she and Drummond, Miss a was Tilney Mrs. rich. very and people, of
large very a had Drummond Miss and schoolfellows; were Hughes Mrs. and
thousand twenty her gave father her married, she when and, fortune;
the all saw Hughes Mrs. wedding-clothes. buy to hundred five and pounds,
warehouse.” the from came they after clothes

Bath?” in Tilney Mrs. and Mr. are “And

recollection, Upon certain. quite not am I but are, they fancy I “Yes,
is; mother the least at dead; both are they notion a have I however,
there me told Hughes Mrs. because dead, is Tilney Mrs. sure am I yes,
daughter his gave Drummond Mr. that pearls of set beautiful very a was
put were they for now, got has Tilney Miss that and wedding-day her on
died.” mother her when her for by

son?” only the partner, my Tilney, Mr. is “And

is; he idea some have I dear; my that, about positive quite be cannot “I
likely and says, Hughes Mrs. man, young fine very a is he however, but,
well.” very do to

that feel to enough heard had she further; no inquired Catherine
most was she that and give, to intelligence real no had Allen Mrs.
with meeting a such missed having in herself unfortunate particularly
circumstance, a such foreseen have she Could sister. and brother both
as and, others; the with out go to her persuaded have should nothing
had she what over think and luck, ill her lament only could she was, it
very been means no by had drive the that her to clear was it till lost,
disagreeable. quite was himself Thorpe John that and pleasant




10 CHAPTER


the at evening the in met all Morlands and Thorpes, Allens, The
an then was there together, sat Isabella and Catherine as and, theatre;
thousand many the of few some utter to latter the for opportunity
the in communication for her within collecting been had which things
heavens! “Oh, them. divided had which time of length immeasurable
on address her was last?” at you got I have Catherine, beloved My
for Morland,” Mr. “Now, her. by sitting and box the entering Catherine’s
word another speak not shall “I side, other the on her to close was he
My it. expect to not you charge I so evening; the of rest the all you to
ask not need I But age? long this been you have how Catherine, sweetest
a in hair your done have really You delightfully. look you for you,
to want you do creature, mischievous you ever; than style heavenly more
you with love in quite is brother my you, assure I everybody? attract
your thing--even settled a is that Tilney--but Mr. for as and already;
makes Bath to back coming his now; attachment his doubt cannot modesty
quite am really I him! see to give I not would What Oh! plain. too it
man young delightful most the is he says mother My impatience. with wild
him introduce must you know; you morning, this him saw she world; the in
assure I sake! heaven’s for about, Look now? house the in he Is me. to
him.” see I till exist hardly can I you,

anywhere.” him see cannot I here; not is “he Catherine, said “No,”

my like you do How him? with acquainted be to never I Am horrid! “Oh,
own my entirely were sleeves the amiss; look not does it think I gown?
brother your Bath; of sick immoderately so get I know, you Do thought.
be to well vastly is it though that, morning this agreeing were I and
found soon We millions. for here live not would we weeks, few a for here
to country the preferring in alike exactly were tastes our that out
was it same, the exactly so were opinions our really, place; other every
I differed; we which in point single a not was There ridiculous! quite
am I thing, sly a such are you world; the for by you had have not would
it.” about other or remark droll some made have would you sure

not.” should I indeed “No,

You yourself. know you than better you know I indeed; would you yes “Oh,
nonsense some or other, each for born seemed we that us told have would
my conception; beyond me distressed have would which kind, that of
by you had have not would I roses; your as red as been have would cheeks
world.” the for

remark a improper so made have not would I injustice; me do you “Indeed
my entered have never would it sure am I besides, and account; any upon
head.”

to evening the of rest the talked and incredulously smiled Isabella
James.

again Tilney Miss meet to endeavouring of resolution Catherine’s
of moment usual the till and morning; next the force full in continued
second a of dread the from alarm some felt she pump-room, the to going
to appeared visitors no occurred, kind that of nothing But prevention.
pump-room, the for time good in off set three all they and them, delay
Mr. place; took conversation and events of course ordinary the where
to gentlemen some joined water, of glass his drinking after Allen,
their of accounts the compare and day the of politics the over talk
new every noticing together, about walked ladies the and newspapers;
the of part female The room. the in bonnet new every almost and face,
in crowd the among appeared Morland, James by attended family, Thorpe
her took immediately Catherine and hour, an of quarter a than less
constant in now was who James, friend. her of side the by place usual
themselves separating and position, similar a maintained attendance,
some for manner that in walked they party, their of rest the from
which, situation a of happiness the doubt to began Catherine till time,
very her gave brother, and friend her to entirely her confining
in engaged always were They either. of notice the in share little
was sentiment their but dispute, lively or discussion sentimental some
with attended vivacity their and voices, whispering such in conveyed
not was opinion supporting Catherine’s though that laughter, much so
give to able never was she other, the or one by for called unfrequently
however length At subject. the of word a heard having not from any,
avowed the by friend, her from herself disengage to empowered was she
just saw joyfully most she whom Tilney, Miss to speaking of necessity
with joined, instantly she whom and Hughes, Mrs. with room the entering
courage had have might she than acquainted, be to determination firmer a
day the of disappointment the by urged been not she had command, to
advances her returned civility, great with her met Tilney Miss before.
as long as together talking continued they and goodwill, equal with
not probability all in though and room; the in remained parties both
not had which either by used expression an nor made, was observation an
in roof, that under before, times of thousands some used and made been
simplicity with spoken being their of merit the yet season, Bath every
uncommon. something be might conceit, personal without and truth, and

of exclamation artless an was dances!” brother your well “How
once at which conversation, their of close the towards Catherine’s
companion. her amused and surprised

well.” very dance does he “Yes, smile. a with replied she “Henry!”

other the engaged was I say me hear to odd very it thought have must “He
engaged been had really I But down. sitting me saw he when evening,
cannot “You bow. only could Tilney Miss Thorpe.” Mr. to day whole the
was I surprised “how silence, moment’s a after Catherine added think,”
away.” gone quite being his of sure so felt I again. him see to

but Bath in was he before, you seeing of pleasure the had Henry “When
us.” for lodgings engage to only came He days. of couple a for

I anywhere, him seeing not course, of and me; to occurred never “That
Monday on with danced he lady young the not Was gone. be must he thought
Smith?” Miss a

Hughes.” Mrs. of acquaintance an “Yes,

pretty?” her think you Do dance. to glad very was she say dare “I

very.” “Not

suppose?” I pump-room, the to comes never “He

father.” my with morning this out rid has he but sometimes; “Yes,

to ready was she if Tilney Miss asked and them, joined now Hughes Mrs.
said soon,” again you seeing of pleasure the have shall I hope “I go.
tomorrow?” ball cotillion the at be you “Shall Catherine.

shall.” certainly we think I we--Yes, “Perhaps

duly was civility This there.” be all shall we for it, of glad am “I
knowledge some with side Tilney’s Miss parted--on they and returned;
the without Catherine’s, on and feelings, acquaintance’s new her of
them. explained having of consciousness smallest

and hopes, her all answered had morning The happy. very home went She
expectation, of object the now was day following the of evening the
the on wear should she head-dress what and gown What good. future the
Dress it. in justified be cannot She concern. chief her became occasion
about solicitude excessive and distinction, frivolous a times all at is
her well; very this all knew Catherine aim. own its destroys often it
Christmas the only subject the on lecture a her read had aunt great
debating night Wednesday on minutes ten awake lay she yet and before;
the but nothing and muslin, tamboured her and spotted her between
evening. the for one new a buying her prevented time the of shortness
uncommon, not though great judgment, in error an been have would This
rather brother a own, her than rather sex other the of one which from
of aware be can only man for her, warned have might aunt, great a than
to mortifying be would It gown. new a towards man of insensibility the
little how understand to made be they could ladies, many of feelings the
attire; their in new or costly is what by affected is man of heart the
how and muslin, their of texture the by biased is it little how
sprigged, the spotted, the towards tenderness peculiar of unsusceptible
alone. satisfaction own her for fine is Woman jackonet. the or mull, the
for better the her like will woman no more, the her admire will man No
of something a and former, the for enough are fashion and Neatness it.
not But latter. the to endearing most be will impropriety or shabbiness
Catherine. of tranquillity the troubled reflections grave these of one

different very feelings with evening Thursday on rooms the entered She
been then had She before. Monday the thither her attended had what from
to anxious chiefly now was and Thorpe, to engagement her in exulting
could she though for again; her engage should he lest sight, his avoid
to time third a her ask should Tilney Mr. that expect not dared not,
Every less. nothing in centred all plans and hopes, wishes, her dance,
every for moment, critical this in heroine my for feel may lady young
have All agitation. same the known other or time some at has lady young
the from danger in be, to themselves believed have all least at or been,
anxious been have all and avoid; to wished they whom someone of pursuit
as soon As please. to wished they whom someone of attentions the for
fidgeted she began; agony Catherine’s Thorpes, the by joined were they
possible as much as herself hid her, towards came Thorpe John if about
The him. hear to not pretended her to spoke he when and view, his from
nothing saw she and beginning, country-dancing the over, were cotillions
Tilneys. the of

am I “but Isabella, whispered Catherine,” dear my frightened, be not “Do
it positively declare I again. brother your with dance to going really
you but himself, of ashamed be to ought he him tell I shocking. quite is
and creature, dear my haste, Make countenance. in us keep must John and
moment.” a in back be will he but off, walked just is John us. to come

walked others The answer. to inclination nor time neither had Catherine
lost. for up herself gave she and view, in still was Thorpe John away,
kept she him, expect or observe to however, appear, not might she That
her for self-condemnation a and fan; her on fixed intently eyes her
with meet even should they crowd a such among that supposing in folly,
mind, her through passed just had time, reasonable any in Tilneys the
dance, to solicited again and addressed herself found suddenly she when
she motion ready and eyes sparkling what With himself. Tilney Mr. by
went she heart of flutter a pleasing how with and request, his granted
as and, escape, To imagined. easily be may set, the to him with
so asked, be to and Thorpe, John escape narrowly so believed, she
sought had he if as Tilney, Mr. by asked her, joining his on immediately
any supply could life that her to appear not did purpose!--it on her
felicity. greater

a of possession quiet the into themselves worked they had Scarcely
stood who Thorpe, John by claimed was attention her when however, place,
of meaning the is “What he. said Morland!” Miss “Heyday, her. behind
together.” dance to were I and you thought I this?

me.” asked never you for so, think should you wonder “I

the into came I as soon as you asked I Jove! by one, good a is “That
round, turned I when but again, you ask to going just was I and room,
sake the for came only I trick! shabby cursed a is This gone! were you
ever me to engaged were you believe firmly I and you, with dancing of
the in waiting were you while you asked I remember, I Yes; Monday. since
acquaintance my all telling been I have here And cloak. your for lobby
and room; the in girl prettiest the with dance to going was I that
me quiz will they else, somebody with up standing you see they when
famously.”

that.” as description a such after me, of think never will they no; “Oh,

for room the of out them kick will I not, do they if heavens, “By
his satisfied Catherine there?” you have chap What blockheads.
figure good A him. know not do “Hum--I repeated. he “Tilney,” curiosity.
friend a is Here horse? a want he Does together. put well man; a of
A anybody. suit would that sell to one got has Fletcher, Sam mine, of
minds fifty had I guineas. forty road--only the for animal clever famous
horse good a buy to always maxims my of one is it for myself, it buy to
not would it purpose, my answer not would it but one; with meet I when
I hunter. good real a for money any give would I field. the for do
take not would I backed. were ever that best the now, three have
in house a get to mean I and Fletcher them. for guineas hundred eight
d--uncomfortable, so is It season. next the against Leicestershire,
inn.” an at living

Catherine’s weary could he which by sentence last the was This
of pressure resistless the by off borne then just was he for attention,
said, and near, drew now partner Her ladies. passing of string long a
with stayed he had patience, of out me put have would gentleman “That
attention the withdraw to business no has He longer. minute a half you
mutual of contract a into entered have We me. from partner my of
agreeableness our all and evening, an of space the for agreeableness
themselves fasten can Nobody time. that for other each to solely belongs
other. the of rights the injuring without one, of notice the on
and Fidelity marriage. of emblem an as country-dance a consider I
not do who men those and both; of duties principal the are complaisance
partners the with business no have themselves, marry or dance to choose
neighbours.” their of wives or

things!” different very such are they “But

together.” compared be cannot they think you “--That

keep and go must but part, never can marry that People not. sure be “To
a in other each opposite stand only dance that People together. house
hour.” an half for room long

that in Taken dancing. and matrimony of definition your is such “And
could I think I but striking; not is resemblance their certainly, light
the has man both, in that allow, will You view. a such in them place
both, in that refusal; of power the only woman choice, of advantage
of advantage the for formed woman, and man between engagement an is it
each to exclusively belong they into, entered once when that and each;
each duty, their is it that dissolution; its of moment the till other
had she or he that wishing for cause no other the give to endeavour to
own their keep to interest best their and elsewhere, themselves bestowed
neighbours, their of perfections the towards wandering from imaginations
You else. anyone with off better been have should they that fancying or
this?” all allow will

still but well; very sounds this all it, state you as sure, be to “Yes,
same the in all at them upon look cannot I different. very so are they
them.” to belong duties same the think nor light,

man the marriage, In difference. a is certainly there respect, one “In
make to woman the woman, the of support the for provide to supposed is
smile. to is she and purvey, to is he man; the to agreeable home the
the agreeableness, the changed; exactly are duties their dancing, in But
the and fan the furnishes she while him, from expected are compliance
which duties of difference the was suppose, I That, water. lavender
comparison.” of incapable conditions the rendering as you, struck

that.” of thought never I indeed, “No,

This observe. must I however, thing, One loss. a at quite am I “Then
any disallow totally You alarming. rather is side your on disposition
your that infer thence not I may and obligations; the in similarity
your as strict so not are state dancing the of duties the of notions
who gentleman the if that fear to reason not I Have wish? might partner
to were gentleman other any if or return, to were now just you to spoke
with conversing from you restrain to nothing be would there you, address
chose?” you as long as him

he if that brother’s, my of friend particular very a such is Thorpe “Mr.
young three hardly are there but again; him to talk must I me, to talks
with.” acquaintance any have I that him besides room the in men

alas!” Alas, security? only my be to that is “And

anybody, know not do I if for better; a have cannot you sure am I “Nay,
to want not do I besides, and, them; to talk to me for impossible is it
anybody.” to talk

proceed shall I and having; worth security a me given have you “Now
of honour the had I when as agreeable as Bath find you Do courage. with
before?” inquiry the making

indeed.” so, quite--more “Yes,

proper the at it of tired be to forget will you or care, Take so! “More
weeks.” six of end the at tired be to ought You time.

months.” six here stay to were I if tired, be should I think not do “I

finds everybody so and variety, little has London, with compared “Bath,
but enough; pleasant is Bath allow I weeks, six ‘For year. every out
be would You world.’ the in place tiresome most the is it that, beyond
winter, every regularly come who descriptions, all of people by so told
because last at away go and twelve, or ten into weeks six their lengthen
longer.” no stay to afford can they

to go who those and themselves, for judge must people other “Well,
retired small a in live who I, But Bath. of nothing think may London
place a such in sameness greater find never can country, the in village
a amusements, of variety a are here for home; own my in than this as
know can I which long, day all done and seen be to things of variety
there.” of nothing

country.” the of fond not are “You

But happy. very been always and there, lived always have I am. I “Yes,
Bath a in than life country a in sameness more much is there certainly
another.” like exactly is country the in day One life.

country.” the in rationally more much so time your spend you then “But

I?” “Do

not?” you “Do

difference.” much is there believe not do “I

long.” day all amusement of only pursuit in are you “Here

about walk I it. of much so find not do I home--only at am I so “And
every in people of variety a see I here but there; do I so and here,
Allen.” Mrs. on call and go only can I there and street,

amused. much very was Tilney Mr.

of picture a “What repeated. he Allen!” Mrs. on call and go “Only
you again, abyss this into sink you when However, poverty! intellectual
that all of and Bath, of talk to able be will You say. to more have will
here.” did you

Mrs. to again of talk to something of want in be never shall I Yes. “Oh!
of talking be always shall I believe really I else. anybody or Allen,
but could I If much. very so it like do again--I home at am I when Bath,
be should I suppose I here, them of rest the and Mamma, and Papa have
delightful--and quite is brother) eldest (my coming James’s happy! too
so got just are we family very the that out turns it as especially
be ever can Who Oh! already. friends intimate his are with intimate
Bath?” of tired

do. you as it to sort every of feelings fresh such bring who those “Not
deal good a are friends intimate and brothers, and mammas, and papas But
of relish honest the Bath--and of frequenters the of most to by, gone
Here them.” with past is sights, everyday and plays, and balls
too now becoming dance the of demands the closed, conversation their
attention. divided a for importunate

perceived Catherine set, the of bottom the reaching their after Soon
the among stood who gentleman a by regarded earnestly be to herself
man, handsome very a was He partner. her behind immediately lookers-on,
of vigour the past not but bloom, the past aspect, commanding a of
presently him saw she her, towards directed still eye his with and life;
and notice, his by Confused whisper. familiar a in Tilney Mr. address
in wrong something by excited being its of fear the from blushing
the so, did she while But head. her away turned she appearance, her
that see “I said, nearer, coming partner, her and retreated, gentleman
name, your knows gentleman That asked. been just have I what guess you
father.” my Tilney, General is It his. know to right a have you and

expressing “Oh!” an was it “Oh!”--but only was answer Catherine’s
on reliance perfect and words, his to attention needful: everything
now eye her did admiration strong and interest real With truth. their
a handsome “How and crowd, the through moved he as general, the follow
remark. secret her was are!” they family

source new a concluded, evening the before Tilney Miss with chatting In
since walk country a taken never had She her. to arose felicity of
frequented commonly the all whom to Tilney, Miss Bath. in arrival her
all her made which terms in them of spoke familiar, were environs
might she that fearing openly her on and too; them know to eagerness
sister and brother the by proposed was it her, with go to nobody find
like shall “I other. or morning some walk, a in join should they that
put us let not do and world; the in anything “beyond cried, she it,”
a only with to, agreed readily was This tomorrow.” go us off--let it
sure was Catherine which rain, not did it that Tilney’s, Miss of proviso
Pulteney in her for call to were they o’clock, twelve At not. would it
to speech parting her was o’clock,” “Remember--twelve and Street;
friend, established more her older, her other, her Of friend. new her
fortnight’s a enjoyed had she worth and fidelity whose of Isabella,
though Yet, evening. the during anything saw scarcely she experience,
cheerfully she happiness, her with acquainted her make to longing
away, early rather them took which Allen, Mr. of wish the to submitted
the all chair her in danced she as her, within danced spirits her and
home. way




11 CHAPTER


only making sun the morning, sober-looking very a brought morrow The
most everything it from augured Catherine and appear, to efforts few a
year, the in early so morning bright A wishes. her to favourable
foretold one cloudy a but rain, to turn generally would allowed, she
for Allen Mr. to applied She advanced. day the as improvement
and skies own his having not Allen, Mr. but hopes, her of confirmation
sunshine. of promise absolute any giving declined him, about barometer
positive. more was opinion Allen’s Mrs. and Allen, Mrs. to applied She
the if day, fine very a being its of world the in doubt no had “She
out.” keep sun the and off, go only would clouds

the upon rain small of specks few a however, o’clock, eleven about At
it believe do I dear, “Oh! and eye, watchful Catherine’s caught windows
tone. desponding most a in her from broke wet,” be will

Allen. Mrs. said be,” would it how thought “I

to come may it perhaps “but Catherine; sighed today,” me for walk “No
twelve.” before up hold may it or nothing,

dirty.” so be will it dear, my then, but may, it “Perhaps

dirt.” mind never I signify; not will That “Oh!

dirt.” mind never you know “I placidly, very friend her replied “No,”

as Catherine, said faster!” and faster on comes “It pause, short a After
window. a at watching stood she

wet.” very be will streets the raining, keeps it If indeed. does it “So

an of sight the hate I How already. up umbrellas four are “There
umbrella!”

chair a take rather much would I carry. to things disagreeable are “They
time.” any at

be would it convinced so felt I morning! nice-looking a such was “It
dry!”

in people few very be will There indeed. so thought have would “Anybody
put will Allen Mr. hope I morning. the all rains it if pump-room, the
had he for not, will he say dare I but goes, he when greatcoat his on
wonder I greatcoat; a in out walk than world the in anything do rather
comfortable.” so be must it it, dislike should he

five every went Catherine heavy. not though continued--fast, rain The
still it if that, return each on threatening clock, the to minutes
as matter the up give would she minutes, five another raining on kept
be not will “You rained. still it and twelve, struck clock The hopeless.
dear.” my go, to able

after quarter a till up it give not shall I yet. despair quite not do “I
think do I and up, clear to it for day of time the just is This twelve.
and twelve, after minutes twenty is it There, lighter. little a looks it
here weather such had we That Oh! entirely. up it give shall I now
of south the and Tuscany in least at or Udolpho, at had they as
weather!” beautiful died!--such Aubin St. poor that night France!--the

weather the to attention anxious Catherine’s when twelve, past half At
the amendment, its from merit any claim longer no could she and over was
by quite her took sunshine of gleam A clear. to voluntarily began sky
instantly she and parting, were clouds the round; looked she surprise;
appearance. happy the encourage and over watch to window the to returned
succeed, would afternoon bright a that certain it made more minutes Ten
it thought “always had who Allen, Mrs. of opinion the justified and
friends, her expect still might Catherine whether But up.” clear would
venture, to Tilney Miss for rain much too been not had there whether
question. a be yet must

the to husband her accompany to Allen Mrs. for dirty too was It
barely had Catherine and himself, by off set accordingly he pump-room;
approach the by claimed was notice her when street the down him watched
that people three same the containing carriages, open two same the of
back. mornings few a much so her surprised had

for coming are They declare! I Thorpe, Mr. and brother, my “Isabella,
Miss know you for indeed, go cannot go--I not shall I perhaps--but me
soon was Thorpe John it. to agreed Allen Mrs. call.” still may Tilney
he stairs the on for sooner, yet them with was voice his and them, with
haste!” Make haste! “Make quick. be to Morland Miss to out calling was
no is moment--there this hat your on “Put door. the open threw he as
Allen?” Mrs. do, d’ye How Bristol. to going are lost--we be to time

with go cannot I however, But, off? way great a that not Is Bristol! “To
moment.” every friends some expect I engaged; am I because today, you
Mrs. all; at reason no as down talked vehemently course of was This
give to in, walked others two the and him, second to on called was Allen
We delightful? this not is Catherine, sweetest “My assistance. their
me and brother your thank to are You drive. heavenly most a have shall
verily I breakfast-time, at heads our into darted it scheme; the for
ago hours two off been have should we and instant; same the at believe
signify, not does it But rain. detestable this for been not had it if
such in am I Oh! delightfully. do shall we and moonlight, are nights the
much So quiet! and air country little a of thoughts the at ecstasies
Clifton to directly drive shall We Rooms. Lower the to going than better
it, for time is there if over, is dinner as soon as and, there; dine and
Kingsweston.” to on go

Morland. said much,” so do to able being our doubt “I

times ten do to able be shall “We Thorpe. cried fellow!” croaking “You
can we else anything and too, Castle Blaize and Aye, Kingsweston! more.
go.” not will she says sister your is here but of; hear

that?” is “What Catherine. cried Castle!” “Blaize

to time any at miles fifty going England--worth in place finest “The
see.”

castle?” old an castle, a really it is “What,

kingdom.” the in oldest “The

of?” reads one what like it is “But

same.” very “Exactly--the

galleries?” long and towers there really--are now “But

dozens.” “By

go.” cannot cannot--I I but it; see to like should I “Then

mean?” you do what creature, beloved My go! “Not

Isabella’s of fearful spoke, she as down because”--looking go, cannot “I
a take to me on call to brother her and Tilney Miss expect smile--“I
now, but rained; it only twelve, at come to promised They walk. country
soon.” here be will they say dare I fine, so is it as

I Street, Broad into turned we as “for, Thorpe; cried indeed,” they “Not
chestnuts?” bright with phaeton a drive not he them--does saw

indeed.” know not do “I

danced you man the of talking are You him. saw I does; he know I “Yes,
you?” not are night, last with

“Yes.”

a driving Road, Lansdown the up turn moment that at him saw I “Well,
girl.” smart-looking

indeed?” you “Did

got have to seemed he and directly, again him knew soul; my upon “Did
too.” cattle pretty very some

a for dirty too be would it thought they suppose I But odd! very is “It
walk.”

Walk! life. my in dirt much so saw never I for might, they well “And
the dirty so been not has It fly! could you than walk more no could You
everywhere.” ankle-deep is it winter; whole

idea an form cannot you Catherine, dearest “My it: corroborated Isabella
now.” going refuse cannot you go; must you come, dirt; the of

go we May it? over all go we may but castle; the see to like should “I
rooms?” of suite every into and staircase, every up

corner.” and hole every yes, “Yes,

dryer, is it till hour an for out gone be only should they if then, “But
by?” and by call and

Tilney heard I for that, of danger no is there easy, yourself “Make
were they that horseback, on by passing just was who man a to hallooing
Rocks.” Wick as far as going

Allen?” Mrs. go, I Shall will. I “Then

dear.” my please, you as “Just

Mrs. cry. general the was go,” to her persuade must you Allen, “Mrs.
you “suppose she, said dear,” my “Well, it: to inattentive not was Allen
off. were they minutes two in And go.”

very a in were carriage, the into got she as feelings, Catherine’s
great one of loss the for regret between divided state; unsettled
in equal its almost another, enjoying soon of hope the and pleasure,
had Tilneys the think not could She kind. in unlike however degree,
engagement, their up giving readily so in her, by well quite acted
later hour an but now was It excuse. of message any her sending without
of spite in and, walk; their of beginning the for on fixed time the than
course the in dirt of accumulation prodigious the of heard had she what
that thinking help observation own her from not could she hour, that of
herself feel To inconvenience. little very with gone have might they
of delight the hand, other the On painful. very was them by slighted
Blaize represented fancy her as Udolpho, like edifice an exploring
for her console might as good of counterpoise a such was be, to Castle
anything. almost

Place, Laura through and Street, Pulteney down briskly passed They
she and horse, his to talked Thorpe words. many of exchange the without
phaetons arches, broken and promises broken on turns, by meditated,
Argyle entered they As trap-doors. and Tilneys hangings, false and
companion, her from address this by roused was she however, Buildings,
by?” went she as hard so you at looked who girl that is “Who

Where?” “Who?

now.” sight of out almost be must pavement--she right-hand the “On
arm, brother’s her on leaning Tilney Miss saw and round looked Catherine
her. at back looking both them saw She street. the down slowly walking
it Tilney; Miss is “it cried; impatiently she Thorpe,” Mr. stop, “Stop,
will I stop, Stop, gone? were they me tell you could How indeed. is
speak? she did purpose what to But them.” to go and moment this out get
had who Tilneys, the trot; brisker a into horse his lashed only Thorpe
the round sight of out moment a in were her, after look to ceased soon
whisked herself was she moment another in and Place, Laura of corner
another of length the during and however, Still, marketplace. the into
I Thorpe. Mr. stop, pray “Pray, stop. to him entreated she street,
Mr. But Tilney.” Miss to back go must I on. go not will I on. go cannot
odd made horse, his encouraged whip, his smacked laughed, only Thorpe
having was, she as vexed and angry Catherine, and on; drove and noises,
submit. and point the up give to obliged was away, getting of power no
so, me deceive you could “How spared. not were however, reproaches, Her
Lansdown the up driving them saw you that say you could How Thorpe? Mr.
think must They world. the for so happen it had have not would I Road?
word! a saying without too, them, by go To me! of rude so strange, so it
nor Clifton, at pleasure no have shall I am; I vexed how know not do You
now, out get rather, times thousand ten rather, had I else. anything in
a in out driving them saw you say you could How them. to back walk and
never had he declared stoutly, very himself defended Thorpe phaeton?”
the up give hardly would and life, his in alike much so men two seen
himself. Tilney been having its of point

very be to likely not was over, was subject this when even drive, Their
in been had it what longer no was complaisance Catherine’s agreeable.
were replies her and reluctantly, listened She airing. former their
still she that, towards comfort; only her remained Castle Blaize short.
of disappointed be than rather though pleasure; with intervals at looked
the by of ill thought be than rather especially and walk, promised the
its which happiness the all up given have willingly would she Tilneys,
of suite long a through progress a of happiness supply--the could walls
though furniture, magnificent of remains the exhibiting rooms, lofty
way their in stopped being of happiness deserted--the years many for now
having of even or door; grated low, a by vaults, winding narrow, along
and wind, of gust sudden a by extinguished lamp, only their lamp, their
on proceeded they meanwhile, the In darkness. total in left being of
town the of view within were and mischance, any without journey their
his made them, behind was who Morland, from halloo a when Keynsham, of
close came then others The matter. the was what know to up, pull friend
back, go better had “We said, Morland and conversation, for enough
as well as so thinks sister your today; on go to late too is it Thorpe;
little very Street, Pulteney from coming hour an exactly been have We I.
to more eight least at have we suppose, I and, miles; seven than more
much had We late. too deal great a out set We do. never will It go.
round.” turn and day, another till off it put better

instantly and angrily; rather Thorpe replied me,” to one all is “It
Bath. to back way their on were they horse, his turning

soon he said drive,” to d--beast a such got not had brother your “If
have would horse My well. very it done have might “we afterwards,
have I and himself, to left if hour, the within Clifton to trotted
broken-winded cursed that to in him pulling with arm my broke almost
his of gig and horse a keeping not for fool a is Morland pace. jade’s
own.”

not could he sure am I “for warmly, Catherine said not,” is he “No,
it.” afford

it?” afford he cannot why “And

enough.” money not has he “Because

that?” is fault whose “And

loud, the in something said then Thorpe of.” know I that “Nobody’s,
a being its about recourse, often had he which to way incoherent
not could money in rolled who people if that and miserly; be to d--thing
even not did Catherine which could, who know not did he things, afford
the been have to was what of Disappointed understand. to endeavour
disposed less and less was she disappointment, first her for consolation
they and so; companion her find to or herself agreeable be to either
words. twenty speaking her without Street Pulteney to returned

lady and gentleman a that her told footman the house, the entered she As
off; setting her after minutes few a her for inquired and called had
had lady the Thorpe, Mr. with out gone was she them told he when that,
no, saying his on and her; for left been had message any whether asked
away. went and her, about none had she said but card, a for felt had
slowly walked Catherine tidings, heart-rending these over Pondering
hearing on who, Allen, Mr. by met was she them of head the At upstairs.
so had brother your glad am “I said, return, speedy their of reason the
scheme.” wild strange, a was It back. come are you glad am I sense; much

disturbed was Catherine Thorpe’s. at together evening the spent all They
in commerce, of pool a find to seemed Isabella but spirits; of out and
a Morland, with partnership private by shared, she which of fate the
Clifton. at inn an of air country and quiet the for equivalent good very
more spoken was Rooms Lower the at being not in too, satisfaction, Her
glad How there! going are that creatures poor the pity I “How once. than
ball full a be will it whether wonder I them! amongst not am I that am I
for there be not would I yet. dancing begun not have They not! or
then and now evening an have to delightful so is It world. the all
the know I ball. good very a be not will it say dare I oneself. to
I But is. that everybody pity I sure am I there. be not will Mitchells
you sure am I you? not do it, at be to long you Morland, Mr. say, dare
say dare I you. on restraint a be here anybody let not do pray Well, do.
such of yourselves think men you but you; without well very do could we
consequence.”

in wanting being of Isabella accused have almost could Catherine
they did little very so sorrows, her and herself towards tenderness
she comfort the was inadequate very so and mind, her on dwell to appear
“You whispered. she creature,” dearest my dull, so be not “Do offered.
but sure; be to shocking, amazingly was It heart. my break quite will
punctual? more they not were Why blame. to entirely were Tilneys the
I and John sure am I signify? that did what but indeed, dirty, was It
a where anything, through going mind never I it. minded have not should
same; the just is John and disposition, my is that concerned; is friend
you hand delightful a What heavens! Good feelings. strong amazing has he
fifty would I life! my in happy so was never I vow! I Kings, got! have
myself.” than them have should you rather times

the is which couch, sleepless the to heroine my dismiss may I now And
with wet and thorns with strewed pillow a to portion; heroine’s true
night’s good another get she if herself, think she may lucky And tears.
months. three next the of course the in rest




12 CHAPTER


harm any be there “will morning, next the Catherine said Allen,” “Mrs.
have I till easy be not shall I today? Tilney Miss on calling my in
everything.” explained

always Tilney Miss gown; white a on put only dear; my means, all by “Go,
white.” wears

more was equipped, properly being and complied, cheerfully Catherine
inform might she that pump-room, the at be to ever than impatient
were they believed she though for lodgings, Tilney’s General of herself
Allen’s Mrs. and house, the of certain not was she Street, Milsom in
she Street Milsom To doubtful. more it made only convictions wavering
hastened number, the in perfect herself made having and directed, was
her explain visit, her pay to heart beating a and steps eager with away
and church-yard, the through lightly tripping forgiven; be and conduct,
to obliged be not might she that eyes, her away turning resolutely
to reason had she who, family, dear her and Isabella beloved her see
any without house the reached She by. hard shop a in were believe,
for inquired and door, the at knocked number, the at looked impediment,
not was but home, at be to Tilney Miss believed man The Tilney. Miss
her gave She name? her up send to pleased be she Would certain. quite
did which look a with and returned, servant the minutes few a In card.
Miss that for mistaken, been had he said words, his confirm quite not
left mortification, of blush a with Catherine, out. walked was Tilney
and home, at was Tilney Miss that persuaded almost felt She house. the
street, the down retired she as and her; admit to offended much too
in windows, drawing-room the at glance one withhold not could
the At them. at appeared one no but there, her seeing of expectation
a at not then, and again, back looked she however, street, the of bottom
was She herself. Tilney Miss saw she door, the from issuing but window,
father, her be to believed Catherine whom gentleman, a by followed
deep in Catherine, Buildings. Edgar’s towards up turned they and
herself angry be almost could She way. her on proceeded mortification,
she sensation; resentful the checked she but incivility; angry such at
hers as offence an such how not knew She ignorance. own her remembered
degree a what to politeness, worldly of laws the by classed be might
of rigours what to nor lead, propriety with might it unforgivingness of
amenable. her make justly might it return in rudeness

the with going not of thoughts some even had she humbled, and Dejected
they that confessed be must it but night; that theatre the to others
first the in recollected, soon she for continuance, long of not were
the in and, home; at staying for excuse any without was she that place,
theatre the To see. to much very wanted she play a was it that second,
her; please or plague to appeared Tilneys no went; all they accordingly
fondness a family, the of perfections many the amongst that, feared she
were they because was it perhaps but ranked; be to not was plays for
she which stage, London the of performances finer the to habituated
kind the of else everything rendered authority, Isabella’s on knew,
pleasure; of expectation own her in deceived not was She horrid.” “quite
during her observing one, no that care her suspended well so comedy the
about wretchedness any had she supposed have would acts, four first the
Mr. of view sudden the however, fifth, the of beginning the On her.
box, opposite the in party a joining father, his and Tilney Henry
excite longer no could stage The distress. and anxiety to her recalled
look other Every attention. whole her keep longer merriment--no genuine
the for and, box; opposite the towards directed was average an upon
without Tilney, Henry watch thus she did scenes, entire two of space
of suspected be he could longer No eye. his catch to able once being
stage the from withdrawn never was notice his play; a for indifference
her, towards look did he however, length, At scenes. whole two during
attended observance continued no smile, No bow! a such bowed--but he and
direction. former their to returned immediately were eyes his it;
to round run have almost could she miserable; restlessly was Catherine
Feelings explanation. her hear to him forced and sat he which in box the
her considering of instead her; possessed heroic than natural rather
proudly of condemnation--instead ready this by injured dignity own
him towards resentment her show to innocence, conscious in resolving,
trouble the all him to leave to it, of doubt a harbour could who
by only past the on him enlighten to and explanation, an seeking of
herself to took else--she somebody with flirting or sight, his avoiding
only was and appearance, its of least at or misconduct, of shame the all
cause. its explaining of opportunity an for eager

be to longer no was Tilney fell--Henry curtain concluded--the play The
he perhaps and remained, father his but sat, hitherto had he where seen
minutes few a in right; was She box. their to round coming now be might
spoke rows, thinning then the through way his making and, appeared, he
such with Not friend. her and Allen Mrs. to politeness calm like with
been have I Tilney, Mr. “Oh! latter: the by answered he was calmness
thought have must You apologies. my make and you, to speak to wild quite
Allen? Mrs. it, was fault, own my not was it indeed but rude; so me
a in out gone were sister his and Tilney Mr. that me tell they not Did
times thousand ten had I But do? I could what then And together? phaeton
Allen?” Mrs. I, not had now you; with been have rather

reply. Allen’s Mrs. was gown,” my tumble you dear, “My

it away; thrown not was did, it as sole standing however, assurance, Her
and countenance, his into smile natural more cordial, more a brought
reserve: affected little a only retained which tone a in replied he
walk pleasant a us wishing for rate any at you to obliged much were “We
back look to as kind so were you Street: Argyle in you passing our after
purpose.” on

such of thought never I walk; pleasant a you wish not did I indeed “But
to out called I stop; to earnestly so Thorpe Mr. begged I but thing; a
were You not--Oh! did Allen, Mrs. now, you; saw I ever as soon as him
stopped, have only would Thorpe Mr. if and, did; I indeed but there; not
you.” after run and out jumped have would I

a such to insensible be could who world the in Henry a there Is
he smile, sweeter yet a With not. was least at Tilney Henry declaration?
and regret, concern, sister’s his of said be need that everything said
not was Tilney Miss say not Do “Oh! honour. Catherine’s on dependence
see not would she for was; she know I “because Catherine, cried angry,”
next the house the of out walk her saw I called; I when morning this me
Perhaps affronted. not was I but hurt, was I it; leaving my after minute
there.” been had I know not did you

she and Eleanor, from it of heard I but time; the at within not was “I
such of reason the explain to you, see to since ever wishing been has
than more nothing was It well. as it do can I perhaps but incivility;
being he and out, walk to preparing just were father--they my that
her of point a off--made put it have to caring not and time, for hurried
vexed, much very was She you. assure do I all, was That denied. being
possible.” as soon as apology her make to meant and

something a yet information, this by eased greatly was mind Catherine’s
question, following the sprang which from remained, solicitude of
the to distressing rather though itself, in artless thoroughly
your than generous less you were why Tilney, Mr. “But, gentleman:
could and intentions, good my in confidence such felt she If sister?
take to ready so be you should why mistake, a only be to it suppose
offence?”

offence!” take I “Me!

were you box, the into came you when look, your by sure am I “Nay,
angry.”

right.” no have could I angry! “I

He face.” your saw who right no had you thought have would nobody “Well,
play. the of talking and him, for room make to her asking by replied

for agreeable too only was and time, some them with remained He
parted, they Before away. went he when contented be to Catherine
soon as taken be should walk projected the that agreed was it however,
box, their quitting his of misery the aside setting and, possible; as
the in creatures happiest the of one left whole, the upon was, she
world.

that surprise some with observed had she other, each to talking While
minutes ten for house the of part same the in never was who Thorpe, John
felt she and Tilney; General with conversation in engaged was together,
herself perceive could she thought she when surprise than more something
say to have they could What discourse. and attention their of object the
found she appearance: her like not did Tilney General feared She her? of
rather daughter, his to admittance her preventing his in implied was it
know to Thorpe Mr. came “How minutes. few a walk own his postpone than
her to out them pointed she as inquiry, anxious her was father?” your
military every like father, his but it; about nothing knew He companion.
acquaintance. large very a had man,

getting in them assist to came Thorpe over, was entertainment the When
while and, gallantry; his of object immediate the was Catherine out.
had which inquiry the prevented he chair, a for lobby the in waited they
in asking, by tongue, her of tip the to almost heart her from travelled
General with talking him seen had she whether manner, consequential a
active--looks Stout, soul! my upon fellow, old fine a is “He Tilney:
a you: assure I him, for regard great a have I son. his as young as
lived.” ever as fellow of sort good gentleman-like,

him?” know to you came how “But

I know. not do I that town about much people few are There him! “Know
the today again face his knew I and Bedford; the at forever him met have
have, we players best the of One billiard-room. the into came he moment
almost was I though together, touch little a had we and by; the by
if and, me; against four to five were odds the first: at him of afraid
in made was ever perhaps that strokes cleanest the of one made not had I
understand you make not could I exactly--but ball his took world--I this
rich as fellow; fine very A him. beat did I however, table; a without it
famous gives he say dare I him; with dine to like should I Jew. a as
by Yes, You. of? talking been have we think you do what But dinners.
Bath.” in girl finest the you thinks general the And heavens!

so?” say you can How Nonsense! “Oh!

done, voice--“well his said?”--lowering I think you do what “And
mind.” your of quite am I I; said general,

by than admiration his by gratified less much was who Catherine, Here
Thorpe, Allen. Mr. by away called be to sorry not was Tilney’s, General
continued it, entered she till and, chair, her to her see would however,
to him entreating her of spite in flattery, delicate of kind same the
done. have

very was her, admire should disliking, of instead Tilney, General That
the of one not was there that thought joyfully she and delightful;
much more, done had evening The meet. to fear now need she whom family
expected. been have could than her for more,




13 CHAPTER


now have Saturday and Friday, Thursday, Wednesday, Tuesday, Monday,
hopes its day, each of events the reader; the before review in passed
stated, separately been have pleasures, and mortifications fears, and
the close and described, be to remain now only Sunday of pangs the and
on and relinquished, not deferred, been had scheme Clifton The week.
a In again. forward brought was it day, this of Crescent afternoon’s the
had whom of former the James, and Isabella between consultation private
anxiously less no latter the and going, upon heart her set particularly
weather the provided that, agreed was it her, pleasing upon his placed
and morning; following the on place take should party the fair, were
time. good in home at be to order in early, very off set to were they
Catherine secured, approbation Thorpe’s and determined, thus affair The
minutes few a for them left had She it. of apprised be to remained only
as and completed, was plan the interval that In Tilney. Miss to speak to
the of instead but demanded; was agreement her again, came she as soon
very was grave, looked Catherine Isabella, by expected acquiescence gay
her kept have to ought which engagement The go. not could but sorry,
to her for impossible it make would attempt former the in joining from
take to Tilney Miss with settled moment that had She now. them accompany
would she and determined, quite was it tomorrow; walk proposed their
retract should and must she that But retract. account, any upon not,
Clifton to go must they Thorpes; the both of cry eager the instantly was
off put to nothing be would it her, without go not would they tomorrow,
refusal. a of hear not would they and longer, day one for walk mere a
I Isabella. me, urge not “Do subdued. not but distressed, was Catherine
same The nothing. availed This go.” cannot I Tilney. Miss to engaged am
would they and go, should she go, must she again; her assailed arguments
you that Tilney Miss tell to easy so be would “It refusal. a of hear not
put to beg only must and engagement, prior a of reminded been just had
Tuesday.” till walk the off

prior no been has There it. do not could I easy. be not would it “No,
calling urgent, more and more only became Isabella But engagement.”
most the by her addressing manner, affectionate most the in her on
not would Catherine sweetest dearest, her sure was She names. endearing
so her loved who friend a to request trifling a such refuse seriously
so heart, a feeling so have to Catherine beloved her knew She dearly.
all But loved. she those by persuaded easily so be to temper, a sweet
pained though and right, the in be to herself felt Catherine vain; in
to it allow not could supplication, flattering such tender, such by
her reproached She method. another tried then Isabella her. influence
so her known had she though Tilney, Miss for affection more having with
grown being with friends, oldest and best her for than while, a little
being help cannot “I herself. towards short, in indifferent, and cold
who I, strangers, for slighted myself see I when Catherine, jealous,
not is it placed, are affections my once When excessively! so you love
are feelings my believe I But them. change to anything of power the in
peace; own my for strong too are they sure am I anybody’s; than stronger
me cut does strangers by friendship your in supplanted myself see to and
else.” everything up swallow to seem Tilneys These own. I quick, the to

the it Was unkind. and strange equally reproach this thought Catherine
others? of notice the to feelings her expose to thus friend a of part
of regardless selfish, and ungenerous her to appeared Isabella
her crossed ideas painful These gratification. own her but everything
applied had meanwhile, the in Isabella, nothing. said she though mind,
sight, a such at miserable Morland, and eyes; her to handkerchief her
any out stand cannot you think I Catherine. “Nay, saying, help not could
friend--I a such oblige to and much; not is sacrifice The now. longer
refuse.” still you if unkind, quite you think shall

and her, against siding openly brother’s her of time first the was This
they If compromise. a proposed she displeasure, his avoid to anxious
easily might they which Tuesday, till scheme their off put only would
and them, with go could she themselves, on only depended it as do,
immediate the was no!” no, “No, But satisfied. be then might everybody
not might he that know not did Thorpe for be, not could “that answer;
and more; no do could but sorry, was Catherine Tuesday.” on town to go
of voice a in who Isabella, by broken was which ensued, silence short a
party. the of end an is there then well, “Very said, resentment cold
would I woman. only the be cannot I cannot. I go, not does Catherine If
thing.” a improper so do world, the in account any upon not,

James. said go,” must you “Catherine,

say dare I sisters? other his of one drive Thorpe Mr. cannot why “But
go.” to like would them of either

my drive to Bath to come not did I “but Thorpe, cried ye,” “Thank
I if me d---- go, not do you if No, fool. a like look and about, sisters
you.” driving of sake the for go only I do.

were words her But pleasure.” no me gives which compliment a is “That
away. abruptly turned had who Thorpe, on lost

most a in walking together, continued still others three The
said, was word a not sometimes Catherine; poor to manner uncomfortable
and reproaches, or supplications with attacked again was she sometimes
were hearts their though Isabella’s, within linked still was arm her
always irritated; another at softened, was she moment one At war. at
steady. always but distressed,

James; said Catherine,” obstinate, so been had you think not did “I
kindest, the were once you persuade; to hard so be to used not were “you
sisters.” my of best-tempered

indeed “but feelingly; very replied, she now,” so less not am I hope “I
right.” be to believe I what doing am I wrong, am I If go. cannot I

great no is “there voice, low a in Isabella, said suspect,” “I
struggle.”

no made Isabella and arm, her away drew she swelled; heart Catherine’s
joined again were they till minutes, ten long a passed Thus opposition.
I “Well, said, look, gayer a with them to coming who, Thorpe, by
safe a with tomorrow go all may we now and matter, the settled have
excuses.” your made and Tilney, Miss to been have I conscience.

Catherine. cried not!” have “You

to me sent had you her Told moment. this her Left soul. my upon have, “I
Clifton to going of engagement prior a recollected just having that, say
her with walking of pleasure the have not could you tomorrow, us with
her; to convenient as just was Tuesday well, very said She Tuesday. till
of thought good pretty A difficulties. our all of end an is there so
mine--hey?”

and humour, good and smiles all more once was countenance Isabella’s
again. happy looked too James

our all Catherine, sweet my Now, indeed! thought heavenly most “A
a have shall we and acquitted, honourably are you over; are distresses
party.” delightful most

run must I this. to submit cannot “I Catherine; said do,” not will “This
right.” her set and directly Tilney Miss after

and other, the of Thorpe hand, one of hold caught however, Isabella,
When angry. quite was James Even three. all from in poured remonstrances
would Tuesday that said herself Tilney Miss when settled, was everything
any make to absurd, quite ridiculous, quite was it well, as her suit
objection. further

message. such any invent to business no had Thorpe Mr. care. not do “I
Miss to spoken have could I off, it put to right it thought had I If
know I do how and way; ruder a in it doing only is This myself. Tilney
into me led he perhaps; again mistaken be may has--He Thorpe Mr. that
Thorpe; Mr. go, me Let Friday. on mistake his by rudeness of act one
me.” hold not do Isabella,

were they Tilneys; the after go to vain in be would it her told Thorpe
and them, overtaken had he when Street, Brock into corner the turning
time. this by home at were

will I are they “wherever Catherine; said them,” after go will I “Then
persuaded be not could I If talking. signify not does It them. after go
it.” into tricked be will never I wrong, thought I what doing into
have would Thorpe off. hurried and away broke she words these with And
if go, her let go, her “Let him. withheld Morland but her, after darted
go.” will she

as--” obstinate as is “She

proper a been have hardly could it for simile, the finished never Thorpe
one.

would crowd the as fast as agitation, great in Catherine walked Away
As persevere. to determined yet pursued, being of fearful her, permit
to her to painful was It passed. had what on reflected she walked, she
brother; her displease to particularly them, displease and disappoint
inclination own her Setting resistance. her repent not could she but
to Tilney, Miss to engagement her in time second a failed have to apart,
before, minutes five only made voluntarily promise a retracted have
been not had She wrong. been have must too, pretence false a on and
consulted not had she alone, principles selfish on them withstanding
some in ensured been have might that gratification; own her merely
had she no, Castle; Blaize seeing by itself, excursion the by degree
their in character own her to and others, to due was what to attended
to enough not was however, right, being of conviction Her opinion.
not could she Tilney Miss to spoken had she till composure; her restore
Crescent, the of clear got she when pace her quickening and ease; at be
of top the gained she till ground remaining the over ran almost she
the of spite in that movements her been had rapid So Street. Milsom
into turning just but were they outset, the in advantage Tilneys’
still servant the and them; of view within came she as lodgings their
saying of ceremony the only used she door, open the at remaining
him by hurrying and moment, that Tilney Miss with speak must she that
which her, before door first the opening Then, upstairs. proceeded
the in herself found immediately she right, the be to happened
Her daughter. and son, his Tilney, General with drawing-room
and nerves of irritation her being--from in only defective explanation,
am “I given. instantly was all, at explanation breath--no of shortness
go--I to promised never mistake--I a all was hurry--It great a in come
hurry great a in away ran go.--I not could I first the from them told
stay not would me.--I of thought you what care not did it.--I explain to
servant.” the for

speech, this by elucidated perfectly not though however, business, The
given had Thorpe John that found Catherine puzzle. a be to ceased soon
greatly herself owning in scruple no had Tilney Miss and message; the
in her exceeded still had brother her whether But it. by surprised
as herself addressed instinctively she though Catherine, resentment,
knowing. of means no had vindication, her in other the to as one to much
declarations eager her arrival, her before felt been have might Whatever
could she as friendly as sentence and look every made immediately
desire.

Tilney Miss by introduced was she settled, happily thus affair The
solicitous such ready, such with him by received and father, her to
her made and mind, her to information Thorpe’s recalled as politeness
such To on. depended sometimes be might he that pleasure with think
of aware not that carried, civility general’s the was attention anxious
angry quite was he house, the entering in swiftness extraordinary her
the of door the open to her reduced had neglect whose servant the with
point a make should He it? by mean William did “What herself. apartment
warmly most not had Catherine if And matter.” the into inquiring of
the lose would William that likely seemed it innocence, his asserted
rapidity. her by place, his not if forever, master his of favour

leave, take to rose she hour, an of quarter a them with sitting After
if her asking Tilney’s General by surprised agreeably most then was and
rest the spending and dining of honour the daughter his do would she
was Catherine wishes. own her added Tilney Miss her. with day the of
Allen Mrs. and Mr. power. her of out quite was it but obliged; greatly
no say could he declared general The moment. every back her expect would
on but superseded; be to not were Allen Mrs. and Mr. of claims the more;
would they given, be could notice longer when trusted, he day other some
they sure was Catherine no; “Oh, friend. her to her spare to refuse not
pleasure great have should she and objection, least the have not would
saying street-door, the to himself her attended general The coming.” in
of elasticity the admiring downstairs, went they as gallant everything
and dancing, her of spirit the with exactly corresponded which walk, her
they when beheld, ever had she bows graceful most the of one her making
parted.

Pulteney to gaily proceeded passed, had that all by delighted Catherine,
she though elasticity, great with concluded, she as walking, Street,
anything seeing without home reached She before. it of thought never had
triumphant been had she that now and party; offended the of more
began she walk, her of secure was and point, her carried had throughout,
been had she whether doubt to subsided) spirits her of flutter the (as
way given had she if and noble; always was sacrifice A right. perfectly
of idea distressing the spared been have should she entreaties, their to
happiness great of scheme a and angry, brother a displeased, friend a
and mind, her ease To means. her through perhaps destroyed, both to
conduct own her what person unprejudiced an of opinion the by ascertain
the Allen Mr. before mention to occasion took she been, really had
following the for Thorpes the and brother her of scheme half-settled
think you do “and he, said “Well,” directly. it at caught Allen Mr. day.
too?” going of

told they before Tilney Miss with walk to myself engaged just had I “No;
I?” could them, with go not could I know you therefore and it; of me

schemes These it. of think not do you glad am I and not; certainly “No,
country the about driving women and men Young thing. the all at not are
and inns to going but well; very is it then and Now carriages! open in
should Thorpe Mrs. wonder I and right; not is It together! places public
Morland Mrs. sure am I going; of think not do you glad am I it. allow
Do thinking? of way my of you not are Allen, Mrs. pleased. be not would
objectionable?” projects of kind these think you not

clean A things. nasty are carriages Open indeed. so much very “Yes,
in getting splashed are You them. in wear minutes’ five not is gown
every in bonnet your and hair your takes wind the and out; getting and
myself.” carriage open an hate I direction.

an has it think you not Do question. the not is that but do; you know “I
by them in about driven frequently are ladies young if appearance, odd
related?” even not are they whom to men, young

it.” see to bear cannot I indeed. appearance odd very a dear, my “Yes,

before? so me tell you not did why “then Catherine, cried madam,” “Dear
with gone have not would I improper, be to it known had I if sure am I
thought you if me, tell would you hoped always I but all; at Thorpe Mr.
wrong.” doing was I

Mrs. told I as for it; on depend may you dear, my should, I so “And
But power. my in you for best the do always would I parting, at Morland
people, young be will people Young particular. over be not must one
first we when you, wanted I know You herself. says mother good your as
do people Young would. you but muslin, sprigged that buy to not came,
thwarted.” always be to like not

you think not do I and consequence; real of something was this “But
persuade.” to hard me found have would

Allen; Mr. said done,” harm no is there hitherto, gone has it as far “As
any Thorpe Mr. with out go to not dear, my you, advise only would I “and
more.”

wife. his added say,” to going was I what just is “That

a after and Isabella, for uneasy felt herself, for relieved Catherine,
proper both be not would it whether Allen Mr. asked thought, moment’s
of indecorum the explain and Thorpe, Miss to write to her in kind and
that considered she for herself; as insensible as be must she which
in day, next the Clifton to going be perhaps otherwise might Isabella
doing from her discouraged however, Allen, Mr. passed. had what of spite
old is she dear; my alone, her leave better had “You thing. such any
advise to mother a has not, if and about, is she what know to enough
had you however, but, doubt; a beyond indulgent too is Thorpe Mrs. her.
be will you and go, to choose brother your and She interfere. not better
will.” ill getting only

be should Isabella that think to sorry though and submitted, Catherine
her of approbation Allen’s Mr. by relieved greatly felt wrong, doing
the from advice his by preserved be to rejoiced truly and conduct, own
one being from escape Her herself. error an such into falling of danger
the would what for indeed; escape an now was Clifton to party the of
in them to promise her broken had she if her, of thought have Tilneys
one of guilty been had she if itself, in wrong was what do to order
another? of guilty be to her enable to only propriety, of breach




14 CHAPTER


attack another expected almost Catherine and fair, was morning next The
no felt she her, support to Allen Mr. With party. assembled the from
where contest, a spared be gladly would she but event: the of dread
at therefore rejoiced heartily was and painful, was itself victory
for called Tilneys The them. of anything hearing nor seeing neither
sudden no arising, difficulty new no and time; appointed the at her
to intrusion impertinent no summons, unexpected no recollection,
to able unnaturally most was heroine my measures, their disconcert
himself. hero the with made was it though engagement, her fulfil
whose hill noble that Cliff, Beechen round walking on determined They
object an striking so it render coppice hanging and verdure beautiful
Bath. in opening every almost from

of side the along walked they as Catherine, said it,” at look never “I
France.” of south the of thinking “without river, the

surprised. little a Henry, said then?” abroad been have “You

mind in me puts always It about. read have I what mean only I No, “Oh!
The in through, travelled father her and Emily that country the of
say?” dare I novels, read never you But Udolpho. of Mysteries

not?” “Why

better read you--gentlemen for enough clever not are they “Because
books.”

good a in pleasure not has who lady, or gentleman it be person, “The
Radcliffe’s Mrs. all read have I stupid. intolerably be must novel,
Udolpho, of Mysteries The pleasure. great with them of most and works,
remember I again; down lay not could I it, begun once had I when
time.” whole the end on standing hair days--my two in it finishing

it read to undertook you that remember I “and Tilney, Miss added “Yes,”
to minutes five only for away called was I when that and me, to aloud
the into volume the took you me, for waiting of instead note, a answer
it.” finished had you till stay to obliged was I and Walk, Hermitage

Morland, Miss see, You testimony. honourable most Eleanor--a you, “Thank
on, get to eagerness my in I, was Here suspicions. your of injustice the
promise the breaking sister, my for minutes five only wait to refusing
most a at suspense in her keeping and aloud, it reading of made had I
to are you which, volume, the with away running by part, interesting
on reflect I when proud am I own. her particularly own, her was observe,
opinion.” good your in me establish must it think I and it,

of ashamed be never shall I now and indeed, it hear to glad very am “I
despised men young before, thought really I But myself. Udolpho liking
amazingly.” novels

they do--for they if amazement suggest well may it amazingly; is “It
hundreds. and hundreds read have myself I women. as many as nearly read
and Julias of knowledge a in me with cope can you that imagine not Do
never-ceasing the in engage and particulars, to proceed we If Louisas.
soon shall I that?’ read you ‘Have and this?’ read you ‘Have of inquiry
appropriate an want say?--I I shall as--what me behind far as you leave
when Valancourt poor left herself Emily friend your as far simile.--as
had have I years many how Consider Italy. into aunt her with went she
were you while Oxford, at studies my on entered had I you. of start the
home!” at sampler your working girl little good a

Udolpho think you not do really, now But afraid. am I good, very “Not
world?” the in book nicest the

depend must That neatest. the mean you suppose I which nicest--by “The
binding.” the upon

he Morland, Miss impertinent. very are “you Tilney, Miss said “Henry,”
finding forever is He sister. his does he as exactly you treating is
taking is he now and language, of incorrectness some for me, with fault
not did it, used you as ‘nicest,’ word The you. with liberty same the
shall we or can, you as soon as it change better had you and him; suit
way.” the of rest the all Blair and Johnson with overpowered be

but wrong; anything say to mean not did “I Catherine, cried sure,” am “I
so?” it call I not should why and book, nice a is it

taking are we and day, nice very a is this “and Henry, said true,” “Very
a is It Oh! ladies. young nice very two are you and walk, nice very a
it perhaps Originally everything. for does It indeed! word nice very
or delicacy, propriety, neatness, express to only applied was
or sentiments, their in dress, their in nice were refinement--people
comprised is subject every on commendation every now But choice. their
word.” one that in

you, to applied be to only ought “it sister, his cried fact,” in “While,
Come, wise. than nice more are You all. at commendation any without
utmost the in faults our over meditate to him leave us let Morland, Miss
we terms whatever in Udolpho praise we while diction, of propriety
of kind that of fond are You work. interesting most a is It best. like
reading?”

other.” any like much not do I truth, the say “To

“Indeed!”

and sort, that of things and plays, and poetry read can I is, “That
be cannot I history, solemn real history, But travels. dislike not do
you?” Can in. interested

history.” of fond am I “Yes,

me tells it but duty, a as little a it read I too. were I wish “I
and popes of quarrels The me. weary or vex either not does that nothing
for good so all men the page; every in pestilences, or wars with kings,
I yet and tiresome: very is all--it at women any hardly and nothing,
it of deal great a for dull, so be should it that odd it think often
mouths, heroes’ the into put are that speeches The invention. be must
and invention, be must this all of chief designs--the and thoughts their
books.” other in me delights what is invention

their in happy not “are Tilney, Miss said think,” you “Historians,
I interest. raising without imagination display They fancy. of flights
with false the take to contented well very am history--and of fond am
intelligence of sources have they facts principal the In true. the
on, depended much as be may which records, and histories former in
own one’s under pass actually not does that anything as conclude, I
are they of, speak you embellishments little the for as and observation;
up, drawn well be speech a If such. as them like I and embellishments,
with probably made--and be may it whomsoever by pleasure, with it read I
if than Robertson, Mr. or Hume Mr. of production the if greater, much
Great.” the Alfred or Agricola, Caractacus, of words genuine the

have I and father; my and Allen Mr. are so And history! of fond are “You
small my within instances many So it. dislike not do who brothers two
the pity not shall I rate, this At remarkable! is friends of circle
it books, their read to like people If longer. any history of writers
volumes, great filling in trouble much so at be to but well, very all is
be to into, look ever willingly would nobody think, to used I as which,
struck always girls, and boys little of torment the for only labouring
necessary, and right very all is it know I though and fate; hard a as me
on down sit could that courage person’s the at wondered often have I
it.” do to purpose

what “is Henry, said tormented,” be should girls and boys little “That
can state civilized a in nature human with acquainted all at one no
observe must I historians, distinguished most our of behalf in but deny;
higher no have to supposed being at offended be well might they that
well perfectly are they style, and method their by that and aim,
mature and reason advanced most the of readers torment to qualified
own your be to observed I as torment,’ ‘to verb the use I life. of time
as admitted now be to them supposing instruct,’ ‘to of instead method,
synonymous.”

been had you if but torment, a instruction call to foolish me think “You
their learning first children little poor hear to myself as used much as
they stupid how seen ever had you if spell, to learning then and letters
is mother poor my tired how and together, morning whole a for be can
my of day every almost seeing of habit the in am I as it, of end the at
might instruct’ ‘to and torment’ ‘to that allow would you home, at life
words.” synonymous as used be sometimes

difficulty the for accountable not are historians But probably. “Very
seem altogether not do who yourself, you even and read; to learning of
may application, intense very severe, very to friendly particularly
to worth-while well very is it that acknowledge to brought be perhaps
of sake the for life, one’s of years three or two for tormented be
been not had reading Consider--if it. of rest the all read to able being
not might perhaps vain--or in written have would Radcliffe Mrs. taught,
all.” at written have

lady’s that on her from panegyric warm very a assented--and Catherine
on another in engaged soon were Tilneys The subject. the closed merits
the with country the viewing were They say. to nothing had she which
of capability its on decided and drawing, to accustomed persons of eyes
Here taste. real of eagerness the all with pictures, into formed being
taste: of drawing--nothing of nothing knew She lost. quite was Catherine
little her brought which attention an with them to listened she and
idea any scarcely conveyed which phrases in talked they for profit,
to appeared however, understand, could she which little The her. to
matter the on entertained had she notions few very the contradict
the from taken be to longer no were view good a if as seemed It before.
proof a longer no was sky blue clear a that and hill, high an of top
misplaced A ignorance. her of ashamed heartily was She day. fine a of
ignorant. be always should they attach, to wish people Where shame.
of inability an with come to is mind well-informed a with come To
would person sensible a which others, of vanity the to administering
of misfortune the have she if especially, woman A avoid. to wish always
can. she as well as it conceal should anything, knowing

already been have girl beautiful a in folly natural of advantages The
treatment her to and author; sister a of pen capital the by forth set
the to though that men, to justice in add, only will I subject the of
a is females in imbecility sex, the of part trifling more and larger
them of portion a is there charms, personal their of enhancement great
anything desire to themselves informed well too and reasonable too
own her know not did Catherine But ignorance. than woman in more
affectionate an with girl, good-looking a that know not advantages--did
young clever a attracting of fail cannot mind, ignorant very a and heart
present the In untoward. particularly are circumstances unless man,
declared knowledge, of want her lamented and confessed she instance,
and draw; to able be to world the in anything give would she that
his which in followed, immediately picturesque the on lecture a
in beauty see to began soon she that clear so were instructions
he that earnest so was attention her and him, by admired everything
taste. natural of deal great a having her of satisfied perfectly became
distances--side-screens second and distances, foregrounds, of talked He
a hopeful so was Catherine and shades; and perspectives--lights and
voluntarily she Cliff, Beechen of top the gained they when that scholar
landscape. a of part make to unworthy as Bath of city whole the rejected
much too with her wearying of fearful and progress, her with Delighted
easy an by and decline, to subject the suffered Henry once, at wisdom
which oak withered the and fragment rocky of piece a from transition
the forests, to general, in oaks to summit, its near placed had he
shortly he government, and lands crown lands, waste them, of enclosure
an was it politics, from and politics; at arrived himself found
short his succeeded which pause general The silence. to step easy
Catherine, by to end an put was nation the of state the on disquisition
have “I words, these uttered voice, of tone solemn a rather in who,
London.” in out come soon will indeed shocking very something that heard

and startled, was addressed, chiefly was this whom to Tilney, Miss
nature?” what of And “Indeed! replied, hastily

is it that heard only have I author. the is who nor know, not do I “That
yet.” with met have we anything than horrible more be to

thing?” a such of hear you could Where heaven! “Good

from letter a in it of account an had mine of friend particular “A
murder expect shall I dreadful. uncommonly be to is It yesterday. London
kind.” the of everything and

accounts friend’s your hope I But composure! astonishing with speak “You
proper beforehand, known is design a such if and exaggerated; been have
coming its prevent to government by taken be undoubtedly will measures
effect.” to

desires “neither smile, to not endeavouring Henry, said “Government,”
and murder; be must There matters. such in interfere to dares nor
much.” how not cares government

you make I shall “Come, added, and laughed, He stared. ladies The
as explanation an out puzzle to you leave or other, each understand
the by less no man, a myself prove will I noble. be will No--I can? you
patience no have I head. my of clearness the than soul my of generosity
the to down sometimes themselves let to disdain as sex my of such with
sound neither are women of abilities the Perhaps yours. of comprehension
observation, want may they Perhaps keen. nor vigorous acute--neither nor
wit.” and genius, fire, judgment, discernment,

to goodness the have but says; he what mind not do Morland, “Miss
riot.” dreadful this to as me satisfy

riot?” What “Riot!

confusion The brain. own your in only is riot the Eleanor, dear “My
more nothing of talking been has Morland Miss scandalous. is there
three in out, come to shortly is which publication new a than dreadful
with each, in pages seventy-six and hundred two volumes, duodecimo
you lantern--do a and tombstones two of first, the to frontispiece a
all mistaken has sister stupid Morland--my Miss you, And understand?
London--and in horrors expected of talked You expressions. clearest your
have would creature rational any as conceiving, instantly of instead
she library, circulating a to only relate could words such that done,
assembling men thousand three of mob a herself to pictured immediately
the threatened, Tower the attacked, Bank the Fields, George’s St. in
Light Twelfth the of detachment a blood, with flowing London of streets
quell to Northampton from up called nation) the of hopes (the Dragoons
the in Tilney, Frederick Captain gallant the and insurgents, the
a by horse his off knocked troop, his of head the at charging of moment
the of fears The stupidity. her Forgive window. upper an from brickbat
a means no by is she but woman; the of weakness the to added have sister
general.” in simpleton

you “that Tilney, Miss said Henry,” now, “And grave. looked Catherine
Morland Miss make well as may you other, each understand us made have
intolerably you think her have to mean you yourself--unless understand
in women of opinion your in brute great a and sister, your to rude
ways.” odd your to used not is Morland Miss general.

them.” with acquainted better her make to happy most be shall “I

present.” the of explanation no is that but doubt; “No

do?” to I am “What

before handsomely character your Clear do. to ought you what know “You
women.” of understanding the of highly very think you that her Tell her.

women the all of understanding the of highly very think I Morland, “Miss
I whom be--with may they those--whoever of world--especially the in
company.” in be to happen

serious.” more Be enough. not is “That

of understanding the of highly more think can one no Morland, “Miss
they that much so them given has nature opinion, my In do. I than women
half.” than more use to necessary it find never

is He Morland. Miss now, him from serious more nothing get shall “We
entirely be must he that you assure do I But mood. sober a in not
woman any of thing unjust an say to appear ever can he if misunderstood,
me.” of one unkind an or all, at

never could Tilney Henry that believe to Catherine to effort no was It
must meaning his but surprise, sometimes might manner His wrong. be
ready as almost was she understand, not did she what and just: be always
it though and delightful, was walk whole The did. she what as admire, to
attended friends her too; delightful was conclusion its soon, too ended
addressing parted, they before Tilney, Miss and house, the into her
Catherine, to as Allen Mrs. to much as form, respectful with herself
after day the on dinner to company her of pleasure the for petitioned
only the and side, Allen’s Mrs. on made was difficulty No next. the
pleasure. her of excess the concealing in was Catherine’s on difficulty

her all banish to as charmingly so away passed had morning The
James or Isabella of thought no for affection, natural and friendship
she gone, were Tilneys the When walk. their during her crossed had
little to time some for amiable was she but again, amiable became
her relieve could that give to intelligence no had Allen Mrs. effect;
the of end the Towards them. of any of nothing heard had she anxiety;
yard indispensable some for occasion having Catherine, however, morning,
into out walked delay, moment’s a without bought be must which ribbon of
was she as Thorpe Miss second the overtook Street Bond in and town, the
in girls sweetest the of two between Buildings Edgar’s towards loitering
she her, From morning. the all friends dear her been had who world, the
at off set “They place. taken had Clifton to party the that learned soon
envy not do I sure am I “and Anne, Miss said morning,” this eight
the of out be to off well very are I and you think I drive. their them
a not is there for world, the in thing dullest the be must It scrape.
and brother, your with went Belle year. of time this at Clifton at soul
Maria.” drove John

the of part this hearing on felt really she pleasure the spoke Catherine
arrangement.

go. to wild quite was She gone. is “Maria other, the rejoined yes,” “Oh!
her admire I say cannot I fine. very something be would it thought She
if go, to not first the from determined was I part, my for and taste;
much.” so ever me pressed they

wish “I answering, help not could this, of doubtful little a Catherine,
go.” all not could you pity a is It too. gone have could you

I Indeed, me. to indifference of matter a quite is it but you; “Thank
Sophia and Emily to so saying was I account. any on gone have not would
us.” overtook you when

the have should Anne that glad but unconvinced; still was Catherine
adieu her bade she her, console to Sophia a and Emily an of friendship
had party the that pleased home, returned and uneasiness, much without
wishing heartily very and it, join to refusing her by prevented been not
to Isabella or James either allow to pleasant too be might it that
longer. any resistance her resent




15 CHAPTER


tenderness and peace speaking Isabella, from note a day, next the Early
on friend her of presence immediate the entreating and line, every in
happiest the in Catherine, hastened importance, utmost the of matter a
two The Buildings. Edgar’s to curiosity, and confidence of state
Anne’s on and, parlour; the in themselves by were Thorpes Miss youngest
asking of opportunity the took Catherine sister, her call to it quitting
desired Maria party. yesterday’s their of particulars some for other the
immediately Catherine and it; of speak to than pleasure greater no
the in scheme delightful most the altogether been had it that learnt
that and been, had it charming how imagine could nobody that world,
the was Such conceive. could anybody than delightful more been had it
in much thus unfolded second the minutes; five first the of information
soup, some ate Hotel, York the to directly driven had they detail--that
the tasted pump-room, the to down walked dinner, early an bespoke and
adjourned thence spars; and purses in shillings some out laid and water,
swallowed hotel, the to back hurrying and pastry-cook’s, a at ice eat to
a had then and dark; the in being prevent to haste, in dinner their
little, a rained it and up, not was moon the only back, drive delightful
along. it get hardly could he tired so was horse Morland’s Mr. and

Blaize that appeared It satisfaction. heartfelt with listened Catherine
was there rest, the all for as and, of; thought been never had Castle
concluded intelligence Maria’s instant. an half for regret to nothing
represented she whom Anne, sister her for pity of effusion tender a with
party. the excluded being from cross, insupportably as

help I could how know, you but, sure; am I me, forgive never will “She
because her, drive not would he vowed he for go, me have would John it?
humour good in be not will she say dare I ankles. thick such had she
a not is it cross; be not will I determined am I but month; this again
temper.” of out me puts that matter little

such of look a and step, a eager so with room the entered now Isabella
without was Maria notice. friend’s her all engaged as importance, happy
“Yes, began: thus Catherine, embracing Isabella, and away, sent ceremony
deceived not has penetration your indeed; so is it Catherine, dear my
everything.” through sees It yours! of eye arch That Oh! you.

ignorance. wondering of look a by only replied Catherine

“compose other, the continued friend,” sweetest beloved, my “Nay,
and down sit us Let perceive. you as agitated, amazingly am I yourself.
note? my had you moment the it guessed you so and Well, comfort. in talk
can heart, my know who alone, you Catherine, dear My Oh! creature! Sly
of charming most the is brother Your happiness. present my of judge
excellent your will what But him. of worthy more were I wish only I men.
so am I them of think I When Heavens! Oh! say? mother and father
agitated!”

suddenly truth the of idea an awake: to began understanding Catherine’s
emotion, an new so of blush natural the with and, mind; her into darted
Can mean? you do what Isabella, dear My heaven! “Good out, cried she
James?” with love in be really you you--can

the half but comprehended learnt soon she however, surmise, bold This
continually having of accused was she which affection, anxious The fact.
their of course the in had, action, and look every Isabella’s in watched
love. equal an of confession delightful the received party, yesterday’s
Catherine had Never James. to engaged alike were faith and heart Her
brother Her joy. and wonder, interest, of full so anything to listened
of importance the circumstances, such to New engaged! friend her and
those of one as it contemplated she and great, unspeakably appeared it
a afford hardly can life of course ordinary the which of events, grand
nature the express; not could she feelings her of strength The return.
a such having of happiness The friend. her contented however, them, of
embraces in mingled ladies fair the and effusion, first their was sister
joy. of tears and

the of prospect the in did sincerely Catherine as however, Delighting,
her surpassed far Isabella that acknowledged be must it connection,
my me, to dearer infinitely so be will “You anticipations. tender in
much so be shall I that feel I Maria: or Anne either than Catherine,
own.” my to than family Morland’s dear my to attached more

Catherine. beyond friendship of pitch a was This

quite I “that Isabella, continued brother,” dear your like so are “You
me; with is always it so But you. saw I moment first the you on doted
Morland that day first very The everything. settles moment first the
heart him--my beheld I moment first very Christmas--the last us to came
hair my with gown, yellow my wore I remember I gone. irrecoverably was
John and drawing-room, the into came I when and braids; in up done
before.” handsome so anybody saw never I thought I him, introduced

though for, love; of power the acknowledged secretly Catherine Here
she endowments, his all to partial and brother, her of fond exceedingly
handsome. him thought life her in never had

wore and evening, that us with tea drank Andrews Miss too, remember “I
thought I that heavenly so looked she and sarsenet; puce-coloured her
sleep not could I her; with love in fall certainly must brother your
sleepless many the Catherine, Oh! it. of thinking for right all wink a
suffer you have not would I account! brother’s your on had have I nights
will I but know; I thin, wretchedly grown am I done! have I what half
I it. of enough seen have you anxiety; my describing by you pain not
speaking in unguarded perpetually--so myself betrayed have I that feel
would sure always was I secret my But church! the for partiality my of
you.” with safe be

an of ashamed but safer; been have could nothing that felt Catherine
point, the contest longer no dared she expected, little ignorance
affectionate and penetration arch of full as been have to refuse nor
found, she brother, Her her. consider to chose Isabella as sympathy
his known make to Fullerton, to speed all with off set to preparing was
agitation real some of source a was here and consent; ask and situation
she as her, persuade to endeavoured Catherine Isabella. of mind the to
oppose never would mother and father her that persuaded, herself was
be to parents “for she, said impossible,” is “It wishes. son’s their
no have I happiness; children’s their of desirous more or kind, more
immediately.” consenting their of doubt

not dare I yet “and Isabella; replied same,” the exactly says “Morland
it. to consent can never they small; so be will fortune my it; expect
anybody!” marry might who brother, Your

love. of force the discerned again Catherine Here

be can fortune of difference The humble. too are you Isabella, “Indeed,
signify.” to nothing

signify would it know I heart generous your in Catherine, sweet My “Oh!
for As many. in disinterestedness such expect not must we but nothing;
the I Had reversed. were situations our wish only I sure am I myself,
brother your world, whole the of mistress I were millions, of command
choice.” only my be would

novelty, as sense by much as recommended sentiment, charming This
her of heroines the all of remembrance pleasing most a Catherine gave
than lovely more looked never friend her thought she and acquaintance;
her was consent,” will they sure am “I idea. grand the uttering in
you.” with delighted be will they sure am “I declaration; frequent

the that moderate so are wishes “my Isabella, said part,” own my “For
are people Where me. for enough be would nature in income smallest
would I detest: I grandeur wealth; is itself poverty attached, really
village retired some in cottage A universe. the for London in settle not
Richmond.” about villas little charming some are There ecstasy. be would

must You Fullerton. near settle must “You Catherine. cried “Richmond!”
us.” near be

you, near be but can I If not. do we if miserable be shall I sure am “I
myself allow not will I talking! idle is this But satisfied. be shall I
Morland answer. father’s your have we till things, such of think to
tomorrow. it have may we Salisbury, to tonight it sending by that says
know I letter. the open to courage have never shall I know I Tomorrow?
me.” of death the be will it

it again, spoke Isabella when conviction--and this succeeded reverie A
wedding-gown. her of quality the on resolve to was

himself, lover young anxious the by to end an put was conference Their
Wiltshire. for off set he before sigh parting his breathe to came who
her and say, to what not knew but him, congratulate to wished Catherine
of parts eight the however, them, From eyes. her in only was eloquence
with them combine could James and expressively, most out shone speech
his home, at hoped he that all of realization the for Impatient ease.
not he had shorter, yet been have would they and long; not were adieus
that one fair his of entreaties urgent the by detained frequently been
eagerness her by door the from almost called he was Twice go. would he
how Consider away. you drive must I Morland, “Indeed, gone. him have to
heaven’s For so. linger you see to bear cannot I ride. to have you far
it.” on insist go--I go, There, time. more no waste sake,

inseparable were ever, than united more now hearts with friends, two The
along. flew hours the happiness sisterly of schemes in and day; the for
and everything, with acquainted were who son, her and Thorpe Mrs.
Isabella’s consider to consent, Morland’s Mr. want to only seemed who
their for imaginable circumstance fortunate most the as engagement
of quota their add and counsels, their join to allowed were family,
measure the up fill to expressions mysterious and looks significant
To sisters. younger unprivileged the in raised be to curiosity of
neither seemed reserve of sort odd this feelings, simple Catherine’s
would she unkindness its and supported; consistently nor meant, kindly
their less been inconsistency its had out, pointing forborne have hardly
of sagacity the by ease at heart her set soon Maria and Anne but friend;
wit, of war of sort a in spent was evening the and what”; know “I their
affected an of mystery the in side one on ingenuity, family of display a
acute. equally all discovery, undefined of other the on secret,

to endeavouring day, next the again friend her with was Catherine
before hours tedious many the away while and spirits her support
time the as for exertion, needful a letters; the of delivery the
more and more became Isabella near, drew expectation reasonable of
a into herself worked had arrived, letter the before and desponding,
distress could where come, did it when But distress. real of state
kind my of consent the gaining in difficulty no had have “I found? be
to done be shall power their in everything that promised am and parents,
moment one in and lines, three first the were happiness,” my forward
over spread instantly was glow brightest The security. joyful was all
spirits her removed, seemed anxiety and care all features, Isabella’s
without herself called she and control, for high too almost became
mortals. of happiest the scruple

her son, her daughter, her embraced joy, of tears with Thorpe, Mrs.
with Bath of inhabitants the half embraced have could and visitor,
“dear was It tenderness. with overflowing was heart Her satisfaction.
Maria” dear and Anne “dear word; every at Catherine” “dear and John”
at “dears” two and felicity; their in sharers made be immediately must
child beloved that than more not were Isabella of name the before once
only not He joy. in skulker no was himself John earned. well now had
finest the of one being of commendation high the Morland Mr. on bestowed
praise. his in sentences many off swore but world, the in fellows

containing short, was felicity, this all sprang whence letter, The
was particular every and success; of assurance this than more little
Isabella particulars for But again. write could James till deferred
Morland’s Mr. in comprised was needful The wait. to afford well could
what by and easy; everything make to pledged was honour his promise;
to were property landed whether formed, be to was income their means
her which in matter a was over, made money funded or resigned, be
of secure feel to enough knew She concern. no took spirit disinterested
rapid a took imagination her and establishment, speedy and honourable an
of end the at herself saw She felicities. attendant its over flight
at acquaintance new every of admiration and gaze the weeks, few a
a with Putney, in friend old valued every of envy the Fullerton,
brilliant a and tickets, her on name new a command, her at carriage
finger. her on rings hoop of exhibition

had who Thorpe, John ascertained, were letter the of contents the When
set to prepared London, to journey his begin to arrival its waited only
parlour, the in alone her finding on he, said Morland,” Miss “Well, off.
journey. good a him wished Catherine good-bye.” you bid to come am “I
about, fidgeted window, the to walked he her, hear to appearing Without
self-occupied. wholly seemed and tune, a hummed

answer; no made He Catherine. said Devizes?” at late be you not “Shall
this thing good famous “A with, out burst silence minute’s a after but
Belle’s. and Morland’s of fancy clever A soul! my upon scheme, marrying
notion.” bad no is it say I Morland? Miss it, of think you do What

one.” good very a it think I sure am “I

to enemy no are you glad am I heavens! by honest, That’s you? “Do
Wedding One to ‘Going song old the hear ever you Did however. matrimony,
hope.” I wedding, Belle’s to come will you say, I Another?’ on Brings

possible.” if her, with be to sister your promised have I “Yes;

foolish a forcing and about himself know”--twisting you then “And
old same this of truth the try may we know, you then say, laugh--“I
song.”

with dine I journey. good a you wish I Well, sing. never I But we? “May
home.” going be now must and today, Tilney Miss

may we when knows Who hurry. confounded such no is there but “Nay,
a of end the by again down be shall I that but Not again? together be
me.” to appear will it fortnight long devilish a and fortnight,

he that Catherine--finding replied long?” so away stay you do why “Then
answer. an for waited

forget not shall I good-natured. and however--kind you, of kind is “That
anybody than that, all and nature good more have you But hurry. a in it
only not is it and nature, good of deal monstrous A believe. I living,
you then and everything; of much so much, so have you but nature, good
you.” like anybody know not do I soul, my such--upon have

a only say, dare I me, like people many great a are there dear, “Oh!
you.” to morning Good better. deal great

Fullerton at respects my pay and come shall I Morland, Miss say, I “But
disagreeable.” not if long, is it before

you.” see to glad very be will mother and father My do. “Pray

me.” see to sorry be not will you Morland, Miss hope, hope--I I “And

see. to sorry am I people few very are There all. at not dear, “Oh!
cheerful.” always is Company

company, cheerful little a but me Give thinking. of way my just is “That
where be only me let love, I people the of company the have only me let
And I. say rest, the take devil the and like, I whom with and like I
Miss notion, a have I But same. the say you hear to glad heartily am I
matters.” most upon alike much pretty think I and you Morland,

most to as And of. thought ever I than more is it but may; we “Perhaps
mind own my know I that many not are there truth, the say to matters,
about.”

what with brains my bother to way my not is It I. do more no Jove, “By
only me Let enough. simple is things of notion My me. concern not does
and head, my over house comfortable a with I, say like, I girl the have
good a of sure am I nothing. is Fortune rest? the all for I care what
better.” the much so why, penny, a not had she if and own; my of income

one on fortune good a is there If there. you like think I true. “Very
which matter No other. the on any for occasion no be can there side,
fortune great one of idea the hate I enough. is there that so it, has
wickedest the think I money for marry to And another. for out looking
at you see to glad very be shall We day. Good existence. in thing
in not was It went. she away And convenient.” is it whenever Fullerton,
to news such With longer. her detain to gallantry his all of power the
not was departure her for, prepare to visit a such and communicate,
away, hurried she and urge; to nature his in anything by delayed be to
and address, happy own his of consciousness undivided the to him leaving
encouragement. explicit her

her learning first on experienced herself had she which agitation The
emotion inconsiderable no raise to expect her made engagement brother’s
How event. wonderful the of communication the by Allen, Mrs. and Mr. in
of words many which affair, important The disappointment! her was great
since ever both them by foreseen been had in, ushered preparation
was occasion the on felt they that all and arrival; brother’s her
remark, a with happiness, people’s young the for wish a in comprehended
the on and beauty, Isabella’s of favour in side, gentleman’s the on
surprising most the Catherine to was It luck. good great her of lady’s,
James’s of secret great the of however, disclosure, The insensibility.
Allen. Mrs. in emotion some raise did before, day the Fullerton to going
repeatedly but calmness, perfect with that to listen not could She
known have could she wished concealment, its of necessity the regretted
she as went, he before him seen have could she wished intention, his
father his to regards best her with him troubled have certainly should
Skinners. the all to compliments kind her and mother, and




16 CHAPTER


Street Milsom in visit her from pleasure of expectations Catherine’s
accordingly, and inevitable; was disappointment that high very so were
kindly and Tilney, General by received politely most was she though
of else one no and home, at was Henry though daughter, his by welcomed
in hours many spending without return, her on found, she party, the
appointment her to gone had she that feelings, her of examination the
finding of Instead afforded. not had it which happiness for preparing
intercourse the from Tilney, Miss with acquaintance in improved herself
instead before; as her with intimate so hardly seemed she day, the of
a of ease the in ever, than advantage greater to Tilney Henry seeing of
agreeable; little so been nor little, so said never had he party, family
his of spite her--in to civilities great father’s their of spite in and,
get to release a been had compliments--it and invitations, thanks,
not could It this. all for account to her puzzled It him. from away
and agreeable perfectly was he That fault. Tilney’s General be
a of admit not did man, charming very a altogether and good-natured,
not could He father. Henry’s and handsome, and tall was he for doubt,
of want her for or spirits, of want children’s his for accountable be
have might last at hoped she former The company. his in enjoyment
own her to attribute only could she latter the and accidental, been
gave visit, the of particulars the hearing on Isabella, stupidity.
insufferable pride, pride, all was “It explanation: different a
very be to family the suspected long had She pride! and haughtiness
Miss as behaviour of insolence Such certain. it made this and high,
of honours the do to Not life! her in of heard never had she Tilney’s
such with guest her to behave To breeding! good common with house her
her!” to speak to even Hardly superciliousness!

superciliousness; no was there Isabella; that, as bad so not was it “But
civil.” very was she

appeared had who he, brother, the then And her! defend Don’t “Oh!
are feelings people’s some Well, heavens! Good you! to attached so
day?” whole the you at once looked hardly he so And incomprehensible.

spirits.” good in seem not did he but so; say not do “I

my is inconstancy world the in things all Of contemptible! “How
dear my again, him of think to never you entreat me Let aversion.
you.” of unworthy is he indeed Catherine;

me.” of thinks ever he suppose not do I “Unworthy!

fickleness! Such you. of thinks never he say; I what exactly is “That
has John believe really I mine! to and brother your to different How Oh!
heart.” constant most the

for impossible be would it you assure I Tilney, General for as “But
seemed it attention; and civility greater with me to behave to anybody
happy.” me make and entertain to care only his be to

he believe I pride. of him suspect not do I him; of harm no know I “Oh!
John’s and him, of well very thinks John man. gentleman-like very a is
judgment--”

meet shall we evening; this me to behave they how see shall I “Well,
rooms.” the at them

go?” I must “And

settled.” all was it thought I it? intend you not “Do

But nothing. you refuse can I it, of point a such make you since “Nay,
will know, you heart, my for agreeable, very being my upon insist not do
beg; I it, mention not do dancing, for as And off. miles forty some be
to me plague will Hodges Charles question. the of out quite is that
he but one to Ten short. very him cut shall I but say; dare I death,
shall I so avoid, to want I what exactly is that and reason, the guesses
himself.” to conjecture his keeping his on insist

was she friend; her influence not did Tilneys the of opinion Isabella’s
or brother of either manners the in insolence no been had there sure
hearts. their in pride any being there credit not did she and sister;
same the with one by met was she confidence; her rewarded evening The
Miss heretofore: as attention, same the with other the by and kindness,
dance. to her asked Henry and her, near be to pains took Tilney

brother, elder their that Street Milsom in before day the heard Having
for loss no at was she hour, every almost expected was Tilney, Captain
had she whom man, young handsome fashionable-looking, very a of name the
She party. their to belonged evidently now who and before, seen never
that possible it supposed even and admiration, great with him at looked
her in though, brother, his than handsomer him think might people some
prepossessing. less countenance his and assuming, more was air his eyes,
for, inferior; decidedly doubt a beyond were manners and taste His
of thought every against protested only not he hearing, her within
it finding for Henry at openly laughed even but himself, dancing
whatever that, presumed be may it circumstance latter the From possible.
not was her of admiration his him, of opinion heroine’s our be might
the between animosities produce to likely not kind; dangerous very a of
of instigator the be cannot He lady. the to persecutions nor brothers,
hereafter will she whom by greatcoats, horsemen’s in villains three the
with off drive will which four, and traveling-chaise a into forced be
of presentiments by undisturbed meanwhile, Catherine, speed. incredible
short a but having of that except all, at evil any of or evil, an such
Tilney, Henry with happiness usual her enjoyed down, dance to set
him finding in and, said; he everything to eyes sparkling with listening
herself. so becoming irresistible,

again, them towards came Tilney Captain dance, first the of end the At
They away. brother his pulled dissatisfaction, Catherine’s to much and,
did sensibility delicate her though and, together; whispering retired
Tilney Captain that fact, as down it lay and alarm, immediate take not
now he which her, of misrepresentation malevolent some heard have must
them separating of hope the in brother, his to communicate to hastened
without sight her from conveyed partner her have not could she forever,
duration; minutes’ five full of was suspense Her sensations. uneasy very
when hour, an of quarter long very a it think to beginning was she and
requesting Henry’s by given, was explanation an and returned, both they
objection any have would Thorpe, Miss friend, her thought she if know to
to introduced be to happy most be would brother his as dancing, to
Miss sure very was she that replied hesitation, without Catherine, her.
to on passed was reply cruel The all. at dance to mean not did Thorpe
away. walked immediately he and other, the

him heard I “because she, said know,” I it, mind not will brother “Your
him in good-natured very was it but dancing; hated he that before say
she fancied and down, sitting Isabella saw he suppose I it. of think to
not would she for mistaken, quite is he but partner; a for wish might
world.” the in account any upon dance

to you give can it trouble little very “How said, and smiled, Henry
actions.” people’s other of motive the understand

mean?” you do What “Why?

What influenced, be to likely one a such is How not, is it you, “With
age, feelings, person’s a such upon act to likely most inducement the is
be I should How considered--but, life of habits probable and situation,
so?” and so acting in inducement my be would What influenced,

you.” understand not do “I

perfectly you understand I for terms, unequal very on are we “Then
well.”

unintelligible.” be to enough well speak cannot I Yes; “Me?

language.” modern on satire excellent An “Bravo!

mean.” you what me tell pray “But

the of aware not are you But it? desire really you Do indeed? I “Shall
and embarrassment, cruel very a in you involve will it consequences;
us.” between disagreement a on bring certainly

afraid.” not am I either; do not shall it no; “No,

of wish brother’s my attributing your that meant only I then, “Well,
being your of me convinced alone nature good to Thorpe Miss with dancing
world.” the of rest the all to yourself nature good in superior

were predictions gentleman’s the and disclaimed, and blushed Catherine
her repaid which words his in however, something, a was There verified.
much so mind her occupied something that and confusion; of pain the for
and listen, to or speak to forgetting time, some for back drew she that
Isabella, of voice the by roused till, was; she where forgetting almost
them give to preparing Tilney Captain with her saw and up looked she
across. hands

this of explanation only the smiled, and shoulders her shrugged Isabella
it as but given; be time that at could which change extraordinary
her spoke she comprehension, Catherine’s for enough quite not was
partner. her to terms plain very in astonishment

to not determined so was Isabella happen! could it how think cannot “I
dance.”

before?” mind her change never Isabella did “And

me, from him told you what After brother! your because--And But, “Oh!
her?” ask to going of think he could how

surprised be me bid You head. that on myself to surprise take cannot “I
his brother, my for as but am; I therefore and account, friend’s your on
believed I than more no been has own, must I business, the in conduct
open an was friend your of fairness The to. equal perfectly him
by understood be only could know, you firmness, her attraction;
yourself.”

general.” in firm very is Isabella you, assure I but, laughing; are “You

be must firm always be To anyone. of said be should as much as is “It
judgment; of trial the is relax to properly When obstinate. often be to
by has Thorpe Miss think really I brother, my to reference without and,
hour.” present the on fixing in ill chosen means no

discourse confidential any for together get to able not were friends The
room the about walked they as then, but over; was dancing the all till
your at wonder not do “I herself: explained thus Isabella arm, in arm
rattle! a such is He death. to fatigued really am I and surprise;
given have would I but disengaged; been had mind my if enough, Amusing
still.” sit to world the

you?” not did why “Then

I how know you and particular; so looked have would It dear! My “Oh!
he but could, possibly I as long as him refused I that. doing abhor
him begged I me. pressed he how idea no have You denial. no take would
aspiring after he; not no, partner--but other some get and me, excuse to
of; think to bear could he room the in else nobody was there hand, my to
with be to wanted he dance, to merely wanted he that not was it and
to way unlikely very a taken had he him told I nonsense! Such Oh! me.
speeches fine hated I world, the in things all of for, me; upon prevail
if peace no be would there found I then so so--and and compliments; and
him, introduced who Hughes, Mrs. thought I Besides, up. stand not did I
he sure am I brother, dear your and not: did I if ill it take might
am I evening. whole the down sat had I if miserable been have would
his to listening with jaded quite are spirits My over! is it glad so
was eye every saw I fellow, young smart a such being then, and nonsense:
us.” upon

indeed.” handsome very is “He

him admire would people say dare I may. he suppose I Yes, “Handsome!
florid a hate I beauty. of style my in all at not is he but general; in
Amazingly well. very is he However, man. a in eyes dark and complexion
my in know, you times, several down him took I sure. am I conceited,
way.”

subject interesting more far a had they met, next ladies young the When
the and received, then was letter second Morland’s James discuss. to
Mr. which of living, A explained. fully father his of intentions kind
pounds hundred four about of incumbent, and patron himself was Morland
be should he as soon as son his to resigned be to was value, yearly
no income, family the from deduction trifling no it; take to enough old
equal least at of estate An children. ten of one to assignment niggardly
inheritance. future his as assured was moreover, value,

and gratitude; becoming with occasion the on himself expressed James
could they before years three and two between waiting of necessity the
borne was expected, had he than more no unwelcome, however being, marry,
as been had expectations whose Catherine, discontent. without him by
now was judgment whose and income, father’s her of ideas her as unfixed
heartily and satisfied, well equally felt brother, her by led entirely
settled. pleasantly so everything having on Isabella congratulated

“Mr. face. grave a with Isabella, said indeed,” charming very is “It
Mrs. gentle the said indeed,” handsome vastly behaved has Morland
as do could I wish only “I daughter. her at anxiously looking Thorpe,
he finds he If know. you him, from more expect not could One much.
an be must he sure am I for will, he say dare I by, and by more do can
begin to income small a but is hundred Four man. good-hearted excellent
do you moderate, so are Isabella, dear my wishes, your but indeed, on
dear.” my want, ever you little how consider not

to bear cannot I but more; for wish I account own my on not is “It
an upon down sit him making Morland, dear my injuring of means the be
For life. of necessaries common the in one find to enough hardly income
myself.” of think never I nothing; is it myself,

in reward your find always will you and dear; my do, never you know “I
young a was never There you. for feel everybody makes it affection the
say dare I and you; knows that everybody by are you as beloved so woman
distress us let not do child--but dear my you, sees Morland Mr. when
so behaved has Morland Mr. things. such of talking by Catherine dear our
man; excellent most a was he heard always I know. you handsome, very
a had had you if what, but suppose to not are we dear, my know, you and
am I for more, something with down come have would he fortune, suitable
man.” liberal-minded most a be must he sure

But sure. am I do, I than Morland Mr. of better think can “Nobody
to right a has everybody and know, you failing, their has everybody
these by hurt was Catherine money.” own their with like they what do
promised has father my “that she, said sure,” very am “I insinuations.
afford.” can he as much as do to

there Catherine, sweet my that, to “As herself. recollected Isabella
much a that sure be to enough well me know you and doubt, a be cannot
that money more of want the not is It me. satisfy would income smaller
if and money; hate I spirits; of out little a present at just me makes
should I year, a pounds fifty only upon now place take could union our
out. me found have you Catherine, my Ah! unsatisfied. wish a have not
are that half and years two endless long, long, The sting. the There’s
living.” the hold can brother your before pass to

see perfectly “we Thorpe, Mrs. said Isabella,” darling my yes, “Yes,
the understand perfectly We disguise. no have You heart. your into
a such for better the you love must everybody and vexation; present
affection.” honest noble

to endeavoured She lessen. to began feelings uncomfortable Catherine’s
Isabella’s of source only the was marriage the of delay the that believe
and cheerful as interview next their at her saw she when and regret;
thought minute a for had she that forget to endeavoured ever, as amiable
the with received was and letter, his followed soon James otherwise.
kindness. gratifying most




17 CHAPTER


and Bath; in stay their of week sixth the on entered now had Allens The
which to question, a time some for was last the be should it whether
with acquaintance her have To heart. beating a with listened Catherine
counterbalance. could nothing which evil an was soon so end Tilneys the
suspense, in was affair the while stake, at seemed happiness whole Her
should lodgings the that determined was it when secured everything and
to was fortnight additional this What fortnight. another for taken be
made Tilney Henry seeing sometimes of pleasure the beyond her to produce
since indeed, twice or Once speculation. Catherine’s of part small a but
so got had she done, be could what her taught had engagement James’s
of felicity the general in but “perhaps,” secret a in indulge to as far
now was present the views: her bounded present the for him with being
for certain being happiness her and weeks, three another in comprised
excite to as distance a such at was life her of rest the period, that
this saw which morning the of course the In interest. little but
her forth poured and Tilney, Miss visited she arranged, business
she had sooner No trial. of day a be to doomed was It feelings. joyful
Tilney Miss than stay lengthened Allen’s Mr. in delight her expressed
Bath quitting upon determined just having father’s her of her told
of suspense past The blow! a was Here week. another of end the by
disappointment. present the to quiet and ease been had morning the
she concern sincere most of voice a in and fell, countenance Catherine’s
week!” another of end the “By words, concluding Tilney’s Miss echoed

I what waters the give to on prevailed be seldom can father my “Yes,
arrival friends’ some of disappointed been has He trial. fair a think
a in is well, pretty now is he as and here, meet to expected he whom
home.” get to hurry

known had I “if dejectedly; Catherine said it,” for sorry very am “I
before--” this

so be would “you manner, embarrassed an in Tilney Miss said “Perhaps,”
if--” happy very me make would good--it

Catherine which civility, the to stop a put father her of entrance The
corresponding. their of desire a introduce might hope to beginning was
his to turned he politeness, usual his with her addressing After
being on you congratulate I may Eleanor, “Well, said, and daughter
friend?” fair your to application your in successful

in.” came you as sir, request, the make to beginning just was “I

My it. in is heart your much how know I means. all by proceed “Well,
time daughter his leaving without continued, he Morland,” Miss daughter,
has she as Bath, leave We wish. bold very a forming been “has speak, to
tells steward my from letter A se’nnight. Saturday on you, told perhaps
hope my in disappointed being and home; at wanted is presence my that me
of some here, Courteney General and Longtown of Marquis the seeing of
And Bath. in longer me detain to nothing is there friends, old very my
a without it leave should we you, with point selfish our carry we could
scene this quit to on prevailed be short, in you, Can regret. single
in company your with Eleanor friend your oblige and triumph public of
its though request, the make to ashamed almost am I Gloucestershire?
Bath in creature every to greater appear certainly would presumption
pain I would world the for not yours--but as such Modesty yourself. than
visit, a with us honour to induced be can you If praise. open by it
you offer can we true, ‘Tis expression. beyond happy us make will you
neither you tempt can we place; lively this of gaieties the like nothing
plain is see, you as living, of mode our for splendour, nor amusement by
make to side our on wanting be shall endeavours no yet unpretending; and
disagreeable.” wholly not Abbey Northanger

Catherine’s up wound and words, thrilling were These Abbey! Northanger
gratified and grateful Her ecstasy. of point highest the to feelings
of language the within expressions its restrain hardly could heart
her have To invitation! an flattering so receive To calmness. tolerable
every soothing, and honourable Everything solicited! warmly so company
her and it; in contained was hope future every and enjoyment, present
approbation, Mamma’s and Papa of clause saving the only with acceptance,
they if “and she, said directly,” home write will “I given. eagerly was
not--” will they say dare I as object, not do

her on waited already having sanguine, less not was Tilney General
of sanction their obtained and Street, Pulteney in friends excellent
may “we he, said you,” with part to consent can they “Since wishes. his
world.” the all from philosophy expect

and civilities, secondary her in gentle, though earnest, was Tilney Miss
necessary this as settled nearly as minutes few a in became affair the
allow. would Fullerton to reference

through feelings Catherine’s led had morning the of circumstances The
were they but disappointment; and security, suspense, of varieties the
rapture, to elated spirits with and bliss; perfect in lodged safely now
she lips, her on Abbey Northanger and heart, her at Henry with
on relying Morland, Mrs. and Mr. letter. her write to home hurried
their entrusted already had they whom to friends the of discretion the
had which acquaintance an of propriety the of doubt no felt daughter,
their post of return by therefore sent and eye, their under formed been
though indulgence, This Gloucestershire. in visit her to consent ready
being of conviction her completed for, hoped had Catherine than more not
fortune, and friends in creature, human other every beyond favoured
her for cooperate to seemed Everything chance. and circumstance
had she Allens, the friends, first her of kindness the By advantage.
her. met had kind every of pleasures where scenes into introduced been
return. a of happiness the known each had preferences, her feelings, Her
The it. create to able been had she attachment, felt she Wherever
Tilneys, The sister. a in her to secured be to was Isabella of affection
of, thought favourably be to desired she all, above whom, by they,
their which by measures flattering the in wishes her even outstripped
she visitor, chosen their be to was She continued. be to was intimacy
society whose person the with roof same the under weeks for be to was
to was roof this rest, the all to addition in prized--and, mostly she
in next was edifices ancient for passion Her abbey! an of roof the be
made abbeys and castles Tilney--and Henry for passion her to degree
see To fill. not did image his which reveries those of charm the usually
cloisters the or one, the of keep and ramparts the either explore and
more be to though wish, darling a weeks many for been had other, the of
desire. for impossible nearly too seemed had hour an of visitor the than
house, of her against chances the all With happen. to was this yet, And
abbey, an up turned Northanger cottage, and court, park, place, hall,
narrow its passages, damp long, Its inhabitant. its be to was she and
she and reach, daily her within be to were chapel, ruined and cells
some legends, traditional some of hope the subdue entirely not could
nun. ill-fated and injured an of memorials awful

the by elated little so seem should friends her that wonderful was It
so be should it of consciousness the that home, a such of possession
A it. for account could only habit early of power The borne. meekly
superiority Their pride. no gave born been had they which to distinction
person. of superiority their than them to more no was abode of

so but Tilney; Miss of make to eager was she inquiries the were Many
she answered, were inquiries these when that thoughts, her were active
been having Abbey Northanger of before, than assured more hardly was
having its of Reformation, the of time the at convent endowed richly a
dissolution, its on Tilneys the of ancestor an of hands the into fallen
the of part a making still building ancient the of portion large a of
low standing its of or decayed, was rest the although dwelling present
oak. of woods rising by east and north the from sheltered valley, a in




18 CHAPTER


two that aware hardly was Catherine happiness, of full thus mind a With
than more for Isabella seeing her without away, passed had days three or
and this, of sensible be to first began She together. minutes few a
one pump-room the along walked she as conversation, her for sigh to
and hear; to or say to anything without side, Allen’s Mrs. by morning,
the before friendship, of longing minutes’ five a felt she had scarcely
the led conference, secret a to her inviting and appeared, it of object
sat they as she said place,” favourite my is “This seat. a to way
of view tolerable a commanded which doors, the between bench a on down
way.” the of out so is “it either; at entering everybody

towards bent continually were eyes Isabella’s that observing Catherine,
how remembering and expectation, eager in as other, the or door one
a present the thought arch, being of accused falsely been had she often
not “Do said, gaily therefore and so; really being for opportunity fine
here.” be soon will James Isabella, uneasy, be

simpleton a such me think not “do replied, she creature,” dear My “Psha!
hideous be would It elbow. my to him confine to wanting always be to as
you so And place. the of jest the be should we together; always be to
the of one is It it. of glad amazingly am I Northanger! to going are
most a upon depend shall I understand. I England, in places old finest
it.” of description particular

you are who But give. to power my in best the have certainly shall “You
coming?” sisters your Are for? looking

you and somewhere, be must eyes One’s anybody. for looking not am “I
an are thoughts my when mine, fixing of have I trick foolish a what know
absent most the am I believe I absent; amazingly am I off. miles hundred
a of minds with case the always is it says Tilney world. the in creature
stamp.” certain

me?” tell to particular in something had you Isabella, thought, I “But

My saying. was I what of proof a is here But have. I so and Yes, “Oh!
just have I this: is thing the Well, it. forgot quite had I head, poor
contents.” the guess can you John; from letter a had

cannot.” I indeed, “No,

write he can What affected. abominably so be not do love, sweet “My
with love in ears and head over is he know You yourself? but about,
you.”

Isabella!” dear me, “With

and Modesty, absurd! quite being is this Catherine, sweetest my “Nay,
is honesty common little a really but way, its in well very is that, all
overstrained! so being of idea no have I becoming. as quite sometimes
must child a as such were attentions His compliments. for fishing is It
you that Bath left he before hour an half but was it And noticed. have
letter, this in so says He encouragement. positive most the him gave
his received you that and offer, an you made as good as he that says
suit, his urge to me wants he now and way; kindest the in advances
affect to vain in is it So you. to things pretty of manner all say and
ignorance.”

astonishment her expressed truth, of earnestness the all with Catherine,
Mr. of thought every of innocence her protesting charge, a such at
of impossibility consequent the and her, with love in being Thorpe’s
his on attentions any to “As him. encourage to intended ever having her
a for them of sensible was never I honour, my upon declare, do I side,
coming. his of day first the dance to me asking his just moment--except
some be must there it, like anything or offer, an me making to as And
that of thing a misunderstood have not could I mistake. unaccountable
protest solemnly I believed, be to wish ever I as And, know! you kind,
half last The us. between passed ever nature a such of syllable no that
I mistake--for a completely and all be must It away! went he before hour
morning.” whole that once him see not did

Edgar’s in morning whole the spent you for did, certainly you that “But
pretty am I came--and consent father’s your day the was Buildings--it
you before time some parlour the in alone were John and you that sure
house.” the left

life the for say--but dare I so, was it it, say you if Well, you? “Are
and you, with being now remember do I it. recollect cannot I me, of
five for alone ever were we that rest--but the as well as him seeing
pass might whatever for about, arguing worth not is it minutes--However,
it, of recollection no having my by convinced, be must you side, his on
kind the of anything for wished nor expected, nor thought, never I that
for regard any have should he that concerned excessively am I him. from
had never I side; my on unintentional quite been has it indeed me--but
tell and can, you as soon as him undeceive Pray it. of idea smallest the
say--but to ought I what know not do is--I pardon--that his beg I him
speak not would I way. properest the in mean, I what understand him make
know you but sure; am I Isabella, yours, of brother a of disrespectfully
not is another--he than more man one of think could I if that well very
angry be not must you friend, dear “My silent. was Isabella person.” the
And, me. about much very so cares brother your suppose cannot I me. with
sisters.” be still shall we know, you

being our of one than ways more are “there blush), a (with yes” “Yes,
case the Catherine, dear my Well, to? wandering I am where But sisters.
so?” it not John--is poor against determined are you that be to seems

meant never certainly as and affection, his return cannot certainly “I
it.” encourage to

further. any you tease not shall I sure am I case, the is that “Since
have. I therefore and subject, the on you to speak to me desired John
very a it thought I letter, his read I as soon as confess, I But
of good the promote to likely not and business, imprudent foolish,
You together? came you supposing upon, live to you were what for either;
will that trifle a not is it but sure, be to something, you of both have
there say, may romancers that all after and nowadays; family a support
he it; of think could John wonder only I money. without doing no is
last.” my received have not could

I that convinced are wrong?--You anything of then, me, acquit do “You
me liking of him suspected never brother, your deceive to meant never
moment?” this till

to pretend not do “I laughingly, Isabella answered that,” to As “Oh!
All been. have may past time in designs and thoughts your what determine
will so or flirtation harmless little A yourself. to known best is that
one than encouragement more give to on drawn often is one and occur,
in person last the am I that assured be may you But by. stand to wishes
for allowed be should things those All severely. you judge to world the
not may one know, you day, one means one What spirits. high and youth in
alter.” opinions change, Circumstances next. the mean

same. the always was it alter; did never brother your of opinion my “But
happened.” never what describing are You

to listening all at without other the continued Catherine,” dearest “My
an into you hurrying of means the be world the all for not would “I her,
anything think not do I about. were you what knew you before engagement
merely happiness your all sacrifice to you wishing in me justify would
after perhaps who and brother, my is he because brother, my oblige to
seldom people for you, without happy as just be might know, you all,
amazingly so are they especially, men young at, be would they what know
brother’s a should why is, say I What inconstant. and changeable
notions my carry I know You friend’s? a than me to dearer be happiness
do Catherine, dear my things, all above But, high. pretty friendship of
great too in are you if that it, for word my Take hurry. a in be not
is there says Tilney it. repent to live certainly will you hurry, a
own their of state the as in deceived often so are people nothing
never comes; he Here Ah! right. very is he believe I and affections,
sure.” am I us, see not will he mind,

Isabella, and Tilney; Captain perceived up, looking Catherine,
He notice. his caught soon spoke, she as him on eye her fixing earnestly
invited movements her which to seat the took and immediately, approached
she low, spoken Though start. Catherine made address first His him.
proxy!” by or person in watched, be to Always “What! distinguish, could

“Why whisper. half same the in answer Isabella’s was nonsense!” “Psha,
spirit, it--my believe could I If head? my into things such put you do
independent.” pretty is know, you

me.” for enough be would That independent. were heart your wish “I

have men You hearts? with do to have you can What indeed! heart, “My
hearts.” any you of none

enough.” torment us give they and eyes; have we hearts, not have we “If

so anything find they sorry am I it; for sorry am I they? “Do
you” pleases this hope I way. another look will I me. in disagreeable
now.” tormented not are eyes your hope “I him); on back her (turning

view--at in still is cheek blooming a of edge the for so; more “Never
little.” too and much too once

listen could countenance, of out quite and this, all heard Catherine
her for jealous and it, endure could Isabella that Amazed longer. no
proposed Allen, Mrs. join should she saying and up, rose she brother,
so was She inclination. no showed Isabella this for But walking. their
pump-room; the about parade to odious so was it and tired, amazingly
was she sisters; her miss should she seat her from moved she if and
must Catherine dearest her that so moment; every sisters her expecting
be could Catherine But again. down quietly sit must and her, excuse
their propose to up coming then just Allen Mrs. and too; stubborn
leaving pump-room, the of out walked and her joined she home, returning
did uneasiness much With Tilney. Captain with sitting still Isabella
falling was Tilney Captain that her to seemed It them. leave thus she
him; encouraging unconsciously Isabella and Isabella, with love in
as was James to attachment Isabella’s for be, must it unconsciously
truth her doubt To engagement. her as acknowledged well and certain
their of whole the during yet, and impossible; was intentions good or
talked had Isabella wished She odd. been had manner her conversation
not had and money, about much so not and self, usual her like more
that strange How Tilney. Captain of sight the at pleased well so looked
a her give to longed Catherine admiration! his perceive not should she
which pain the all prevent and guard, her on her put to it, of hint
her and him for both create otherwise might behaviour lively too her
brother.

this for amends make not did affection Thorpe’s John of compliment The
as believing from far as almost was She sister. his in thoughtlessness
he that forgotten not had she for sincere; be to it wishing from
encouragement her of and offer the of assertion his and mistake, could
egregious. very be sometimes could mistakes his that her convinced
in was profit chief her little; but gained she therefore, vanity, In
love in himself fancy to while his worth it think should he That wonder.
his of talked Isabella astonishment. lively of matter a was her with
said had Isabella but any; of sensible been never had she attentions;
never would and haste, in spoken been had hoped she which things many
present for altogether rest to glad was she this upon and again; said be
comfort. and ease




19 CHAPTER


to herself allowing not though Catherine, and away, passed days few A
of result The closely. her watching help not could friend, her suspect
creature. altered an seemed Isabella agreeable. not was observations her
friends immediate their by only surrounded indeed, her, saw she When
so was manners of change her Street, Pulteney or Buildings Edgar’s in
unnoticed. passed have might it farther, no gone it had that, trifling
of absence boasted that of or indifference, languid of something A
come occasionally would before, of heard never had Catherine which mind
spread have only might that appeared, worse nothing had but her; across
her saw Catherine when But interest. warmer a inspired and grace new a
were they as readily as attentions Tilney’s Captain admitting public, in
notice her in James with share equal an almost him allowing and offered,
What over. passed be to positive too became alteration the smiles, and
at, be could friend her what conduct, unsteady such by meant be could
pain the of aware be not could Isabella comprehension. her beyond was
which thoughtlessness wilful of degree a was it but inflicting; was she
him saw She sufferer. the was James resent. but not could Catherine
woman the comfort present his of careless however and uneasy; and grave
object. an always was it her to heart, her him given had who be might
looks his Though concerned. greatly was she too Tilney Captain poor For
she and goodwill, her to passport a was name his her, please not did
for, disappointment; approaching his of compassion sincere with thought
pump-room, the in overhear to herself believed had she what of spite in
Isabella’s of knowledge a with incompatible so was behaviour his
it. of aware him imagine reflection, upon not, could she that engagement
seemed had more if but rival, a as brother her of jealous be might He
by wished, She misapprehension. her in been have must fault the implied,
make and situation, her of Isabella remind to remonstrance, gentle a
either remonstrance, for but unkindness; double this of aware her
suggest to able If her. against always was comprehension or opportunity
the distress, this In it. understand never could Isabella hint, a
consolation; chief her became family Tilney the of departure intended
days, few a within place take to was Gloucestershire into journey their
heart every to peace restore least at would removal Tilney’s Captain and
removing; of intention no present at had Tilney Captain But own. his but
Bath. at continue to was he Northanger; to party the of be to not was he
to spoke She made. directly was resolution her this, knew Catherine When
partiality evident brother’s his regretting subject, the on Tilney Henry
engagement. prior her known make to him entreating and Thorpe, Miss for

answer. Henry’s was it,” know does brother “My

here?” stay he does why Then he? “Does

she but else; something of talk to beginning was and reply, no made He
longer The away? go to him persuade you not do “Why continued, eagerly
his for him advise Pray last. at him for be will it worse the stays, he
will Absence directly. Bath leave to sake, everybody’s for and sake, own
it and here, hope no have can he but again; comfortable him make time in
miserable.” be to staying only is

that.” do to wish not would brother my sure am “I said, and smiled Henry

away?” go to him persuade will you “Then

endeavour even cannot I if me, pardon but command; at not is “Persuasion
He engaged. is Thorpe Miss that him told myself have I him. persuade to
master.” own his be must and about, is he what knows

not does “he Catherine; cried about,” is he what know not does he “No,
me told ever has James that Not brother. my giving is he pain the know
uncomfortable.” very is he sure am I but so,

doing?” brother’s my is it sure you are “And

sure.” very “Yes,

Thorpe’s Miss or Thorpe, Miss to attentions brother’s my it “Is
pain?” the gives that them, of admission

thing?” same the it not “Is

offended is man No difference. a acknowledge would Morland Mr. think “I
only woman the is it loves; he woman the of admiration man’s another by
torment.” a it make can who

I But wrong. is “Isabella said, and friend, her for blushed Catherine
my to attached much very is she for torment, to mean cannot she sure am
and met, first they since ever him with love in been has She brother.
into almost herself fretted she uncertain, was consent father’s my while
him.” to attached be must she know You fever. a

Frederick.” with flirts and James, with love in is she understand: “I

with flirt cannot man one with love in woman A flirts. not no, “Oh!
another.”

so flirt nor well, so love neither will she that probable is “It
a up give each must gentlemen The singly. either do might she as well,
little.”

believe not do you “Then with, resumed Catherine pause, short a After
brother?” my to attached much very so Isabella

subject.” that on opinion no have can “I

he can what engagement, her knows he If mean? brother your can what “But
behaviour?” his by mean

questioner.” close very a are “You

told.” be to want I what ask only I I? “Am

tell?” to expected be can I what ask only you do “But

heart.” brother’s your know must you for so; think I “Yes,

assure I occasion, present the on it, term you as heart, brother’s “My
at.” guess only can I you

“Well?”

To ourselves. for guess all us let guesswork, be to is it if Nay, “Well!
before are premises The pitiful. is conjecture second-hand by guided be
young thoughtless a sometimes perhaps and lively a is brother My you.
has he and friend, your with acquaintance week’s a about had has he man;
her.” known has he as long as almost engagement her known

be may “you consideration, moments’ some after Catherine, said “Well,”
sure am I but this; all from intentions brother’s your at guess to able
he not Does it? about uncomfortable father your not is But cannot. I
to speak to were father your if Sure, away? go to Tilney Captain want
go.” would he him,

your for solicitude amiable this “in Henry, said Morland,” Miss dear “My
carried not you Are mistaken? little a be not you may comfort, brother’s
or account own his on either you, thank he Would far? too little a
good her least at or affection, her that supposing for Thorpe’s, Miss
Captain of nothing seeing her by secured be to only is behaviour,
him to constant heart her is Or solitude? in only safe he Is Tilney?
may you this--and think cannot He else? anyone by unsolicited when only
not ‘Do say, not will I it. think you have not would he that sure be
as be but moment; this at so, are you that know I because uneasy,’ be
attachment mutual the of doubt no have You can. you as uneasy little
that therefore, it, upon depend friend; your and brother your of
no that it upon depend them; between exist can never jealousy real
open are hearts Their duration. any of be can them between disagreement
what exactly know they you; to be can heart neither as other, each to
will one that certain be may you and borne; be can what and required is
pleasant.” be to known is what beyond other the tease never

“Though added, he grave, and doubtful look to still her Perceiving
a but remain probably will he us, with Bath leave not does Frederick
absence of leave His us. behind days few a only perhaps time, short very
then will what And regiment. his to return must he and expire, soon will
for Thorpe Isabella drink will mess-room The acquaintance? their be
Tilney’s poor over brother your with laugh will she and fortnight, a
month.” a for passion

its resisted had She comfort. against longer no contend would Catherine
her carried now it but speech, a of length whole the during approaches
extent the for herself blamed She best. know must Tilney Henry captive.
subject the on seriously so think to never resolved and fears, her of
again.

parting their in behaviour Isabella’s by supported was resolution Her
in stay Catherine’s of evening last the spent Thorpes The interview.
excite to lovers the between passed nothing and Street, Pulteney
in was James apprehension. in them quit her make or uneasiness, her
tenderness Her placid. engagingly most Isabella and spirits, excellent
that but heart; her of feeling first the rather seemed friend her for
flat a lover her gave she once and allowable; was moment a such at
remembered Catherine but hand; her back drew she once and contradiction,
The affection. judicious to all it placed and instructions, Henry’s
fancied. be may ones fair parting the of promises and tears, embraces,




20 CHAPTER


good whose friend, young their lose to sorry were Allen Mrs. and Mr.
the in and companion, valuable a her made had cheerfulness and humour
Her increased. gently been had own their enjoyment whose of promotion
wishing their prevented however, Tilney, Miss with going in happiness
Bath in week more one only remain to were they as and, otherwise; it
Allen Mr. felt. be long not would now them quitting her themselves,
her saw and breakfast, to was she where Street, Milsom to her attended
was great so but friends; new her among welcome kindest the with seated
fearful so and family, the of one as herself finding in agitation her
to able being not of and right, was what exactly doing not of she was
first the of embarrassment the in that, opinion, good their preserve
to him with return to wished have almost could she minutes, five
Street. Pulteney

her of some away did soon smile Henry’s and manners Tilney’s Miss
could nor ease; at being from far was she still but feelings; unpleasant
her. reassure entirely himself general the of attentions incessant the
felt have not might she whether doubted she seemed, it as perverse Nay,
comfort--his her for anxiety His to. attended less been she had less,
often-expressed his and eat, would she that solicitations continual
life her in never taste--though her to nothing seeing her of fears
it breakfast-table--made a on variety such half beheld she had before
She visitor. a was she that moment a for forget to her for impossible
it. to reply to how not knew and respect, such of unworthy utterly felt
the for impatience general’s the by improved not was tranquillity Her
his at expressed he displeasure the by nor son, eldest his of appearance
by pained quite was She down. came last at Tilney Captain when laziness
to disproportionate seemed which reproof, father’s his of severity the
herself found she when increased concern her was much and offence; the
chiefly was tardiness his that and lecture, the of cause principal the
a in her placing was This her. to disrespectful being from resented
Captain for compassion great felt she and situation, uncomfortable very
goodwill. his for hope to able being without Tilney,

defence, any not attempted and silence, in father his to listened He
on mind, his of inquietude the that fearing in her confirmed which
been have sleepless, long him keeping by might, account, Isabella’s
being her of time first the was It late. rising his of cause real the
form to able now be to hoped had she and company, his in decidedly
father his while voice his heard scarcely she but him; of opinion her
spirits his were much so afterwards, even and room; the in remained
to whisper a in words, these but nothing distinguish could she affected,
off.” all are you when be shall I glad “How Eleanor,

the while ten struck clock The pleasant. not was going of bustle The
Milsom of out be to fixed had general the and down, carrying were trunks
him for brought being of instead greatcoat, His hour. that by Street
to was he which in curricle the in out spread was directly, on put to
out, drawn not was chaise the of seat middle The son. his accompany
had maid daughter’s his and it, in go to people three were there though
sit; to room have not would Morland Miss that parcels with it crowded so
her handed he when apprehension this by influenced he was much so and,
from writing-desk new own her saving in difficulty some had she that in,
closed was door the however, last, At street. the into out thrown being
which in pace sober the at off set they and females, three the upon
a perform usually gentleman a of horses four fed highly handsome, the
Bath, from Northanger of distance the was such miles: thirty of journey
as revived spirits Catherine’s stages. equal two into divided now be to
restraint; no felt she Tilney Miss with for door; the from drove they
abbey an of her, to new entirely road a of interest the with and,
without Bath of view last the caught she behind, curricle a and before,
The it. expected she before milestone every with met and regret, any
was there which in France, Petty at wait hours’ two a of tediousness
about loiter and hungry, being without eat to but done be to nothing
style the of admiration her followed--and next see, to anything without
four--postilions and chaise fashionable the of travelled, they which in
and stirrups, their in regularly so rising liveried, handsomely
consequent this under little a sunk mounted, properly outriders numerous
would delay the agreeable, perfectly been party their Had inconvenience.
seemed man, a charming so though Tilney, General but nothing; been have
was anything scarcely and spirits, children’s his upon check a always
at discontent his with which, of observation the himself; by but said
made waiters, the at impatience angry his and afforded, inn the whatever
lengthen to appeared and him, of awe in more moment every grow Catherine
was release of order the however, last, At four. into hours two the
proposal general’s the by surprised then Catherine was much and given;
the of rest the for curricle son’s his in place his taking her of
of much as seeing her for anxious was he and fine, was day “the journey:
possible.” as country the

open men’s young respecting opinion, Allen’s Mr. of remembrance The
first her and plan, a such of mention the at blush her made carriages,
for deference greater of was second her but it; decline to was thought
for improper anything propose not could he judgment; Tilney’s General
Henry with herself found she minutes, few a of course the in and, her;
trial short very A existed. ever as being a happy as curricle, the in
world; the in equipage prettiest the was curricle a that her convinced
it but sure, be to grandeur, some with off wheeled four and chaise the
forget easily not could she and business, troublesome and heavy a was
would time the Half France. Petty at hours two stopped having its
horses light the were nimbly so and curricle, the for enough been have
own his have to chosen general the not had that, move, to disposed
a half in ease with it passed have could they way, the lead carriage
horses; the to belong all not did curricle the of merit the But minute.
disturbance, any making quietly--without well--so so drove Henry
only the from different so them: at swearing or her, to parading without
And with! him compare to power her in was it whom gentleman-coachman
greatcoat his of capes innumerable the and well, so sat hat his then
being to next him, by driven be To important! becomingly so looked
In world. the in happiness greatest the certainly was him, with dancing
her to listening of that now had she delight, other every to addition
for account, sister’s his on least, at thanked being of praise; own
real as ranked it hearing of visitor; her becoming thus in kindness her
he sister, His gratitude. real creating as described and friendship,
companion--and, female no had circumstanced--she uncomfortably was said,
any without sometimes was father, her of absence frequent the in
all. at companion

her?” with you not “Are Catherine. said be?” that can how “But

at establishment an have I home; my half than more not is “Northanger
father’s, my from miles twenty nearly is which Woodston, in house own my
there.” spent necessarily is time my of some and

that!” for be must you sorry “How

Eleanor.” leave to sorry always am “I

of fond so be must you her, for affection your besides but “Yes;
ordinary an abbey, the as home a such to used being After abbey! the
disagreeable.” very be must parsonage-house

the of idea favourable very a formed have “You said, and smiled, He
abbey.”

one what like just place, old fine a it not Is have. I sure, be “To
about?” reads

such building a that horrors the all encounter to prepared you are “And
Nerves heart? stout a you Have produce? may about’ reads one ‘what as
tapestry?” and panels sliding for fit

there because frightened, easily be should I think not do yes--I “Oh!
been never has it besides, house--and the in people many so be would
back come family the then and years, for deserted left and uninhabited
happens.” generally as notice, any giving without unawares, it to

dimly hall a into way our explore to have not shall We certainly. “No,
spread to obliged be fire--nor wood a of embers expiring the by lighted
furniture. or doors, windows, without room a of floor the on beds our
means) whatever (by is lady young a when that aware be must you But
from apart lodged always is she kind, this of dwelling a into introduced
the of end own their to repair snugly they While family. the of rest the
up housekeeper, ancient the Dorothy, by conducted formally is she house,
apartment an into passages, gloomy many along and staircase, different a
years twenty about it in died kin or cousin some since used never
mind your not Will this? as ceremony a such stand you Can before.
and lofty chamber--too gloomy this in yourself find you when you misgive
take to lamp single a of rays feeble the only with you, for extensive
as large as figures exhibiting tapestry with hung walls size--its its in
even presenting velvet, purple or stuff green dark of bed, the and life,
you?” within sink heart your not Will appearance? funereal a

sure.” am I me, to happen not will this But “Oh!

And apartment! your of furniture the examine you will fearfully “How
drawers, or wardrobes, toilettes, tables, Not discern? you will what
a other the on lute, broken a of remains the perhaps side one on but
fireplace the over and open, can efforts no which chest ponderous
so will features whose warrior, handsome some of portrait the
your withdraw to able be not will you that you, strike incomprehensibly
appearance, your by struck less no meanwhile, Dorothy, it. from eyes
hints. unintelligible few a drops and agitation, great in you on gazes
that suppose to reason you gives she moreover, spirits, your raise To
informs and haunted, undoubtedly is inhabit you abbey the of part the
this With call. within domestic single a have not will you that you
her of sound the to listen off--you curtsies she cordial parting
when, you--and reach can echo last the as long as footsteps receding
discover, you door, your fasten to attempt you spirits, fainting with
lock.” no has it that alarm, increased with

cannot it But book! a like just is This frightful! how Tilney, Mr. “Oh!
Dorothy. really not is housekeeper your sure am I me. to happen really
then?” what Well,

After night. first the occur may perhaps alarm to further “Nothing
to retire will you bed, the of horror unconquerable your surmounting
at or second, the on But slumber. unquiet hours’ few a get and rest,
a have probably will you arrival, your after night third the farthest
edifice the shake to seem to as loud so thunder of Peals storm. violent
during mountains--and neighbouring the round roll will foundation its to
think probably will you it, accompany which wind of gusts frightful the
hanging the of part one extinguished) not is lamp your (for discern you
your repress to course of Unable rest. the than agitated violently more
instantly will you it, indulging for moment a favourable so in curiosity
examine to proceed you, around dressing-gown your throwing and arise,
in division a discover will you search, short very a After mystery. this
inspection, minutest the defy to as constructed artfully so tapestry the
being door, appear--which immediately will door a it, opening on and
efforts, few a after will, you padlock, a and bars massy by secured only
through pass will hand, your in lamp your with opening--and, in succeed
room.” vaulted small a into it

thing.” such any do to frightened much too be should I indeed; “No,

a is there that understand to you given has Dorothy when Not “What!
chapel the and apartment your between communication subterraneous secret
simple so from shrink you Could off? miles two scarcely Anthony, St. of
room, vaulted small this into proceed will you no, No, adventure? an
very anything perceiving without others, several into this through and
another in dagger, a be may there perhaps one In either. in remarkable
of instrument some of remains the third a in and blood, of drops few a
way, common the of out this all in nothing being there but torture;
own your towards return will you exhausted, nearly being lamp your and
your however, room, vaulted small the through repassing In apartment.
ebony of cabinet old-fashioned large, a towards attracted be will eyes
you before, furniture the examining narrowly though which, gold, and
will you presentiment, irresistible an by Impelled unnoticed. passed had
into search and doors, folding its unlock it, to advance eagerly
of anything discovering without time some for drawer--but every
At diamonds. of hoard considerable a but nothing importance--perhaps
will compartment inner an spring, secret a touching by however, last,
of sheets many contains it--it seize appears--you paper of roll open--a
chamber, own your into treasure precious the with hasten manuscript--you
thou Thou--whomsoever ‘Oh! decipher to able been you have scarcely but
may Matilda wretched the of memoirs these hands whose into be, mayst
in you leaves and socket, the in expires suddenly lamp your fall’--when
darkness.” total

on.” go Well, so. say not no--do No, “Oh!

able be to raised had he interest the by amused much too was Henry But
of either solemnity command longer no could he farther; it carry to
fancy own her use to her entreat to obliged was and voice, or subject
grew herself, recollecting Catherine, woes. Matilda’s of perusal the in
her that him assure to earnestly began and eagerness, her of ashamed
really of apprehension smallest the without fixed been had attention
never would sure, was she Tilney, “Miss related. he what with meeting
all at not was She described! had he as chamber a such into her put
afraid.”

sight a for impatience her journey, their of end the near drew they As
subjects on conversation his by suspended time some abbey--for the of
was road the in bend every and force, full in different--returned very
grey of walls massy its of glimpse a afford to awe solemn with expected
the of beams last the with oaks, ancient of grove a amidst rising stone,
so But windows. Gothic high its on splendour beautiful in playing sun
the through passing herself found she that stand, building the did low
without Northanger, of grounds very the into lodge the of gates great
chimney. antique an even discerned having

a was there but surprised, be to right any had she that not knew She
expected. not had certainly she which approach of mode this in something
such with herself find to appearance, modern a of lodges between pass To
a along rapidly so driven and abbey, the of precincts very the in ease
solemnity or alarm, obstacle, without gravel, fine of road level smooth,
long not was She inconsistent. and odd as her struck kind, any of
rain, of scud sudden A considerations. such for however, leisure, at
anything observe to her for impossible it made face, her in full driving
straw new her of welfare the on thoughts her all fixed and further,
with springing, was walls, abbey the under actually was she and bonnet;
the of shelter the beneath was carriage, the from assistance, Henry’s
and friend her where hall, the to on passed even had and porch, old
awful one feeling without her, welcome to waiting were general the
any of suspicion moment’s one or herself, to misery future of foreboding
breeze The edifice. solemn the within acted being horror of scenes past
wafted had it her; to murdered the of sighs the waft to seemed not had
shake good a given having and rain; mizzling thick a than worse nothing
drawing-room, common the into shown be to ready was she habit, her to
was. she where considering of capable and

she But abbey! an in really be to delightful was it Yes, abbey! An
her within anything whether room, the round looked she as doubted,
in was furniture The consciousness. the her given have would observation
she where fireplace, The taste. modern of elegance and profusion the all
was times, former of carving ponderous and width ample the expected had
and marble, handsome though plain of slabs with Rumford, a to contracted
which to windows, The china. English prettiest the of it over ornaments
talk general the heard having from dependence, peculiar with looked she
were care, reverential with form Gothic their in them preserving his of
arch pointed the sure, be To portrayed. had fancy her what less yet
even be might Gothic--they was them of form preserved--the was
an To light! so clear, so large, so was pane every casements--but
heaviest the and divisions, smallest the for hoped had which imagination
was difference the cobwebs, and dirt, glass, painted for stone-work,
distressing. very

the of talk to began employed, was eye her how perceiving general, The
everything, where furniture, the of simplicity and room the of smallness
flattering etc.; comfort, to only pretended use, daily for being
not Abbey the in apartments some were there that however, himself,
gilding costly the mention to proceeding was notice--and her unworthy
to short stopped he watch, his out taking when, particular, in one of
seemed This five! of minutes twenty within surprise with it pronounce
Miss by away hurried herself found Catherine and separation, of word the
punctuality strictest the that her convinced as manner a such in Tilney
Northanger. at expected be would hours family the to

broad a ascended they hall, lofty and large the through Returning
many and flights many after which, oak, shining of staircase
it side one On gallery. wide long, a upon them brought landing-places,
which windows by other the on lighted was it and doors, of range a had
before quadrangle, a into looked discover to time only had Catherine
she hope to staying scarcely and chamber, a into way the led Tilney Miss
she that entreaty anxious an with her left comfortable, it find would
dress. her in possible as alteration little as make would




21 CHAPTER


apartment her that Catherine satisfy to enough was glance moment’s A
the by her alarm to endeavoured had Henry which one the unlike very was
contained and large, unreasonably means no by was It of. description
was floor the papered, were walls The velvet. nor tapestry neither
those than dim more nor perfect less neither were windows the carpeted;
latest the of not though furniture, the below; drawing-room the of
room the of air the and comfortable, and handsome was fashion,
on ease at instantaneously heart Her uncheerful. from far altogether
of examination particular in time no lose to resolved she point, this
delay. any by general the disobliging dreaded greatly she as anything,
was she and haste, possible all with off thrown was therefore habit Her
conveyed had chaise-seat the which package, linen the unpin to preparing
large a on fell suddenly eye her when accommodation, immediate her for
fireplace. the of side one on recess deep a in back standing chest, high
she else, everything forgetting and, start; her made it of sight The
crossed thoughts these while wonder, motionless in it on gazing stood
her:

An this! as sight a such expect not did I indeed! strange is “This
here? placed be it should Why hold? it can What chest! heavy immense
into look will I sight! of out be to meant if as too, back Pushed
too--by directly it--and into look will I may, it what me it--cost
and advanced She out.” go may candle my evening till stay I If daylight.
darker some with inlaid curiously cedar, of was it closely: it examined
the of stand carved a on ground, the from foot a about raised, and wood,
end each at age; from tarnished though silver, was lock The same.
perhaps broken silver, of also handles of remains imperfect the were
was lid, the of centre the on and, violence; strange some by prematurely
intently, it over bent Catherine metal. same the in cipher, mysterious a
could She certainty. with anything distinguish to able being without but
be to letter last the believe it, took she direction whatever in not,
was house that in else anything be should it that yet and T; a
not If astonishment. of degree common no raise to circumstance a
the into fallen have it could events strange what by theirs, originally
family? Tilney

seizing, and greater; growing moment every was curiosity fearful Her
hazards all at resolved she lock, the of hasp the hands, trembling with
for difficulty, With contents. its to as least at herself satisfy to
inches; few a lid the raised she efforts, her resist to seemed something
her, made room the of door the at knocking sudden a moment that at but
This violence. alarming with closed lid the and hold, her quit starting,
of be to mistress her by sent maid, Tilney’s Miss was intruder ill-timed
it her, dismissed immediately Catherine though and Morland; Miss to use
her, forced and doing, be to ought she what of sense the to her recalled
in proceed to mystery, this penetrate to desire anxious her of spite in
her for quick, not was progress Her delay. further without dressing her
calculated well so object the on bent still were eyes her and thoughts
upon moment a waste not dared she though and alarm; and interest to
At chest. the from paces many remain not could she attempt, second a
toilette her gown, her into arm one slipped having however, length,
might curiosity her of impatience the that finished nearly so seemed
desperate so and, spared; be might surely moment One indulged. be safely
by secured unless that, strength, her of exertion the be should
With back. thrown be should moment one in lid the means, supernatural
her. deceive not did confidence her and forward, sprang she spirit this
eyes astonished her to gave and lid, the back threw effort resolute Her
one at reposing folded, properly counterpane, cotton white a of view the
possession! undisputed in chest the of end

Tilney, Miss when surprise of blush first the with it on gazing was She
the to and room, the entered ready, being friend’s her for anxious
expectation, absurd an minutes some for harboured having of shame rising
is “That search. a idle so in caught being of shame the added then was
hastily Catherine as Tilney, Miss said it?” not is chest, old curious a
how say to impossible is “It glass. the to away turned and it closed
this in put first be to came it How here. been has it generations many
might it thought I because moved, it had not have I but not, know I room
that is it of worst The bonnets. and hats holding in use of be sometimes
at is it however, corner, that In open. to difficult it makes weight its
way.” the of out least

her tying blushing, once at being speech, for leisure no had Catherine
Miss dispatch. violent most the with resolutions wise forming and gown,
they minute a half in and late; being of fear her hinted gently Tilney
General for unfounded, wholly not alarm an in together, downstairs ran
having, and hand, his in watch his drawing-room, the pacing was Tilney
violence, with bell the pulled entering, their of instant very the on
directly!” table on be to “Dinner ordered

pale sat and spoke, he which with emphasis the at trembled Catherine
and children, his for concerned mood, humble most a in breathless, and
he as politeness his recovering general, the and chests; old detesting
for daughter his scolding in time his of rest the spent her, at looked
breath of out absolutely was who friend, fair her hurrying foolishly so
the in hurry for occasion least the not was there when haste, from
distress double the over get all at not could Catherine but world:
simpleton great a been and lecture a in friend her involved having of
the when dinner-table, the at seated happily were they till herself,
restored own, her of appetite good a and smiles, complacent general’s
its in suitable room, noble a was dining-parlour The peace. to her
and use, common in one the than drawing-room larger much a to dimensions
the on lost almost was which expense and luxury of style a in up fitted
spaciousness its than more little saw who Catherine, of eye unpractised
aloud spoke she former, the Of attendants. their of number the and
countenance, gracious very a with general, the and admiration; her
further and room, ill-sized an means no by was it that acknowledged
he people, most as subjects such on careless as though that, confessed
necessaries the of one as eating-room large tolerably a upon look did
much to used been have must she “that however, supposed, he life; of
Allen’s?” Mr. at apartments better-sized

Allen’s “Mr. assurance; honest Catherine’s was indeed,” “No,
never had she and large,” as half than more not was dining-parlour
humour good general’s The life. her in this as room a large so seen
not simple be would it thought he rooms, such had he as Why, increased.
be might there believed he honour, his upon but, them; of use make to
was he house, Allen’s Mr. size. their half only of rooms in comfort more
happiness. rational for size true the of exactly be must sure,

the in and, disturbance, further any without passed evening The
cheerfulness. positive much with Tilney, General of absence occasional
fatigue smallest the felt Catherine that presence his in only was It
or languor of moments in even then, even and journey; her from
could she and preponderated, happiness general of sense a restraint,
them. with being of wish one without Bath in friends her of think

whole the intervals at rising been had wind the stormy; was night The
rained and blew it up, broke party the time the by and afternoon;
tempest the to listened hall, the crossed she as Catherine, violently.
of corner a round rage it heard she when and, awe; of sensations with
felt door, distant a fury sudden with close and building ancient the
were these Yes, abbey. an in really was she that time first the for
countless a recollection her to brought they sounds; characteristic
buildings such which scenes, horrid and situations dreadful of variety
she did heartily most and in; ushered storms such and witnessed, had
walls within entrance her attending circumstances happier the in rejoice
drunken or assassins midnight from dread to nothing had She solemn! so
her told had he what in jest in only been certainly had Henry gallants.
have could she guarded, so and furnished, so house a In morning. that
securely as bedroom her to go might and suffer, to or explore to nothing
fortifying wisely Thus Fullerton. at chamber own her been had it if as
on especially enabled, was she upstairs, proceeded she as mind, her
enter to her, from doors two only slept Tilney Miss that perceiving
immediately were spirits her and heart; stout tolerably a with room her
is better much “How fire. wood a of blaze cheerful the by assisted
a find to better much fender--“how the to walked she as she, said this,”
the all till cold the in shivering wait to have to than lit, ready fire
and do, to obliged been have girls poor many so as bed, in are family
a with in coming by one frightening servant old faithful a have to then
like been had it If is! it what is Northanger that am I glad How faggot!
could I this, as night a such in that, know not do I places, other some
to nothing is there sure, be to now, but courage: my for answered have
one.” alarm

It motion. in seemed curtains window The room. the round looked She
the through penetrating wind the of violence the but nothing be could
carelessly forward, boldly stepped she and shutters; the of divisions
courageously peeped so, being its of herself assure to tune, a humming
her, scare to seat window low either on nothing saw curtain, each behind
conviction strongest the felt shutter, the against hand a placing on and
from away turned she as chest, old the at glance A force. wind’s the of
causeless the scorned she use; its without not was examination, this
to indifference happy most a with began and fancy, idle an of fears
hurry not should she time; her take should “She bed. for herself prepare
house. the in up person last the were she if care not did she herself;
if as cowardly, seem would that fire; her up make not would she But
fire The bed.” in were she after light of protection the for wished she
an of part best the spent having Catherine, and away, died therefore
bed, into stepping of think to beginning was arrangements, her in hour
the by struck was she room, the round glance parting a giving on when,
in though which, cabinet, black old-fashioned high, a of appearance
before. notice her caught never had enough, conspicuous situation a
escape to was which cabinet ebony the of description his words, Henry’s
though and her; across rushed immediately first, at observation her
it whimsical, something was there it, in really nothing be could there
and candle her took She coincidence! remarkable very a certainly was
but gold; and ebony absolutely not was It cabinet. the at closely looked
she as and kind; handsomest the of japan yellow and black japan, was it
key The gold. of effect the much very had yellow the candle, her held
not, it; into look to fancy strange a had she and door, the in was
was it but anything, finding of expectation smallest the with however,
sleep not could she short, In said. had Henry what after odd, very so
on caution great with candle the placing So, it. examined had she till
turn to tried and hand tremulous very a with key the seized she chair, a
discouraged, not but Alarmed, strength. utmost her resisted it but it;
herself believed she and flew, bolt a way; another it tried she
immovable. still was door The mysterious! strangely how but successful;
the down roared wind The wonder. breathless in moment a paused She
everything and windows, the against torrents in beat rain the chimney,
bed, to retire To situation. her of awfulness the speak to seemed
be must sleep since vain, be would point, a such on unsatisfied however,
closed mysteriously so cabinet a of consciousness the with impossible
the to herself applied she therefore, Again, vicinity. immediate her in
with instants some for way possible every in it moving after and key,
yielded suddenly door the effort, last hope’s of celerity determined the
and victory, a such at exultation with leaped heart her hand: her to
by only secured being second the door, folding each open thrown having
her that in though lock, the than construction wonderful less of bolts
drawers small of range double a unusual, anything discern not could eye
in and them; below and above drawers larger some with view, in appeared
in secured key, and lock a with also closed door, small a centre, the
importance. of cavity a probability all

a With her. fail not did courage her but quick, beat heart Catherine’s
fingers her curiosity, with straining eye an and hope, by flushed cheek
empty. entirely was It forth. it drew and drawer a of handle the grasped
a third, a second, a seized she eagerness greater and alarm less With
not in and unsearched, left was one Not empty. equally was each fourth;
treasure, a concealing of art the in read Well found. anything was one
and her, escape not did drawers the to linings false of possibility the
the in place The vain. in acuteness anxious with each round felt she
from “never had she though and unexplored; now remained alone middle
the of part any in anything finding of idea smallest the had first the
thus success ill her at disappointed least the in not was and cabinet,
was she while thoroughly it examine to not foolish be would it far,
door, the unfasten could she before however time some was It it.” about
of as lock inner this of management the in occurring difficulty same the
her was hitherto, as vain, not and open; did it length at but outer; the
back pushed paper of roll a on fell directly eyes quick her search;
and concealment, for apparently cavity, the of part further the into
her fluttered, heart Her indescribable. were moment that at feelings her
unsteady an with seized, She pale. grew cheeks her and trembled, knees
ascertain to sufficed glance a half for manuscript, precious the hand,
sensations awful with acknowledged she while and characters; written
resolved foretold, had Henry what of exemplification striking this
rest. to attempted she before line every peruse to instantly

with it to turn her made emitted candle her light the of dimness The
some yet had it extinction; sudden its of danger no was there but alarm;
in difficulty greater any have not might she that and burn; to hours
occasion, might date ancient its what than writing the distinguishing
A one. in extinguished and snuffed was It Alas! it. snuffed hastily she
a for Catherine, effect. awful more with expired have not could lamp
a not completely; done was It horror. with motionless was moments, few
breath. rekindling the to hope give could wick the in light of remnant
gust violent A room. the filled immovable and impenetrable Darkness
moment. the to horror fresh added fury, sudden with rising wind, of
a succeeded, which pause the In foot. to head from trembled Catherine
struck door distant a of closing the and footsteps receding like sound
sweat cold A more. no support could nature Human ear. affrighted her on
groping and hand, her from fell manuscript the forehead, her on stood
of suspension some sought and in, hastily jumped she bed, the to way her
in eyes her close To clothes. the underneath far creeping by agony
With question. the of out entirely be must felt she night, that sleep
agitated, so way every in feelings and awakened, justly so curiosity a
dreadful! so abroad too storm The impossible. absolutely be must repose
blast every now but wind, from alarm feel to used been not had She
wonderfully so manuscript The intelligence. awful with fraught seemed
it was how prediction, morning’s the accomplishing wonderfully so found,
relate? it could whom To contain? it could What for? accounted be to
singularly how And concealed? long so been have it could means what By
made had she Till it! discover to lot her to fall should it that strange
repose neither have could she however, contents, its of mistress herself
peruse to determined was she rays first sun’s the with and comfort; nor
She intervene. yet must which hours tedious the were many But it.
The sleeper. quiet every envied and bed, her in about tossed shuddered,
even terrific more noises, the were various and raged, still storm
very The ear. startled her on intervals at struck which wind, the than
another at and motion, in moment one at seemed bed her of curtains
to somebody of attempt the by if as agitated, was door her of lock the
than more and gallery, the along creep to seemed murmurs Hollow enter.
after Hour moans. distant of sound the by chilled was blood her once
proclaimed three heard had Catherine wearied the and away, passed hour
she or subsided tempest the before house the in clocks the all by
asleep. fast fell unknowingly




22 CHAPTER


the o’clock eight at window-shutters her back folding housemaid’s The
her opened she and Catherine; roused first which sound the was day next
of objects on closed, been have ever could they that wondering eyes,
morning bright a and burning, already was fire her cheerfulness;
the with Instantaneously, night. the of tempest the succeeded had
manuscript; the of recollection her returned existence, of consciousness
away, going maid’s the of moment very the in bed the from springing and
the from burst had which sheet scattered every collected eagerly she
luxury the enjoy to back flew and ground, the to falling its on roll
not must she that saw plainly now She pillow. her on perusal their of
had she what of generality the with length equal of manuscript a expect
of entirely consist to seeming roll, the for books, in over shuddered
much and size, trifling of but altogether was sheets, disjointed small
first. at be to it supposed had she than less

import. its at started She page. a over rapidly glanced eye greedy Her
inventory An false? her play senses her not did or possible, be it Could
before was that all seemed characters, modern and coarse in linen, of
washing-bill a held she trusted, be might sight of evidence the If her!
with articles same the saw and sheet, another seized She hand. her in
nothing presented fifth a and fourth, a third, a variation; little
Two each. in her faced waistcoats and cravats, stockings, Shirts, new.
more scarcely expenditure an marked hand, same the by penned others,
breeches-ball. and shoe-string, hair-powder, letters, in interesting,
first its by seemed rest, the enclosed had which sheet, larger the And
the was Such bill! farrier’s mare”--a chestnut poultice “To line, cramp
the by suppose, then could she as perhaps, (left papers of collection
which them) taken had she whence place the in servant a of negligence
her half of her robbed and alarm, and expectation with her filled had
of adventure the not Could dust. the to humbled felt She rest! night’s
as eye her catching it, of corner A wisdom? her taught have chest the
now could Nothing her. against judgment in up rise to seemed lay, she
a that suppose To fancies. recent her of absurdity the than clearer be
in undiscovered remained have could back generations many of manuscript
the be should she that habitable!--Or so modern, so that, as such room a
was which of key the cabinet, a unlocking of skill the possess to first
all! to open

Henry that forbid Heaven herself? on imposed so have she could How
his measure great a in was it And folly! her know ever should Tilney
his with agree to exactly so appeared cabinet the not had for doing, own
smallest the felt have never should she adventures, her of description
Impatient occurred. that comfort only the was This it. about curiosity
detestable those folly, her of evidences hateful those of rid get to
them folding and directly, rose she bed, the over scattered then papers
them returned before, as shape same the in possible as nearly as up
no that wish hearty very a with cabinet, the within spot same the to
her disgrace to again, forward them bring ever might accident untoward
herself. with even

still was however, open, to difficult so been have should locks the Why
ease. perfect with them manage now could she for remarkable, something
the in indulged she and mysterious, something surely was there this In
the of possibility the till minute, a half for suggestion flattering
fastener, its herself being of and unlocked, first at been having door’s
blush. another her cost and head, her into darted

conduct her which in room a from could she as soon as away got She
speed all with way her found and reflections, unpleasant such produced
Miss by her to out pointed been had it as breakfast-parlour, the to
hope immediate his and it; in alone was Henry before. evening the Tilney
reference arch an with tempest, the by undisturbed been having her of
distressing. rather was inhabited, they building the of character the to
yet, and suspected, weakness her have not she would world the For
that acknowledge to constrained was falsehood, absolute an to unequal
morning charming a have we “But little. a awake her kept had wind the
storms “and subject; the of rid get to desiring added, she it,” after
beautiful What over. are they when nothing are sleeplessness and
hyacinth.” a love to learnt just have I hyacinths!

argument?” or accident By learn? you might how “And

take to used Allen Mrs. how. tell cannot I me; taught sister “Your
till could, never I but them; like me make to year, after year pains,
indifferent naturally am I Street; Milsom in day other the them saw I
flowers.” about

new a gained have You better. the much So hyacinth. a love you now “But
happiness upon holds many as have to well is it and enjoyment, of source
your in desirable always is flowers for taste a Besides, possible. as
more to you tempting and doors, of out you getting of means a as sex,
love the though And take. otherwise would you than exercise frequent
once sentiment the tell, can who domestic, rather be may hyacinth a of
rose?” a love to come time in may you but raised,

pleasure The doors. of out me get to pursuit such any want not do I “But
weather fine in and me, for enough is air fresh breathing and walking of
within.” never am I says Mamma time. my half than more out am I

love to learnt have you that pleased am I however, rate, any “At
a and thing; the is love to learning of habit mere The hyacinth. a
my Has blessing. great a is lady young a in disposition of teachableness
instruction?” of mode pleasant a sister

the by answer an attempting of embarrassment the saved was Catherine
happy a announced compliments smiling whose general, the of entrance
not did rising early sympathetic of hint gentle whose but mind, of state
composure. her advance

notice Catherine’s on itself forced set breakfast the of elegance The
general’s the been had it luckily, and, table; at seated were they when
it confessed taste, his of approbation her by enchanted was He choice.
of manufacture the encourage to right it thought simple, and neat be to
as was tea the palate, uncritical his to part, his for and country; his
Dresden of that from as Staffordshire, of clay the from flavoured well
ago. years two purchased set, old an quite was this But Save. or
some seen had he time; that since improved much was manufacture The
perfectly been not he had and town, in last when specimens beautiful
new a order to tempted been have might kind, that of vanity without
of occur long ere might opportunity an that however, trusted, He set.
only the probably was Catherine himself. for not one--though selecting
him. understand not did who party the of one

business where Woodston, for them left Henry breakfast after Shortly
in attended all They days. three or two him keep would and required
the re-entering on immediately and horse, his mount him see to hall the
catching of hope the in window a to walked Catherine breakfast-room,
your upon call heavy somewhat a is “This figure. his of glimpse another
will “Woodston Eleanor. to general the observed fortitude,” brother’s
today.” appearance sombre a but make

Catherine. asked place?” pretty a it “Is

the tell best can ladies for opinion, your Speak Eleanor? you, say “What
be would it think I men. as well as places to regard in ladies of taste
The recommendations. many have to eye impartial most the by acknowledged
excellent an with south-east, the facing meadows fine among stands house
built I which surrounding walls the aspect; same the in kitchen-garden
It son. my of benefit the for ago, years ten about myself stocked and
being place the in property the and Morland; Miss living, family a is
bad a be not shall it that care take I believe may you own, my chiefly
be not would he living, this on solely depend income Henry’s Did one.
younger two only with that odd, seem may it Perhaps for. ill-provided
certainly and him; for necessary profession any think should I children,
tie every from disengaged him wish all could we when moments are there
young you of converts make exactly not may I though But business. of
in me with agree would Morland, Miss father, your sure am I ladies,
The employment. some man young every give to expedient it thinking
thing. the is employment but object, an not is it nothing, is money
as inherit perhaps will who see, you son, eldest my Frederick, Even
his has county, the in man private any as property landed a considerable
profession.”

The wishes. his to equal was argument last this of effect imposing The
unanswerable. be to it proved lady the of silence

the over shown being her of before evening the said been had Something
Catherine though and conductor; her as himself offered now he and house,
a was it daughter, his by only accompanied it explore to hoped had
not circumstances, any under itself, in happiness much too of proposal
the in hours eighteen already been had she for accepted; gladly be to
just netting-box, The rooms. its of few a only seen had and abbey,
ready was she and haste, joyful with closed was forth, drawn leisurely
he house, the over gone had they when “And moment. a in him attend to
the into her accompanying of pleasure the moreover himself promised
perhaps “But acquiescence. her curtsied She garden.” and shrubberies
object. first her those make to her to agreeable more be might it
the year of time this at and favourable, present at was weather The
prefer? she would Which so. continuing its of great very was uncertainty
most would think daughter his did Which service. her at equally was He
discern. could he thought he But wishes? friend’s fair her with accord
of desire judicious a eyes Morland’s Miss in read certainly he Yes,
amiss? judge she did when But weather. smiling present the of use making
and implicitly, yielded He dry. and safe always be would abbey The
room, the left He moment.” a in them attend and hat his fetch would
her of speak to began face, anxious disappointed, a with Catherine, and
own his against doors of out them taking be should he that unwillingness
stopped was she but her; pleasing of idea mistaken a under inclination,
be will it believe “I confusion, little a with saying, Tilney’s Miss by
on uneasy be not do and fine; so is it while morning the take to wisest
day.” of time this at out walks always he account; father’s my

Why understood. be to was this how know exactly not did Catherine
the on unwillingness any be there Could embarrassed? Tilney Miss was
And own. his was proposal The abbey? the over her show to side general’s
her Neither early? so walk his take always should he that odd it not was
was She provoking. very certainly was It so. did Allen Mr. nor father
about curiosity any scarcely had and house, the see to impatience all
not should she now But indeed! them with been had Henry If grounds. the
but thoughts, her were Such it. saw she when picturesque was what know
discontent. patient in bonnet her on put and herself, to them kept she

of grandeur the by expectation, her beyond however, struck, was She
whole The lawn. the from time first the for it saw she as abbey, the
rich quadrangle, the of sides two and court; large a enclosed building
was remainder The admiration. for forward stood ornaments, Gothic in
steep the and plantations, luxuriant or trees, old of knolls by off shut
in even beautiful were shelter, it give to behind, rising hills woody
with compare to nothing seen had Catherine March. of month leafless the
for waiting without that strong, so were delight of feelings her and it;
The praise. and wonder in forth burst boldly she authority, better any
own his if as seemed it and gratitude; assenting with listened general
hour. that till unfixed waited had Northanger of estimation

it to way the led he and admired, next be to was kitchen-garden The
park. the of portion small a across

could Catherine as such was garden this in contained acres of number The
all of extent the double than more being dismay, without to listen not
orchard. and church-yard including father’s, her as well as Allen’s, Mr.
of village a length; in endless number, in countless seemed walls The
at be to parish whole a and them, among arise to seemed hot-houses
of looks her by flattered was general The enclosure. the within work
to her forced soon he as plainly, as almost him told which surprise,
to equal all at gardens any seen never had she that words, in him tell
of ambition any “without that, owned modestly then he and before; them
them believe did it--he about solicitude any himself--without sort that
that. was it hobby-horse, a had he If kingdom. the in unrivalled be to
he eating, of matters most in enough careless Though garden. a loved He
There did. children and friends his not, did he if fruit--or good loved
The his. as garden a such attending however, vexations, great were
pinery The fruits. valuable most the secure always not could care utmost
supposed, he Allen, Mr. year. last the in hundred one only yielded had
himself.” as well as inconveniences these feel must

went never and garden, the about care not did Allen Mr. all. at not “No,
it.” into

he wished general the self-satisfaction, of smile triumphant a With
some in vexed being without his, entered never he for same, the do could
plan. his of short falling its by other, or way

nature the describing worked?” succession-houses Allen’s Mr. were “How
them. entered they as own his of

of use the had Allen Mrs. which hot-house, small one only had Allen “Mr.
then.” and now it in fire a was there and winter, in plants her for

happy very of look a with general, the said man!” happy a is “He
contempt.

till wall, every under her led and division, every into her taken Having
girls the suffered he wondering, and seeing of weary heartily was she
expressing then and door, outer an of advantage the seize to last at
the about alterations recent some of effect the examine to wish his
Miss if walk, their of extension unpleasant no as it proposed tea-house,
you do Why Eleanor? going, you are where “But tired. not were Morland
best Our wet. get will Morland Miss it? to path damp cold, that choose
park.” the across is way

always I “that Tilney, Miss said mine,” of walk a favourite so is “This
damp.” be may it perhaps But way. nearest and best the it think

firs; Scotch old of grove thick a through path winding narrow a was It
it, enter to eager and aspect, gloomy its by struck Catherine, and
stepping from kept be disapprobation, general’s the by even not, could
plea the urged again having and inclination, her perceived He forward.
excused He opposition. further make to polite too was vain, in health of
too not were sun the of rays “The them: attending from however, himself,
turned He course.” another by them meet would he and him, for cheerful
were spirits her much how find to shocked was Catherine and away;
the than real less being however, shock, The separation. the by relieved
of gaiety easy with talk to began she and injury; no it offered relief,
inspired. grove a such which melancholy delightful the

sigh. a with companion, her said spot,” this of fond particularly am “I
walk.” favourite mother’s my was “It

before, family the in mentioned Tilney Mrs. heard never had Catherine
itself showed remembrance tender this by excited interest the and
with pause attentive the in and countenance, altered her in directly
more. something for waited she which

never I “though Eleanor; added her!” with often so here walk to used “I
to used I indeed time that At since. it loved have I as then, it loved
now.” it endears memory her But choice. her at wonder

husband? her to it endear “to Catherine, reflected not,” it ought “And
she silent, continuing Tilney Miss it.” enter not would general the Yet
affliction!” great a been have must death “Her say, to ventured

was “I voice. low a in other, the replied one,” increasing and great “A
as perhaps loss my felt I though and happened; it when thirteen only
then not, could I not, did I it, feel could young so one as strongly
with added, then and moment, a for stopped She was.” it loss a what know
my Henry--though though know--and you sister, no have “I firmness, great
I which here, deal great a is Henry and affectionate, very are brothers
solitary.” often be to not me for impossible is it for, thankful most am

much.” very him miss must you sure be “To

a been have would mother A present. always been have would mother “A
other.” all beyond been have would influence her friend; constant

picture any there Was handsome? she Was woman? charming very a she “Was
Was grove? that to partial so been she had why And abbey? the in her of
forth; poured eagerly now questions spirits?”--were of dejection from it
passed were others two the affirmative, ready a received three first the
with augmented Tilney Mrs. deceased the in interest Catherine’s and by;
marriage, in unhappiness her Of not. or answered whether question, every
He husband. unkind an been had certainly general The persuaded. felt she
besides, And her? loved have therefore he could walk: her love not did
features his of turn the in something a was there was, he as handsome
her. to well behaved having not his spoke which

own her of art consummate the at blushing suppose,” I picture, “Her
room?” father’s your in “hangs question,

was father my but drawing-room; the for intended was it “No;
place. no had it time some for and painting, the with dissatisfied
my in it hung and own, my for it obtained I death her after Soon
like.” very is it you; it show to happy be shall I bed-chamber--where
not wife, departed a like--of portrait--very A proof. another was Here
her! to cruel dreadfully been have must He husband! the by valued

the of nature the herself from hide to longer no attempted Catherine
previously had he attentions, his all of spite in which, feelings
absolute now was before, dislike and terror been had what and excited;
him made woman charming a such to cruelty His aversion! Yes, aversion.
which characters characters, such of read often had She her. to odious
was here but overdrawn; and unnatural call to used been had Allen Mr.
contrary. the of positive proof

them brought path the of end the when point this settled just had She
indignation, virtuous her all of spite in and general; the upon directly
and him, to listen him, with walk to obliged again herself found she
receive to however, able, longer no Being smiled. he when smile to even
with walk to began soon she objects, surrounding the from pleasure
health, her for concern a with and it, perceived general the lassitude;
urgent most was him, of opinion her for her reproach to seemed which
in them follow would He house. the to daughter his with returning for
in back called was Eleanor parted--but they Again hour. an of quarter a
round friend her taking against charge strict a receive to minute a half
delay to anxiety his of instance second This return. his till abbey the
remarkable. very as Catherine struck for wished much so she what




23 CHAPTER


of part the on spent, in, came general the before away passed hour An
character. his of consideration favourable very no in guest, young his
mind a speak not did rambles, solitary these absence, lengthened “This
and, appeared; he length At reproach.” of void conscience a or ease, at
still could he meditations, his of gloom the been have might whatever
friend’s her part in understanding Tilney, Miss them. with smile
father her and subject; the revived soon house, the see to curiosity
any with unprovided expectations, Catherine’s to contrary being,
to minutes five stopping of that beyond delay, further for pretence
ready last at was return, their by room the in be to refreshments order
them. escort to

step, dignified a air, of grandeur a with and, forward; set They
well-read the of doubts the shake not could but eye, the caught which
common the through hall, the across way the led he Catherine,
both magnificent room a into antechamber, useless one and drawing-room
of company with only used drawing-room, real furniture--the and size in
that all charming!--was grand--very noble--very very was It consequence.
discerned scarcely eye indiscriminating her for say, to had Catherine
praise all praise, of minuteness all and satin; the of colour the
or costliness the general: the by supplied was meaning, much had that
for cared she her; to nothing be could fitting-up room’s any of elegance
the When century. fifteenth the than date modern more a of furniture no
every of examination close a in curiosity, own his satisfied had general
in apartment, an library, the into proceeded they ornament, well-known
on books, of collection a exhibiting magnificence, equal of way, its
heard, Catherine pride. with looked have might man humble an which
before--gathered than feeling genuine more with wondered and admired,
over running by knowledge, of storehouse this from could she that all
of suites But proceed. to ready was and shelf, a half of titles the
building, the was as Large wishes. her with up spring not did apartments
that, told being on though, part; greatest the visited already had she
now had she rooms seven or six the kitchen, the of addition the with
it, believe scarcely could she court, the of sides three surrounded seen
was It secreted. chambers many being there of suspicion the overcome or
common in rooms the to return to were they that however, relief, some
the into looking importance, less of few a through passing by use,
unintricate, wholly not passages, occasional with which, court,
her in soothed further was she and sides; different the connected
a been once had what treading was she that told being by progress
several observing and out, pointed cells of traces having cloister,
herself finding her--by to explained nor opened neither were that doors
apartment, private general’s the in and billiard-room, a in successively
aright turn to able being or connection, their comprehending without
room, little dark a through passing by lastly, and them; left she when
guns, books, of litter his with strewed and authority, Henry’s owning
greatcoats. and

be to always and seen, already though which, of dining-room, the From
pacing of pleasure the forgo not could general the o’clock, five at seen
as Morland, Miss of information certain more the for length, the out
quick by proceeded they for, cared nor doubted neither she what to
rich convent, the of kitchen ancient kitchen--the the to communication
hot and stoves the in and days, former of smoke and walls massy the in
loitered not had hand improving general’s The present. the of closets
had cooks the of labour the facilitate to invention modern every here:
genius the when and, theatre; spacious their this, within adopted been
wanted. perfection the produced often had own his failed, had others of
high him placed have time any at might alone spot this of endowments His
convent. the of benefactors the among

the abbey; the of antiquity the all ended kitchen the of walls the With
state, decaying its of account on having, quadrangle the of side fourth
its in erected present the and father, general’s the by removed been
not was building new The here. ceased venerable was that All place.
and offices, for only intended so; be to itself declared but new, only
been had architecture of uniformity no stable-yards, by behind enclosed
had which hand the at raved have could Catherine necessary. thought
the for rest, the all of value the beyond been have must what away swept
spared been have willingly would and economy; domestic mere of purposes
general the had fallen, so scenes through walk a of mortification the
his of arrangement the in was it vanity, a had he if but it; allowed
Morland’s, Miss like mind a to that, convinced was he as and offices;
her of labours the which by comforts, and accommodations the of view a
make should he gratifying, be always must softened, were inferiors
and all; of survey slight a took They on. her leading for apology no
multiplicity their by expectation, her beyond impressed, was Catherine
pantries shapeless few a which for purposes The convenience. their and
were Fullerton, at sufficient deemed were scullery comfortless a and
The roomy. and commodious divisions, appropriate in on carried here
than less her strike not did appearing continually servants of number
girl pattened some went, they Wherever offices. their of number the
this Yet off. sneaked dishabille in footman some or curtsy, to stopped
arrangements domestic these in different inexpressibly How abbey! an was
which, in castles, and abbeys about--from read had she as such from
house the of work dirty the all Northanger, than larger certainly though
could they How utmost. the at hands female of pair two by done be to was
saw Catherine when and, Allen; Mrs. amazed often had all it through get
herself. amazed be to began she here, necessary was what

ascended, be might staircase chief the that hall, the to returned They
be might carving rich of ornaments and wood, its of beauty the and
direction opposite an in turned they top, the gained having out: pointed
on one entered shortly and lay, room her which in gallery the from
shown here was She breadth. and length in superior but plan, same the
dressing-rooms, their with bed-chambers, large three into successively
and money that everything up; fitted handsomely and completely most
been had apartments, to elegance and comfort give to do, could taste
they years, five last the within furnished being and, these; on bestowed
all in wanting and pleasing, generally be would that all in perfect were
last, the surveying were they As Catherine. to pleasure give could that
characters distinguished the of few a naming slightly after general, the
smiling a with turned honoured, been times at had they whom by
of some henceforward that hope to ventured and Catherine, to countenance
felt She Fullerton.” from friends “our be might tenants earliest their
of impossibility the regretted deeply and compliment, unexpected the
full so and herself, towards disposed kindly so man a of well thinking
family. her all to civility of

Tilney, Miss which doors, folding by terminated was gallery The
point the on seemed and through, passed and open, thrown had advancing,
reach long another in left, the to door first the by same the doing of
and, hastily, her called forwards, coming general, the when gallery, of
were she whether demanding back, angrily rather thought, Catherine as
Morland Miss not seen?--Had be to more there was what going?--And
not she did notice?--And her worth be could that all seen already
much so after refreshment some of glad be might friend her suppose
were doors heavy the and directly, back drew Tilney Miss exercise?
momentary a in seen, having who, Catherine, mortified the upon closed
and openings, numerous more passage, narrower a them, beyond glance
the within last at herself believed staircase, winding a of symptoms
paced unwillingly she as felt, and notice; her worth something of reach
end that examine to allowed be rather would she that gallery, the back
general’s The rest. the all of finery the all see than house the of
additional an was examination an such preventing of desire evident
though fancy, her concealed; be to certainly was Something stimulant.
here; her mislead not could twice, or once lately trespassed had it
they as Tilney’s, Miss of sentence short a was, something that what and
out: point to seemed downstairs, distance some at general the followed
room room--the mother’s my was what into you take to going was “I
they were, they as few but words; her all were died--” she which in
the that wonder no was It Catherine. to intelligence of pages conveyed
room that as objects such of sight the from shrink should general
the since him by entered never probability all in room a contain; must
left and wife, suffering his released which passed, had scene dreadful
conscience. of stings the to him

being of wish her express to Eleanor, with alone next when ventured, She
house; the of side that of rest the all as well as it, see to permitted
a have should they whenever there, her attend to promised Eleanor and
watched be must general the her: understood Catherine hour. convenient
I was, it as remains “It entered. be could room that before home, from
feeling. of tone a in she, said suppose?”

entirely.” “Yes,

died?” mother your that be it may ago long how “And

knew, Catherine years, nine And years.” nine these dead been has “She
the after elapsed generally what with compared time, of trifle a was
rights. to put was room her before wife, injured an of death

last?” the to suppose, I her, with were “You

Her home. from unfortunately was “I sighing; Tilney, Miss said “No,”
over.” all was it arrived I before and, short; and sudden was illness

naturally which suggestions horrid the with cold ran blood Catherine’s
father--? Henry’s Could possible? be it Could words. these from sprang
blackest the even justify to examples the were many how yet And
worked she while evening, the in him saw she when And, suspicions!
in together hour an for drawing-room the pacing slowly friend, her with
felt she brow, contracted and eyes downcast with thoughtfulness, silent
attitude and air the was It him. wronging of possibility all from secure
a of workings gloomy the speak plainly more could What Montoni! a of
review fearful its in humanity, of sense every to dead wholly not mind
spirits her of anxiousness the And man! Unhappy guilt? of scenes past of
Miss catch to as repeatedly, so figure his towards eyes her directed
room the about walks “often whispered, she father,” “My notice. Tilney’s
unusual.” nothing is it way; this in

a of was exercise ill-timed such Catherine; thought worse!” the much “So
boded and walks, morning his of unseasonableness strange the with piece
good. nothing

made which of length seeming and variety little the evening, an After
was she them, among importance Henry’s of sensible peculiarly her
not general the from look a was it though dismissed; be to glad heartily
bell. the to daughter his sent which observation her for designed
was he however, candle, master’s his lit have would butler the When
to pamphlets many have “I retire. to going not was latter The forbidden.
perhaps and eyes, my close can I “before Catherine, to he said finish,”
are you after hours for nation the of affairs the over poring be may
be will eyes My employed? meetly more be us of either Can asleep.
future for rest by preparing yours and others, of good the for blinding
mischief.”

compliment, magnificent the nor alleged, business the neither But
must object different very some that thinking from Catherine win could
hours, for up kept be To repose. proper of delay a serious so occasion
likely. very not was pamphlets stupid by bed, in were family the after
could which done be to was something cause: deeper some be must There
Mrs. that probability the and slept; household the while only done be
the from receiving and unknown, causes for up shut lived, yet Tilney
the was food, coarse of supply nightly a husband her of hands pitiless
it idea, the was as Shocking followed. necessarily which conclusion
natural the in as, hastened, unfairly death a than better least at was
her of suddenness The released. be long ere must she things, of course
other her of probably and daughter, her of absence the illness, reputed
imprisonment. her of supposition the favoured time--all the at children,
be to yet cruelty--was wanton or perhaps, origin--jealousy Its
unravelled.

her struck suddenly it undressed, she while matters, these revolving In
very the near passed have morning that might she that unlikely not as
within been have confinement--might woman’s unfortunate this of spot
what for days; her out languished she which in cell the of paces few a
which that than purpose the for fitted more be could abbey the of part
passage, high-arched the In division? monastic of traces the bore yet
she awe, peculiar with trodden had she already which stone, with paved
To account. no given had general the which of doors the remembered well
this of plausibility the of support In lead? doors those not might what
in gallery, forbidden the that her to occurred further it conjecture,
as be, must Tilney, Mrs. unfortunate the of apartments the lay which
suspected this over exactly her, guide could memory her as certainly
of apartments those of side the by staircase the and cells, of range
some by communicating glimpse, transient a caught had she which
barbarous the favoured have well might cells, those with means secret
been perhaps had she staircase that Down husband. her of proceedings
insensibility! well-prepared of state a in conveyed

and surmises, own her of boldness the at started sometimes Catherine
were they but far; too gone had she that feared or hoped sometimes
impossible. dismissal their made as appearances such by supported

be to scene guilty the supposed she which in quadrangle, the of side The
struck it own, her opposite just belief, her to according being, acting,
general’s the from light of rays some watched, judiciously if that, her
prison the to passed he as windows, lower the through glimmer might lamp
gently stole she bed, into stepped she before twice and, wife; his of
it if see to gallery, the in window corresponding the to room her from
The early. too be yet must it and dark, was abroad all but appeared;
be still must servants the that her convinced noises ascending various
then, but watch; to vain in be would it supposed she midnight, Till up.
not if would, she quiet, was all and twelve, struck had clock the when
clock The more. once look and out steal darkness, by appalled quite
asleep. hour an half been had Catherine twelve--and struck




24 CHAPTER


the of examination proposed the for opportunity no afforded day next The
morning between time whole the and Sunday, was It apartments. mysterious
or abroad exercise in general the by required was service afternoon and
her curiosity, Catherine’s was as great and home; at meat cold eating
either dinner, after them exploring of wish a to equal not was courage
the by or o’clock, seven and six between sky the of light fading the by
lamp. treacherous a of illumination stronger though partial more yet
imagination her interest to anything by therefore unmarked was day The
Mrs. of memory the to monument elegant very a of sight the beyond
eye her that By pew. family the fronted immediately which Tilney,
highly the of perusal the and retained; long and caught instantly was
the by her to ascribed was virtue every which in epitaph, strained
her other or way some in been have must who husband, inconsolable
tears. to even her affected destroyer,

face to able be should monument, a such erected having general, the That
boldly so sit could he that yet and strange, very perhaps not was it,
so look air, an elevated so maintain view, its within collected
seemed church, the enter even should he that nay, around, fearlessly
beings of instances many that however, Not, Catherine. to wonderful
remember could She produced. be not might guilt in hardened equally
to crime from on going vice, possible every in persevered had who dozens
humanity of feeling any without chose, they whomsoever murdering crime,
their closed retirement religious a or death violent a till remorse; or
the in not could itself monument the of erection The career. black
Were decease. actual Tilney’s Mrs. of doubts her affect degree smallest
supposed were ashes her where vault family the into descend to even she
to said were they which in coffin the behold to she were slumber, to
too read had Catherine case? a such in avail it could enclosed--what be
figure waxen a which with ease the of aware perfectly be to not much
on. carried funeral supposititious a and introduced, be might

early general’s The better. something promised morning succeeding The
and here; favourable was view, other every in was it as ill-timed walk,
Miss to proposed directly she house, the of out be to him knew she when
oblige to ready was Eleanor promise. her of accomplishment the Tilney
their promise, another of went they as her reminding Catherine and her;
It bed-chamber. her in portrait the to was consequence in visit first
countenance, pensive and mild a with woman, lovely very a represented
were they but observer; new its of expectations the far, so justifying,
meeting upon depended had Catherine for answered, respect every in not
counterpart, very the be should that complexion, hair, features, with
of portraits only Eleanor’s--the of Henry’s, of not if image, very the
equal an always bearing thinking, of habit the in been had she which
for taken was taken once face A child. and mother of resemblance
study and consider and look to obliged was she here But generations.
drawback, this of spite in however, it, contemplated She likeness. a for
left have would interest, stronger yet a for but and, emotion, much with
unwillingly. it

any for much too was gallery great the entered they as agitation Her
Eleanor’s companion. her at look only could she discourse; at endeavour
inured her spoke composure its and sedate; yet dejected, was countenance
passed she Again advancing. were they which to objects gloomy the all to
lock, important the upon was hand her again doors, folding the through
former the close to turning was breathe, to able hardly Catherine, and
general the of figure dreaded the figure, the when caution, fearful with
of name The her! before stood gallery, the of end further the at himself
the through resounded tone, loudest his in moment, same the at “Eleanor”
presence, his of intimation first the daughter his to giving building,
been had concealment at attempt An terror. upon terror Catherine to and
could she yet him, perceiving on movement instinctive first her
an with who friend, her when and eye; his escaped have to hope scarcely
disappeared and joined had her, by hastily darted look apologizing
herself locking and, room, own her to safety for ran she him, with
She again. down go to courage have never should she that believed in,
deeply agitation, greatest the in hour, an least at there remained
summons a expecting and friend, poor her of state the commiserating
No apartment. own his in him attend to general angry the from herself
up drive carriage a seeing on last, at and arrived; however, summons,
the under him meet and descend to emboldened was she abbey, the to
and company; with gay was breakfast-room The visitors. of protection
in daughter, his of friend the as general the by them to named was she
to as ire, resentful his concealed well so which style, complimentary a
Eleanor, And present. the for life of least at secure feel her make
his for concern her to honour did which countenance of command a with
only father “My her, to saying of occasion early an taking character,
been either had she that hope to began she note,” a answer to me wanted
she policy of consideration some from that or general, the by unseen
still dared she trust this Upon so. herself suppose to allowed be should
nothing and them, left company the after presence, his in remain to
it. disturb to occurred

resolution a to came she reflections, morning’s this of course the In
much be would It alone. door forbidden the on attempt next her making of
matter. the of nothing know should Eleanor that respect every in better
into her court to detection, second a of danger the in her involve To
a of office the be not could heart, her wring must which apartment an
might it what herself to be not could anger utmost general’s The friend.
itself examination the thought she besides, and, daughter; a to be
be would It companion. any without made if satisfactory more be would
other the which from suspicions, the Eleanor to explain to impossible
she could nor exempt; happily hitherto been likelihood, all in had,
general’s the of proofs those for search presence, her in therefore,
felt she discovery, escaped have yet might they however which cruelty,
fragmented some of shape the in forth, drawing somewhere of confident
was she apartment the to way the Of gasp. last the to continued journal,
Henry’s before over it get to wished she as and mistress; perfectly now
lost. be to time no was there morrow, the on expected was who return,
now was sun the o’clock, four at high; courage her bright, was day The
dress to retiring her only be would it and horizon, the above hours two
usual. than earlier hour an half

the before gallery the in alone herself found Catherine and done; was It
hurried she thought; for time no was It strike. to ceased had clocks
doors, folding the through noise possible least the with slipped on,
in one the to forward rushed breathe, or look to stopping without and
sullen no with luckily, and, hand, her to yielded lock The question.
room the entered; she tiptoe On being. human a alarm could that sound
another advance could she before minutes some was it but her; before was
feature. every agitated and spot the to her fixed what beheld She step.
bed, dimity handsome an apartment, well-proportioned large, a saw She
stove, Bath bright a care, housemaid’s an with unoccupied as arranged
beams warm the which on chairs, painted neatly and wardrobes, mahogany
had Catherine windows! sash two through poured gaily sun western a of
Astonishment were. they worked and worked, feelings her have to expected
common of ray succeeding shortly a and them; seized first doubt and
mistaken be not could She shame. of emotions bitter some added sense
Miss else!--in everything in mistaken grossly how but room; the to as
she which to apartment, This calculation! own her in meaning, Tilney’s
end one be to proved awful, so position a ancient, so date a given had
in doors other two were There built. had father general’s the what of
no had she but dressing-closets; into probably leading chamber, the
last had Tilney Mrs. which in veil the Would either. open to inclination
what tell to remain read, last had she which in volume the or walked,
the been have might whatever No: whisper? to allowed was else nothing
for sue them let to wit much too certainly had he crimes, general’s
her in safe be to but desired and exploring, of sick was She detection.
on was she and folly; its to privy only heart own her with room, own
of sound the when entered, had she as softly as retreating of point the
tremble. and pause her made where, tell hardly could she footsteps,
the by but unpleasant; be would servant, a by even there, found be To
worse! much wanted), least when hand at always seemed he (and general
a lose to not resolving and ceased; had sound listened--the She
door a instant that At door. the closed and through passed she moment,
ascend to steps swift with seemed someone opened; hastily was underneath
could she before pass to yet had she which of head the by stairs, the
terror of feeling a With move. to power no had She gallery. the gain
few a in and staircase, the on eyes her fixed she definable, very not
a in exclaimed she Tilney!” “Mr. view. her to Henry gave it moments
“Good too. astonished looked He astonishment. common than more of voice
here? you came “How address. his to attending not continued, she God!”
staircase?” that up you came How

“Because surprised. greatly replied, he staircase!” that up I came “How
why and chamber; own my to stable-yard the from way nearest my is it
it?” up come not I should

He more. no say could and deeply, blushed herself, recollected Catherine
her which explanation that for countenance her in looking be to seemed
not, I may “And gallery. the towards on moved She afford. not did lips
you how “ask doors, folding the back pushed he as he, said turn,” my in
the from road a extraordinary as least at is passage This here? came
the from be can staircase that as apartment, your to breakfast-parlour
mine.” to stables

mother’s your see “to down, looking Catherine, said been,” have “I
room.”

there?” seen be to extraordinary anything there Is room! mother’s “My

till back come to mean not did you thought I all. at nothing “No,
tomorrow.”

but away; went I when sooner, return to able be to expect not did “I
You me. detain to nothing finding of pleasure the had I ago hours three
stairs. those up fast so running by you alarmed I afraid am I pale. look
the from leading their of aware not were know--you not did you Perhaps
use?” common in offices

ride.” your for day fine very a had have You not. was I “No,

in rooms the all into way your find to you leave Eleanor does and “Very;
yourself?” by house the

were we Saturday--and on part greatest the over me showed she No; “Oh!
father voice--“your her only”--dropping rooms--but these to here coming
us.” with was

you “Have her. regarding earnestly Henry, said you,” prevented that “And
passage?” that in rooms the all into looked

dress.” and go must I late? very it not see--Is to wanted only I “No,

now not are you watch--“and his showing four” past quarter a only is “It
Northanger at hour an Half for. prepare to rooms no theatre, No Bath. in
enough.” be must

be to herself suffered therefore and it, contradict not could She
first the for her, made questions further of dread her though detained,
the up slowly walked They him. leave to wish acquaintance, their in time
you?” saw I since Bath from letter any had you “Have gallery.

to faithfully so promised Isabella surprised. much very am I and “No,
directly.” write

have I me. puzzles That promise! faithful A faithfully! so “Promised
fidelity promise--the faithful a But performance. faithful a of heard
can it since however, knowing, worth little power a is It promising! of
not? it is commodious, very is room mother’s My you. pain and deceive
disposed! well so dressing-closets the and cheerful-looking, and Large
and house, the in apartment comfortable most the as me strikes always It
sent She own. her for it take not should Eleanor that wonder rather I
suppose?” I it, at look to you

“No.”

a After nothing. said Catherine entirely?” doing own your been has “It
“As added, he her, observed closely had he which during silence, short
must this curiosity, raise to itself in room the in nothing is there
character, mother’s my for respect of sentiment a from proceeded have
I world, The memory. her to honour does which Eleanor, by described as
can virtue that often not is it But woman. better a saw never believe,
a of merits unpretending domestic, The this. as such interest an boast
venerating fervent, of kind that create often not do known never person
suppose, I Eleanor, yours. like visit a prompt would which tenderness
deal?” great a her of talked has

very was say did she what but much, not is--no, That deal. great a “Yes,
it hesitation with and (slowly, suddenly” so dying Her interesting.
I father, your home--and at being you of you--none “and spoken), was
her.” of fond very been not had thought--perhaps

eye quick (his replied he circumstances,” these from “And
some of probability the perhaps infer “you hers), on fixed
be--of may it head)--“or her shook she negligence--some”--(involuntarily
him towards eyes her raised She pardonable.” less still something
he illness,” mother’s “My before. done ever had she than fully more
malady The sudden. was death, her in ended which seizure “the continued,
fever--its bilious a suffered, often had she which from one itself,
as soon as short, in day, third the On constitutional. therefore cause
respectable very a her, attended physician a on, prevailed be could she
his Upon confidence. great placed always had she whom in one and man,
and day, next the in called were others two danger, her of opinion
the On hours. twenty and four for attendance constant almost in remained
I and Frederick disorder, her of progress the During died. she day fifth
observation own our from and repeatedly; her saw home) at both were (we
attention possible every received having her to witness bear can
her which or her, about those of affection the from spring could which
a such at and absent, was Eleanor Poor command. could life in situation
coffin.” her in mother her see to only return to as distance

afflicted?” he “was Catherine, said father,” your “But

attached not him supposing in erred have You so. greatly time, a “For
him for possible was it as well as persuaded, am I her, loved He her. to
disposition--and of tenderness same the know, you all, not have to--we
have often not might she lived, she while that say to pretend not will I
never judgment his her, injured temper his though but bear, to much had
truly was he permanently, not if and, sincere; was her of value His did.
death.” her by afflicted

very been have would “it Catherine; said it,” of glad very am “I
shocking!”

as horror such of surmise a formed had you rightly, you understand I “If
nature dreadful the consider Morland, Miss to--Dear words hardly have I
from? judging been you have What entertained. have you suspicions the of
are we that Remember live. we which in age the and country the Remember
your understanding, own your Consult Christians. are we that English,
passing is what of observation own your probable, the of sense own
our Do atrocities? such for us prepare education our Does you. around
in known, being without perpetrated be they Could them? at connive laws
a such on is intercourse literary and social where this, like country a
voluntary of neighbourhood a by surrounded is man every where footing,
Miss Dearest open? everything lay newspapers and roads where and spies,
admitting?” been you have ideas what Morland,

ran she shame of tears with and gallery, the of end the reached had They
room. own her to off




25 CHAPTER


awakened. completely was Catherine over. were romance of visions The
her opened thoroughly more had been, had it as short address, Henry’s
several their all than fancies late her of extravagance the to eyes
bitterly Most humbled. she was grievously Most done. had disappointments
with sunk--but was she that herself with only not was It cry. she did
to exposed all was criminal, even seemed now which folly, Her Henry.
imagination her which liberty The forever. her despise must he and him,
ever he father--could his of character the with take to dared had
they fears--could her and curiosity her of absurdity The it? forgive
He express. could she than more herself hated She forgotten? be ever
shown morning, fatal this before twice or once had, he thought had--she
as herself made she short, now--in But her. for affection like something
the when down went hour, an half about for possible as miserable
an give scarcely could and heart, broken a with five, struck clock
formidable The well. was she if inquiry Eleanor’s to answer intelligible
his in difference only the and room, the into her followed soon Henry
usual. than attention more rather her paid he that was her to behaviour
was he if as looked he and more, comfort wanted never had Catherine
it. of aware

and politeness; soothing this of abatement no with away wore evening The
not did She tranquillity. modest a to raised gradually were spirits her
that hope to learned she but past; the defend or forget to either learn
Henry’s her cost not might it that and farther, transpire never would it
had she what on fixed chiefly still being thoughts Her regard. entire
be shortly could nothing done, and felt terror causeless such with
delusion, self-created voluntary, a all been had it that than clearer
imagination an from importance receiving circumstance trifling each
by purpose one to bend to forced everything and alarm, on resolved
be to craving been had abbey, the entered she before which, mind a
a for prepared had she feelings what with remembered She frightened.
created, been had infatuation the that saw She Northanger. of knowledge
if as seemed it and Bath, quitting her before long settled, mischief the
which reading of sort that of influence the to traced be might whole the
indulged. there had she

were as even charming and works, Radcliffe’s Mrs. all were as Charming
human that perhaps them in not was it imitators, her all of works the
looked be to was England, of counties Midland the in least at nature,
vices, their and forests pine their with Pyrenees, and Alps the Of for.
and Switzerland, Italy, and delineation; faithful a give might they
there were they as horrors in fruitful as be might France of south the
even and country, own her beyond doubt not dared Catherine represented.
western and northern the yielded have would pressed, hard if that, of
some surely was there England of part central the in But extremities.
of laws the in beloved, not wife a of even existence the for security
servants tolerated, not was Murder age. the of manners the and land, the
procured, be to potions sleeping nor poison neither and slaves, not were
perhaps, Pyrenees, and Alps the Among druggist. every from rhubarb, like
as spotless as not were as such There, characters. mixed no were there
was it England in But fiend. a of dispositions the have might angel an
habits, and hearts their in believed, she English, the among so; not
this Upon bad. and good of mixture unequal though general a was there
Eleanor and Henry in even if surprised be not would she conviction,
this upon and appear; hereafter might imperfection slight some Tilney,
in specks actual some acknowledge to fear not need she conviction
grossly the from cleared though who, father, their of character the
she entertained, have to blush ever must she which suspicions injurious
amiable. perfectly not be to consideration, serious upon believe, did

of formed, resolution her and points, several these on up made mind Her
she sense, good greatest the with future in acting and judging always
and ever; than happier be and herself forgive to but do to nothing had
in gradations insensible by her for much did time of hand lenient the
nobleness and generosity astonishing Henry’s day. another of course the
passed, had what to way slightest the in alluding never in conduct, of
have could she than sooner and her; to assistance greatest the of was
spirits her distress, her of beginning the in possible it supposed
continual of heretofore, as capable, and comfortable, absolutely became
indeed, subjects, some still were There said. he anything by improvement
a of mention tremble--the always must they believed she which under
of sight the love not did she instance--and for cabinet, a or chest
memento occasional an that allow could she even but shape: any in japan
use. without be not might painful, however folly, past of

of alarms the to succeed to soon began life common of anxieties The
greater. day every grew Isabella from hearing of desire Her romance.
the how and on, went world Bath the how know to impatient quite was She
of assured be to anxious she was especially and attended; were rooms
had she which on netting-cotton, fine some matched having Isabella’s
Her James. with terms best the on continuing her of and intent; her left
had James Isabella. on was kind any of information for dependence only
Mrs. and Oxford; to return his till her to writing against protested
to back got had she till letter a of hopes no her given had Allen
she when and again; promised and promised had Isabella But Fullerton.
it made This it! performing in scrupulous so was she thing, a promised
strange! particularly so

repetition the over wondered Catherine mornings, successive nine For
on but, severe: more became morning each which disappointment, a of
a was object first her breakfast-room, the entered she when tenth, the
heartily as him thanked She hand. willing Henry’s by out held letter,
she as however,” James, from only “‘Tis himself. it written had he if as
this to and Oxford; from was it it; opened She direction. the at looked
purpose:


Catherine, “Dear

my it think I writing, for inclination little with knows, God “Though,
and Thorpe Miss between end an at is everything that you tell to duty
shall I again. either see to never yesterday, Bath and her left I me.
soon will You more. you pain only would particulars--they into enter not
I and blame; the lies where know to quarter another from enough hear
easily too of folly the but everything of brother your acquit will hope
time! in undeceived am I God! Thank returned. affection his thinking
kindly so been had consent father’s my After blow! heavy a is it But
me Let forever! miserable me made has She this. of more no given--but
love your friend; only my are you Catherine; dear you, from hear soon
before over be may Northanger at visit your wish I upon. build do I
uncomfortably be will you or known, engagement his makes Tilney Captain
his him; of sight the dread I town: in is Thorpe Poor circumstanced.
father. my and him to written have I much. so feel would heart honest
reasoned I if last, very the till all; than more me hurts duplicity Her
and ever, as me to attached much as herself declared she her, with
it; with bore I long how think to ashamed am I fears. my at laughed
I man. that was I loved, himself believe to reason had man ever if but
no be could there for at, be would she what now even understand cannot
parted We Tilney. of secure her make to off played being my of need
never can I met! never we had me for consent--happy mutual by last at
you how beware Catherine, Dearest woman! another such know to expect
heart. your give

&c. me,” “Believe


of change sudden her before lines three read not had Catherine
to her declared wonder, sorrowing of exclamations short and countenance,
through her watching earnestly Henry, and news; unpleasant receiving be
He began. it than better no ended it that plainly saw letter, whole the
father’s his by surprise his looking even from however, prevented, was
hardly could Catherine but directly; breakfast to went They entrance.
she as cheeks her down ran even and eyes, her filled Tears anything. eat
in then and lap, her in then hand, her in moment one was letter The sat.
general, The did. she what not knew she if as looked she and pocket; her
noticing for leisure no luckily had newspaper, his and cocoa his between
soon As visible. equally was distress her two other the to but her;
the but room; own her to away hurried she table the leave dared she as
again. down come to obliged was she and it, in busy were housemaids
had Eleanor and Henry but privacy, for drawing-room the into turned She
consultation in deep moment that at were and thither, retreated likewise
with was, but pardon, their beg to trying back, drew She her. about
after withdrew, others the and return; to forced violence, gentle
comfort or use of being of wish a expressed affectionately had Eleanor
her. to

Catherine reflection, and grief of indulgence free hour’s an half After
make should she whether but friends; her encountering to equal felt
if Perhaps, consideration. another was them to known distress her
distantly idea--just an give just might she questioned, particularly
Isabella as friend a such friend, a expose To more. not it--but at hint
it! in concerned closely so brother own their then her--and to been had
Eleanor and Henry altogether. subject the waive must she believed She
it, entered she as each, and breakfast-room; the in themselves by were
and, table, the at place her took Catherine anxiously. her at looked
I Fullerton, from news bad “No said, Eleanor silence, short a after
are they hope sisters--I and brothers Morland--your Mrs. and Mr. hope?
ill?” them of none

My well. very all are “they spoke); she as (sighing you” thank I “No,
Oxford.” at brother my from was letter

through speaking then and minutes; few a for said was further Nothing
letter a for wish ever shall I think not do “I added, she tears, her
again!”

I “if opened; just had he book the closing Henry, said sorry,” am “I
have should I unwelcome, anything containing of letter the suspected had
feelings.” different very with it given

is James Poor suppose! could anybody than worse something contained “It
why.” know soon will You unhappy! so

Henry replied sister,” a affectionate so kind-hearted, so have “To
distress.” any under him to comfort a be “must warmly,

an in afterwards, shortly Catherine, said beg,” to favour one have “I
will you here, coming be should brother your if “that, manner, agitated
away.” go may I that it, of notice me give

Frederick!” brother! “Our

but soon, so you leave to sorry very be should I sure am I “Yes;
in be to me for dreadful very it make would that happened has something
Tilney.” Captain with house same the

increasing with gazed she while suspended was work Eleanor’s
in something, and truth, the suspect to began Henry but astonishment;
lips. his passed included, was name Thorpe’s Miss which

declare! I it, guessed have “you Catherine: cried are!” you quick “How
its of thought little you Bath, in it about talked we when yet, And
her--Isabella from heard not have I now wonder Isabella--no so. ending
believed have you Could yours! marry to is and brother, my deserted has
is that everything and fickleness, and inconstancy such been had there
world?” the in bad

hope I misinformed. are you brother, my concerns as far so hope, “I
Morland’s Mr. on bringing in share material any had not has he
you think I probable. not is Thorpe Miss marrying His disappointment.
that Morland--sorry Mr. for sorry very am I far. so deceived be must
at greater be would surprise my but unhappy; be should love you anyone
story.” the of part other any at than her marrying Frederick’s

yourself. letter James’s read shall you however; true, very is “It
line. last the blush a with recollecting part--” one is Stay--There

concern which passages the us to reading of trouble the take you “Will
brother?” my

were thoughts second whose Catherine, cried yourself,” it read “No,
she that again (blushing of” thinking was I what know not do “I clearer.
advice.” good me give to means only “James before); blushed had

close with through, it read having and, letter, the received gladly He
only can I so, be to is it if “Well, saying, it returned attention,
has who man first the be not will Frederick it. for sorry am I that say
envy not do I expected. family his than sense less with wife a chosen
son.” a or lover a as either situation, his

likewise, letter the read now invitation, Catherine’s at Tilney, Miss
inquire to began surprise, and concern her also expressed having and,
fortune. and connections Thorpe’s Miss into

answer. Catherine’s was woman,” of sort good very a is mother “Her

father?” her was “What

Putney.” at live They believe. I lawyer, “A

family?” wealthy a they “Are

but all: at fortune any has Isabella believe not do I very. not “No,
liberal! very so is father Your family. your in signify not will that
to him allowed it as money valued only he that day other the me told He
looked sister and brother The children.” his of happiness the promote
to be it “would pause, short a after Eleanor, said “But,” other. each at
be must She girl? a such marry to him enable to happiness, his promote
how And so. brother your used have not could she or one, unprincipled an
eyes, his before who, girl A side! Frederick’s on infatuation an strange
Is man! another with into entered voluntarily engagement an violating is
so heart his wore always who too, Frederick Henry? inconceivable, it not
loved!” be to enough good woman no found Who proudly!

presumption strongest the circumstance, unpromising most the is “That
up. him give I declarations, past his of think I When him. against
to prudence Thorpe’s Miss of opinion an good too have I Moreover,
other the before gentleman one with part would she that suppose
deceased a is He indeed! Frederick with over all is It secured. was
Eleanor, sister-in-law, your for Prepare understanding. in man--defunct
artless, candid, Open, in! delight must you as sister-in-law a such and
pretensions, no forming simple, but strong affections with guileless,
disguise.” no knowing and

a with Eleanor said in,” delight should I Henry, sister-in-law, a “Such
smile.

our by ill so behaved has she “though Catherine, observed perhaps,” “But
man the got really has she Now yours. by better behave may she family,
constant.” be may she likes, she

will she afraid am “I Henry; replied will,” she afraid am I “Indeed
is that way; her in come should baronet a unless constant, very be
the over look and paper, Bath the get will I chance. only Frederick’s
arrivals.”

are there word, my upon And, then? ambition, for all is it think “You
first she when that, forget cannot I it. like very seem that things some
disappointed quite seemed she them, for do would father my what knew
in character anyone’s in deceived so was never I more. not was it that
before.” life my

studied.” and known have you that variety great the all “Among

poor for as but, great; very is her in loss and disappointment own “My
it.” recover ever hardly will he suppose I James,

we but present; at pitied be to much very certainly is brother “Your
feel, You yours. undervalue sufferings, his for concern our in not, must
a feel you yourself: half lose you Isabella, losing in that suppose, I
becoming is Society occupy. can else nothing which heart your in void
at share to wont were you which in amusements the for as and irksome;
not, would You abhorrent. is her without them of idea very the Bath,
no have you that feel You world. the for ball a to go now instance, for
regard whose on unreserve, with speak can you whom to friend any longer
could you difficulty, any in counsel, whose or dependence, place can you
this?” all feel You on. rely

not--ought do “I reflection, moments’ few a after Catherine, said “No,”
still cannot I that grieved, and hurt am I though truth, the say To I?
her see to never perhaps her, from hear to never am I that her, love
have would one as afflicted much very very, so feel not do I again,
thought.”

nature. human of credit the to most is what do, always you as feel, “You
themselves.” know may they that investigated, be to ought feelings Such

much very so spirits her found other, or chance some by Catherine,
led being her regret not could she that conversation this by relieved
had which circumstance the mention to unaccountably, so though on,
it. produced




26 CHAPTER


young three the by canvassed frequently was subject the time, this From
young two her that surprise, some with found, Catherine and people;
of want Isabella’s considering in agreed perfectly were friends
way the in difficulties great throw to likely as fortune and consequence
would, general the that persuasion Their brother. their marrying her of
be might that objection the of independent alone, ground this upon
feelings her turned connection, the oppose character, her against raised
insignificant, as was She herself. towards alarm some with moreover
Tilney the of heir the if and Isabella; as portionless, as perhaps and
point what at himself, in enough wealth and grandeur not had property
very The rest? to brother younger his of demands the were interest of
by dispersed be only could led thought this which to reflections painful
she as which, partiality, particular that of effect the on dependence a
had she actions, his as well as words his by understand to given was
a by and general; the in excite to as fortunate so been first the from
the on sentiments disinterested and generous most some of recollection
and utter, him heard once than more had she which money, of subject
misunderstood matters such in disposition his think to her tempted which
children. his by

not would brother their that however, convinced, fully so were They
so and consent, father’s his for person in apply to courage the have
to likely less been life his in never had he that her assured repeatedly
mind her suffered she that time, present the at than Northanger to come
But own. her of removal sudden any of necessity the to as ease at be to
his made he whenever Tilney, Captain that supposed be to not was it as
conduct, Isabella’s of idea just any father his give would application,
whole the lay should Henry that expedient highly as her to occurred it
means that by general the enabling was, really it as him before business
on objections his prepare and opinion, impartial and cool a form to
him to it proposed She situations. of inequality than ground fairer a
had she as eagerly so measure the at catch not did he but accordingly;
strengthened, be not need hands father’s “my he, said “No,” expected.
must He forestalled. be not need folly of confession Frederick’s and
story.” own his tell

it.” of half only tell will he “But

enough.” be would quarter “A

His Tilney. Captain of tidings no brought and away passed two or day A
to appeared it Sometimes think. to what not knew sister and brother
suspected the of result natural the be would silence his if as them
it. with incompatible wholly was it that others at and engagement,
Frederick’s by morning every offended though meanwhile, general, The
had and him, about anxiety real any from free was writing, in remissness
at time Morland’s Miss making of that than solicitude pressing more no
this on uneasiness his expressed often He pleasantly. pass Northanger
would employments and society day’s every of sameness the feared head,
the in been had Frasers Lady the wished place, the with her disgust
dinner, to party large a having of then and now every talked country,
dancing young of number the calculate to even began twice or once and
year, of time dead a such was it then But neighbourhood. the in people
country. the in not were Frasers Lady the and game, no wild-fowl, no
he when that morning one Henry telling his in last, at ended, all it And
day some there surprise by him take would they Woodston, to went next
and honoured greatly was Henry him. with mutton their eat and other, or
when “And scheme. the with delighted quite was Catherine and happy, very
at be must I pleasure? this to forward look may I sir, think, you do
be probably shall and meeting, parish the attend to Monday on Woodston
days.” three or two stay to obliged

is There days. those of one some chance our take will we well, “Well,
way. your of out all at yourself put to not are You fix. to need no
I think I enough. be will house the in have to happen may you Whatever
table. bachelor’s a for allowance making ladies young the for answer can
on come not will we you, with day busy a be will Monday see; me Let
surveyor my expect I me. with one busy a be will Tuesday and Monday;
in cannot I afterwards and morning; the in report his with Brockham from
acquaintance my face not could really I club. the attending fail decency
would it country, the in be to known am I as for, now; away stayed I if
Morland, Miss me, with rule a is it and amiss; exceedingly taken be
of sacrifice small a if neighbours, my of any to offence give to never
men. worthy very of set a are They it. prevent can attention and time
them with dine I and year; a twice Northanger from buck a half have They
question. the of out is say may we therefore, Tuesday, can. I whenever
be shall we and us; expect may you Henry, think, I Wednesday, on But
and hours Two us. about look to time have may we that early, you with
the in be shall we suppose; I Woodston, to us carry will quarters three
may you Wednesday, on one before quarter a about so, ten; by carriage
us.” for look

than Catherine to welcome more been have not could itself ball A
with acquainted be to desire her was strong so excursion, little this
an about Henry, when joy with bounding still was heart her and Woodston;
she where room the into greatcoated and booted came afterwards, hour
a in ladies, young come, am “I said, and sitting, were Eleanor and
world this in pleasures our that observe to strain, moralizing very
great a at them purchase often we that and for, paid be to always are
the on draft a for happiness actual ready-monied giving disadvantage,
hour. present this at myself, Witness honoured. be not may that future,
on Woodston at you seeing of satisfaction the for hope to am I Because
I prevent, may causes, other twenty or weather, bad which Wednesday,
it.” intended I before days two directly, away go must

why?” “And face. long very a with Catherine, said away!” “Go

in lost be to is time no Because question? the ask you can How “Why!
and go must I because wits, her of out housekeeper old my frightening
sure.” be to you, for dinner a prepare

seriously!” Not “Oh!

stay.” rather much had I too--for sadly and “Aye,

said? general the what after thing, a such of think you can how “But
trouble, any yourself give to not you desired particularly so he When
do.” would anything because

sister’s your upon unnecessary quite is it sure am “I smiled. only Henry
such made general the and so; be to it know must You mine. and account
not had he if besides, extraordinary: nothing providing your of point a
dinner excellent an such always has he did, he as much so half said
not could day one for one middling a to down sitting that home, at
signify.”

As Good-bye. own. my and sake his for you, like reason could I wish “I
return.” not shall I Eleanor, Sunday, is tomorrow

Catherine to operation simpler much a time any at being it and, went; He
to obliged soon very was she Henry’s, than judgment own her doubt to
going. his her to disagreeable however right, being for credit him give
her on much dwelt conduct general’s the of inexplicability the But
own her by had, she eating, his in particular very was he That thoughts.
say should he why but discovered; already observation, unassisted
most was while, the all another mean and positively, so thing one
but Who understood? be to rate, that at people, were How unaccountable!
at? was father his what of aware been have could Henry

Henry. without be to now were they however, Wednesday, to Saturday From
letter Tilney’s Captain and reflection: every of finale sad the was This
sure very was she Wednesday and absence; his in come certainly would
gloom. in equally all were future and present, past, The wet. be would
Eleanor’s and great; so Isabella in loss her and unhappy, so brother Her
interest to there was What absence! Henry’s by affected always spirits
so shrubberies--always the and woods the of tired was She her? amuse or
than now her to more no was itself in abbey the and dry; so and smooth
helped had it folly the of remembrance painful The house. other any
a from spring could which emotion only the was perfect and nourish to
who She, ideas! her in revolution a What building. the of consideration
charming so nothing was there Now, abbey! an in be to longed so had
well-connected a of comfort unpretending the as imagination her to
its had Fullerton better: but Fullerton, like something parsonage,
come! ever should Wednesday If none. had probably Woodston but faults,

It for. looked reasonably be might it when exactly and come, did It
chaise the o’clock, ten By air. on trod Catherine fine--and was came--it
drive agreeable an after and, abbey; the from trio the conveyed four and
populous and large a Woodston, entered they miles, twenty almost of
say to ashamed was Catherine unpleasant. not situation a in village,
apology an think to seemed general the as it, thought she pretty how
village; the of size the and country, the of flatness the for necessary
at, been ever had she place any to it preferred she heart her in but
of rank the above house neat every at admiration great with looked and
At passed. they which shops chandler’s little the all at and cottage, a
rest the from disengaged tolerably and village, the of end further the
with house, stone substantial new-built a parsonage, the stood it, of
the to up drove they as and, gates; green and sweep semicircular its
Newfoundland large a solitude, his of friends the with Henry, door,
of much make and receive to ready was terriers, three or two and puppy
them.

either her for house, the entered she as full, too was mind Catherine’s
general the by on called till and, deal; great a say to or observe to
she which in room the of idea little very had she it, of opinion her for
that moment a in perceived she then, it round looking Upon sitting. was
guarded too was she but world; the in room comfortable most the was it
him. disappointed praise her of coldness the and so, say to

comparing not are “We he. said house,” good a it calling not are “We
mere a as it considering are Northanger--we and Fullerton with it
and perhaps, decent, but allow, we confined, and small parsonage,
other in or, generality; the to inferior not altogether and habitable;
so half England in parsonages country few are there believe I words,
say to me from it be Far however. improvement, of admit may It good.
perhaps--though, out, thrown bow reason--a in anything and otherwise;
aversion, my another than more thing one is there if ourselves, between
bow.” patched-on a is it

pained be or understand to speech this of enough hear not did Catherine
supported and forward brought studiously being subjects other and it; by
was refreshments of full tray a that time same the at Henry, by
his to restored shortly was general the servant, his by introduced
spirits. of ease usual her all to Catherine and complacency,

and size, well-proportioned commodious, a of was question in room The
to it quitting their on and dining-parlour; a as up fitted handsomely
apartment, smaller a into first shown, was she grounds, the round walk
tidy unusually made and house, the of master the to peculiarly belonging
drawing-room, the be to was what into afterwards and occasion; the on
was Catherine unfurnished, though which, of appearance the with
shaped prettily a was It general. the satisfy to even enough delighted
them from view the and ground, the to reaching windows the room,
her expressed she and meadows; green over only though pleasant,
she which with simplicity honest the all with moment the at admiration
pity a What Tilney? Mr. room, this up fit you not do Why “Oh! it. felt
the is it saw; ever I room prettiest the is It up! fitted it have to not
world!” the in room prettiest

will it “that smile, satisfied most a with general, the said trust,” “I
taste!” lady’s a for only waits it furnished: be speedily very

a What Oh! else. anywhere sit never should I house, my was it if “Well,
is It too! trees, trees--apple the among is there cottage little sweet
cottage!” prettiest the

remember Henry, enough. is object--it an as it approve it--you like “You
remains.” cottage The it. about to spoken is Robinson that

silenced and consciousness, Catherine’s all recalled compliment a Such
her for general the by to applied pointedly though and, directly; her
like nothing hangings, and paper the of colour prevailing the of choice
of influence The her. from drawn be could subject the on opinion an
dissipating in use great of was however, air, fresh and objects fresh
part ornamental the reached having and, associations; embarrassing these
on meadow, a of sides two round walk a of consisting premises, the of
was she ago, year a half about act to begun had genius Henry’s which
she pleasure-ground any than prettier it think to recovered sufficiently
than higher it in shrub a not was there though before, in been ever had
corner. the in bench green the

a with village, the of part through and meadows, other into saunter A
game charming a and improvements, some examine to stables the to visit
them brought about, roll to able just puppies of litter a with play of
At three. be could it thought scarcely Catherine when o’clock, four to
had Never return. their on off set to six at and dine, to were they four
quickly! so passed day any

seem not did dinner the of abundance the that observe but not could She
was he that nay, general; the in astonishment smallest the create to
His there. not was which meat cold for side-table the at looking even
had They kind. different a of were observations daughter’s and son
never and own, his but table any at heartily so eat him seen seldom
being butter’s melted the by disconcerted little so him known before
oiled.

again carriage the coffee, his taken having general the o’clock, six At
conduct his of tenor the been had gratifying so and them; received
subject the on mind her was assured well so visit, whole the throughout
the of confident equally felt have she could that, expectations, his of
little with Woodston quitted have would Catherine son, his of wishes
it. to return might she When the or How the to as anxiety




27 CHAPTER


from letter unexpected very following the brought morning next The
Isabella:


April Bath,

greatest the with letters kind two your received I Catherine, dearest My
them answering not for make to apologies thousand a have and delight,
horrid this in but idleness; my of ashamed quite am really I sooner.
to hand my in pen my had have I nothing. for time find can one place
have but Bath, left you since day every almost you to letter a begin
me to write Pray other. or trifler silly some by prevented been always
place vile this leave we God, Thank home. own my to direct and soon,
dust it--the in pleasure no had have I away, went you Since tomorrow.
I if believe I gone. is for cares one everybody and anything; beyond is
than me to dearer are you for rest, the mind not should I you see could
not brother, dear your about uneasy quite am I conceive. can anybody
some of fearful am and Oxford; to went he since him from heard having
only the is he right: all set will offices kind Your misunderstanding.
it. of him convince will you trust I and love, could or did ever I man
you frightful most the hats the and down; partly are fashions spring The
you afraid am but pleasantly, time your spend you hope I imagine. can
are you family the of could I that all say not will I me. of think never
you those against you set or ungenerous, be not would I because with,
men young and trust, to whom know to difficult very is it but esteem;
the that say to rejoice I together. days two minds their know never
You Bath. left has abhor, particularly I others, all of whom, man young
as who, Tilney, Captain mean must I description, this from know, will
before me, tease and follow to disposed amazingly was remember, may you
Many shadow. my quite became and worse, got he Afterwards away. went you
I but attentions; such were never for in, taken been have might girls
ago, days two regiment his to away went He well. too sex fickle the knew
greatest the is He again. him with plagued be never shall I trust I and
was he days two last The disagreeable. amazingly and saw, ever I coxcomb
no took but taste, his pitied I Davis: Charlotte of side the by always
turned I and Street, Bath in was met we time last The him. of notice
even not would I me; to speak not might he that shop a into directly
have not would I but afterwards; pump-room the into went He him. at look
your and him between contrast a Such world. the all for him followed
about unhappy quite am latter--I the of news some me send Pray brother!
or cold, a with away, went he when uncomfortable so seemed he him;
but myself, him to write would I spirits. his affected that something
he afraid am above, hinted I as and, direction; his mislaid have
his to everything explain Pray amiss. conduct my in something took
himself from line a doubt, any harbours still he if or, satisfaction;
rights. to all set might town, in next when Putney at call a or me, to
in going except play, the to nor age, this rooms the to been not have I
teased they price: half at frolic, a for Hodges, the with night last
up myself shut I say not should they determined was I and it; into me
they and Mitchells, the by sit to happened We gone. was Tilney because
at spite: their knew I out. me see to surprised quite be to pretended
friendship; all are they now but me, to civil be not could they time one
a have I know You them. by in taken be to as fool a such not am I but
a on put to tried had Mitchell Anne own. my of spirit good pretty
made but concert, the at before week the it wore I as mine, like turban
at believe, I face, odd my become to happened it--it of work wretched
but me; upon was eye every said and time, the at so me told Tilney least
purple but nothing wear I take. would I word whose man last the is he
dear your is matter--it no but it, in hideous look I know I now:
sweetest dearest, my time, no Lose colour. favourite brother’s
etc. am, ever Who me, to and him to writing in Catherine,


Catherine. upon even impose not could artifice shallow of strain a Such
the from her struck falsehood and contradictions, inconsistencies, Its
ever having of ashamed and Isabella, of ashamed was She first. very
her as disgusting as now were attachment of professions Her her. loved
her on James to “Write impudent. demands her and empty, were excuses
her by mentioned name Isabella’s hear never should James No, behalf!
again.”

Eleanor and him to known made she Woodston, from arrival Henry’s On
and it, on sincerity with them congratulating safety, brother’s their
strong with letter her of passages material most the aloud reading
she Isabella,” for much it--“So finished had she When indignation.
she or idiot, an me think must She intimacy! our all for “and cried,
her make to served has this perhaps but so; written have not could
has she what see I her. to is mine than me to known better character
I answered. not have tricks her and coquette, vain a is She about. been
I and me, for or James for either regard any ever had she believe not do
her.” known never had I wish

Henry. said had,” never you if as be soon will “It

has she that see I understand. cannot I that thing one but is “There
not do I but succeeded; not have which Tilney, Captain on designs had
should Why time. this all about been has Tilney Captain what understand
and brother, my with quarrel her make to as attentions such her pay he
himself?” off fly then

believe I as such motives, Frederick’s for say to little very have “I
the and Thorpe, Miss as well as vanities his has He been. have to them
yet not have they head, stronger a having that, is, difference chief
him justify not does behaviour his of effect the If himself. injured
cause.” the after seek not better had we you, with

her?” about cared really ever he suppose not do you “Then

did.” never he that persuaded am “I

sake?” mischief’s for so do to believe made only “And

assent. his bowed Henry

has it Though all. at him like not do I that say must I then, “Well,
happens, it As all. at him like not do I us, for well so out turned
any has Isabella think not do I because done, harm great no is there
him?” with love in much very her made had he suppose But, lose. to heart

to heart a had have to Isabella suppose first must we “But
that in and, creature; different very a been have to lose--consequently
treatment.” different very with met have would she case,

brother.” your by stand should you that right very is “It

by distressed much be not would you yours, by stand would you if “And
innate an by warped is mind your But Thorpe. Miss of disappointment the
cool the to accessible not therefore and integrity, general of principle
revenge.” of desire a or partiality, family of reasonings

could Frederick bitterness. further of out complimented was Catherine
She agreeable. so himself made Henry while guilty, unpardonably be not
more no think to tried and letter, Isabella’s answering not on resolved
it. of




28 CHAPTER


for London to go to obliged himself found general the this, after Soon
necessity any that regretting earnestly Northanger left he and week; a
anxiously and company, Morland’s Miss of hour an for even him rob should
children his to amusement and comfort her of study the recommending
the Catherine gave departure His absence. his in object chief their as
The gain. a sometimes be may loss a that conviction experimental first
voluntary, employment every passed, now time their which with happiness
humour, good and ease of scene a meal every indulged, laugh every
pleasures, hours, their liked, they when and liked they where walking
the of sensible thoroughly her made command, own their at fatigues and
thankfully most and imposed, had presence general’s the which restraint
her made delights such and ease Such it. from release present their feel
not it had and day; every more and more people the and place the love
and one, the leave to expedient becoming soon its of dread a for been
at would she other, the by beloved equally being not of apprehension an
in now was she but happy; perfectly been have day each of moment each
fourth the home, came general the before visit; her of week fourth the
she if intrusion an seem might it perhaps and turned, be would week
it whenever consideration painful a was This longer. much stayed
very she mind, her on weight a such of rid get to eager and occurred;
away, going propose once, at it about Eleanor to speak to resolved soon
might proposal her which in manner the by conduct her in guided be and
taken. be

to difficult it feel might she time, much herself gave she if that Aware
of opportunity first the took she subject, a unpleasant so forward bring
the in being Eleanor’s of and Eleanor, with alone suddenly being
her forth start to different, very something about speech a of middle
herself declared and looked Eleanor soon. very away going of obligation
a for company her of pleasure the for “hoped had She concerned. much
suppose to wishes) her by (perhaps misled been time--had longer much
that think but not could promised--and been had visit longer much a that
have to her to was it pleasure the of aware were Morland Mrs. and Mr. if
Catherine return.” her hasten to generous too be would they there, her
As all. at hurry no in were Mamma and Papa that, to As “Oh! explained:
satisfied.” be always would they happy, was she as long

them?” leave to herself hurry a such in ask, she might why, “Then

long.” so there been had she Because “Oh!

you If farther. no you urge can I word, a such use can you if “Nay,
long--” it think

as you with stay could I pleasure, own my For indeed. not do I No, “Oh!
leaving her had, she till that, settled directly was it And again.” long
uneasiness of cause this having In of. thought be to even not was them
The weakened. likewise was other the of force the removed, pleasantly so
stay, to her pressing in manner Eleanor’s of earnestness the kindness,
determined, was stay her that told being on look gratified Henry’s and
only her left as them, with importance her of proofs sweet such were
comfortably do never can mind human the as solicitude much so just
quite and her, loved Henry that always--believe did--almost She without.
belong to her wished even and loved sister and father his that always
merely were anxieties and doubts her far, so believing and them; to
irritations. sportive

wholly remaining of injunction father’s his obey to able not was Henry
London, in absence his during ladies, the on attendance in Northanger at
on them leave to him obliging Woodston at curate his of engagements the
been had it what now not was loss His nights. of couple a for Saturday
not did but gaiety, their lessened it home; at was general the while
and occupation, in agreeing girls two the and comfort; their ruin
time the for sufficient well so themselves found intimacy, in improving
at hour late a rather o’clock, eleven was it that themselves, to
Henry’s of day the on supper-room the quitted they before abbey, the
seemed, it when stairs the of head the reached just had They departure.
a that judge, to them allow would walls the of thickness the as far as
the confirmed moment next the and door, the to up driving was carriage
perturbation first the After house-bell. the of noise loud the by idea
matter?” the be can What heaven! “Good a in away, passed had surprise of
whose brother, eldest her be to Eleanor by decided quickly was it
and unseasonable, so quite not if sudden, as often was arrival
him. welcome to down hurried she accordingly

she as well as mind her up making chamber, her to on walked Catherine
comforting and Tilney, Captain with acquaintance further a to could,
and her, given had conduct his impression unpleasant the under herself
of approve to gentleman a fine too far by being his of persuasion the
as circumstances such under meet not should they least at that her,
never would he trusted She painful. materially meeting their make would
of ashamed be time this by must he as indeed, and Thorpe; Miss of speak
as long as and it; of danger no be could there acted, had he part the
behave could she thought she avoided, were scenes Bath of mention all
was it and away, passed time considerations such In civilly. very him to
and him, see to glad so be should Eleanor that favour his in certainly
arrival, his since gone almost was hour an half for say, to much so have
up. come not did Eleanor and

and gallery, the in step her heard she thought Catherine moment that At
however, Scarcely, silent. was all but continuance; its for listened
moving something of noise the when error, of fancy her convicted she had
touching was someone if as seemed it start; her made door her to close
lock the of motion slight a moment another in doorway--and very the
idea the at little a trembled She it. on be must hand some that proved
again be to not resolving but cautiously; so approaching anyone’s of
raised a by misled or alarm, of appearances trivial by overcome
Eleanor, door. the opened and forward, quietly stepped she imagination,
were however, spirits, Catherine’s there. stood Eleanor, only and
and pale, were cheeks Eleanor’s for instant, an for but tranquillized
it in, come to intending evidently Though agitated. greatly manner her
when speak to greater still a and room, the enter to effort an seemed
account, Tilney’s Captain on uneasiness some supposing Catherine, there.
be to her obliged attention, silent by concern her express only could
with her over hung and lavender-water, with temples her rubbed seated,
not must not--you must you Catherine, dear “My solicitude. affectionate
well. quite am “I words. connected first Eleanor’s were indeed--”
an such on you to come it--I bear cannot me--I distracts kindness This
errand!”

me!” To “Errand!

you!” tell I shall How Oh! you! tell I shall “How

her as pale as turning and mind, Catherine’s into darted now idea new A
Woodston!” from messenger a “‘Tis exclaimed, she friend,

most her at looking Eleanor, returned indeed,” mistaken, are “You
himself.” father my is It Woodston. from one no is “it compassionately;
she as ground the to turned were eyes her and faltered, voice Her
make to itself in enough was return unlooked-for His name. his mentioned
supposed hardly she moments few a for and sink, heart Catherine’s
Eleanor, and nothing; said She told. be to worse anything were there
eyes with but firmness, with speak and herself collect to endeavouring
think to sure, am I good, too are “You on. went soon down, cast still
most a indeed am I perform. to obliged am I part the for me of worse the
been lately so passed, lately so has what After messenger. unwilling
your to side!--as my on thankfully how joyfully, us--how between settled
tell I can how longer, weeks many many, for hoped I as here continuing
happiness the that accepted--and be to not is kindness your that you
not must I by--But repaid be to is us given hitherto has company your
father My part. to are we Catherine, dear My words. with myself trust
on away family whole our takes that engagement an recollected has
fortnight. a for Hereford, near Longtown’s, Lord to going are We Monday.
attempt cannot I impossible. equally are apology and Explanation
either.”

as well as feelings her suppressing Catherine, cried Eleanor,” dear “My
give must engagement second A distressed. so be not “do could, she
so and soon, part--so to are we sorry very very, am I first. a to way
my finish can I not. am I indeed offended, not am I but too; suddenly
Can me. to come will you hope I or time; any at know, you here, visit
Fullerton?” to come lord’s, this from return you when you,

Catherine.” power, my in be not will “It

then.” can, you when “Come

something to recurring thoughts Catherine’s and answer; no made Eleanor
soon “Monday--so aloud, thinking added, she interesting, directly more
to able be shall of--I certain am I Well, go. all you and Monday; as
Do know. you do, you before just till go not need I however. leave, take
father My well. very Monday on go can I Eleanor, distressed, be not
The consequence. little very of is it of notice no having mother’s and
then way--and the half say, dare I me, with servant a send will general
home.” from miles nine only am I then and Salisbury, at be soon shall I

less somewhat be would it so, settled it Were Catherine! “Ah,
received have would you attentions common such in though intolerable,
is morning you?--tomorrow tell I can But--how ought. you what half but
choice; your to left is hour the even not and us, leaving your for fixed
no and o’clock, seven at here be will and ordered, is carriage very the
you.” offered be will servant

believe hardly could “I speechless. and breathless down, sat Catherine
that resentment no displeasure, no and it; heard I when senses, my
I than more be can great, justly however moment, this at feel can you
suggest could I That Oh! felt. I what of talk not must I myself--but
say! mother and father your will What God! Good extenuation! in anything
this--almost to friends real of protection the from you courting After
house, the of out driven you have to home, your from distance double
dear Dear, civility! decent of even considerations the without
myself guilty seem I message, a such of bearer the being in Catherine,
have must you for me, acquit will you trust I yet, insult; its all of
mistress nominal a but am I that see to house this in enough long been
nothing.” is power real my that it, of

voice. faltering a in Catherine said general?” the offended I “Have

I that all know, I that all daughter, a as feelings my For “Alas!
He offence. of cause just no him given have can you that is for, answer
him seen seldom have I discomposed; greatly very greatly, is certainly
to occurred now has something and happy, not is temper His so. more
vexation, some disappointment, some degree; uncommon an in it ruffle
hardly can I which but important, seems moment this at just which
possible?” it is how for in, concern any have to you suppose

for only was it and all; at speak could Catherine that pain with was It
very am “I she, said sure,” am “I it. attempted she that sake Eleanor’s
willingly would I thing last the was It him. offended have I if sorry
must know, you engagement, An Eleanor. unhappy, be not do But done. have
might I that sooner, recollected not was it sorry only am I kept. be
consequence.” little very of is it But home. written have

none; of be will it safety real your to that hope, earnestly I hope, “I
comfort, to consequence: greatest the of is it else everything to but
friends, your Were world. the to family, your to propriety, appearance,
ease; comparative with them to go might you Bath, in still Allens, the
be to miles, seventy of journey a but there; you take would hours few a
unattended!” alone, age, your at you, by post taken

to are we if And that. about think not Do nothing. is journey the “Oh,
I difference. no makes know, you later, or sooner hours few a part,
she that saw Eleanor time.” in called be me Let seven. by ready be can
should they that each for better it believing and alone; be to wished
in you see shall “I with, her left now conversation, further any avoid
morning.” the

presence Eleanor’s In relief. needed heart swelling Catherine’s
was sooner no but tears, her restrained equally had pride and friendship
and house, the from Turned torrents. in forth burst they than gone she
that apology any justify, could that reason any Without way! a such in
of insolence the nay, rudeness, the abruptness, the for atone could
hope, Every farewell. him bid to even able distance--not a at Henry it.
how say could who and least, at suspended, him from expectation every
such by this all And again? meet might they when say could Who long?
heretofore and bred, well so polite, so Tilney, General as man a
was it as incomprehensible as was It her! of fond particularly so
would it where and arise, could it what From grievous. and mortifying
in manner The alarm. and perplexity equal of considerations were end,
any without away her hurrying uncivil, grossly so done was it which
appearance the even her allowing or convenience, own her to reference
the days, two of travelling; her of mode or time the to as choice of
resolved if as hour, earliest the almost that of and on, fixed earliest
he that morning, the in stirring was he before gone her have to
but mean this all could What her. see to even obliged be not might
the had have must she other or means some By affront? intentional an
so from her spare to wished had Eleanor him. offend to misfortune
any that possible it believe not could Catherine but notion, a painful
person a against will ill such provoke could misfortune any or injury
it. with connected be to supposed not least, at or, connected, not

name the deserved that repose or Sleep, night. the passed Heavily
disturbed her which in room, That question. the of out was sleep, of
scene the again was arrival, first her on her tormented had imagination
the now different how Yet slumbers. unquiet and spirits agitated of
mournfully then--how been had it what from inquietude her of source
in foundation had anxiety Her substance! and reality in superior
the in occupied so mind a with and probability; in fears her fact,
situation, her of solitude the evil, natural and actual of contemplation
felt were building, the of antiquity the chamber, her of darkness the
was wind the though and emotion; smallest the without considered and
house, the throughout noises sudden and strange produced often and high,
or curiosity without hour, after hour awake, lay she as all it heard she
terror.

give or attention show to eager room, her entered Eleanor six after Soon
done. be to remained little very but possible; was it where assistance
packing her and dressed, almost was she loitered; not had Catherine
the from message conciliatory some of possibility The finished. almost
as natural, so What appeared. daughter his as her to occurred general
only she And it? succeed repentance and away pass should anger that
properly might apology an passed, had what after far, how know to wanted
here; useless been have would knowledge the But her. by received be
the to put was dignity nor clemency neither for; called not was it
on them between passed little Very message. no brought trial--Eleanor
trivial and few and silence, in safety greatest her found each meeting;
in Catherine upstairs, remained they while exchanged sentences the were
than goodwill more with Eleanor and dress, her completing agitation busy
they done was everything When trunk. the filling upon intent experience
friend her behind minute a half only lingering Catherine room, the left
and object, cherished well-known, every on glance parting a throw to
She prepared. was breakfast where breakfast-parlour, the to down went
as urged being of pain the from herself save to well as eat, to tried
not could and appetite, no had she but comfortable; friend her make to
breakfast last her and this between contrast The mouthfuls. many swallow
for distaste her strengthened and misery, fresh her gave room that in
they since ago hours twenty and four not was It her. before everything
different! how circumstances in but repast, same the to there met had
she had security, false, though happy, what ease, cheerful what With
little fearing and present, everything enjoying her, around looked then
happy Happy, day! a for Woodston to going Henry’s beyond future, in
helped and her by sat had Henry there; been had Henry For breakfast!
address any by undisturbed indulged long were reflections These her.
the and herself; as thought in deep as sat who companion, her from
recall and startle to thing first the was carriage the of appearance
it; of sight the at rose colour Catherine’s moment. present the to them
instant that at striking treated, was she which with indignity the and
only sensible time short a for her made force, peculiar with mind her on
speech. and resolution into impelled now seemed Eleanor resentment. of

from hear me let must “you cried; she Catherine,” me, to write must “You
shall I home, at safe be to you know I Till possible. as soon as you
I hazards, all risks, all at letter, one For comfort. hour’s an have not
safe are you that knowing of satisfaction the have me Let entreat. must
ask can I till then, and well, family your found have and Fullerton, at
Direct more. expect not will I do, to ought I as correspondence your for
Alice.” to cover under it, ask must I and, Longtown’s, Lord at me to

am I me, from letter a receive to allowed not are you if Eleanor, “No,
home getting my of doubt no be can There write. not better had I sure
safe.”

not will I feelings. your at wonder cannot “I replied, only Eleanor
at am I when heart of kindness own your to trust will I you. importune
accompanying sorrow of look the with this, But you.” from distance a
instantly she and moment, a in pride Catherine’s melt to enough was it,
indeed.” you to write will I Eleanor, “Oh, said,

settle, to anxious was Tilney Miss which point another yet was There
that her to occurred had It of. speaking in embarrassed somewhat though
with provided be not might Catherine home, from absence an long so after
it suggesting upon and, journey, her of expenses the for enough money
be to proved it accommodation, of offers affectionate most with her to
that till subject the on thought never had Catherine case. the exactly
for but that convinced was purse, her examining upon but, moment,
house the from turned been have might she friend, her of kindness this
she which in distress the and home; getting of means the even without
scarcely both, of minds the filling involved thereby been have must
remaining their of time the during either by said was word another
announced soon was carriage The time. that was however, Short, together.
affectionate and long a rising, instantly Catherine, and ready; be to
and, adieu; other each bidding in language of place the supplied embrace
mention some without house the leave to unable hall, the entered they as
a paused she either, by spoken been yet not had name whose one of
left she that intelligible it made just lips quivering with and moment,
to approach this with But friend.” absent her for remembrance kind “her
hiding and, feelings; her restraining of possibility all ended name his
across darted she handkerchief, her with could she as well as face her
the from driven was moment a in and chaise, the into jumped hall, the
door.




29 CHAPTER


no had itself in journey The fearful. be to wretched too was Catherine
or length its dreading either without it began she and her; for terrors
in carriage, the of corner one in back Leaning solitariness. its feeling
walls the beyond miles some conveyed was she tears, of burst violent a
ground of point highest the and head; her raised she before abbey the of
capable was she before view her from closed almost was park the within
now she road the Unfortunately, it. towards eyes her turning of
passed happily so had she ago days ten only which same the was travelled
every miles, fourteen for and, Woodston; from and to going in along
on objects of review the by severe more rendered was feeling bitter
mile, Every different. so impressions under looked first had she which
when and sufferings, her to added Woodston, nearer her brought it as
and it, to led which turning the passed she five, of distance the within
agitation and grief her unconscious, so yet near, so Henry, of thought
excessive. were

happiest the of one been had place that at spent had she which day The
made had general the that day, that on was it there, was It life. her of
so had herself, and Henry to regard with expressions such of use
his of conviction positive most the her give to as looked so and spoken
he had ago days ten only Yes, marriage. their wishing actually
too his by her confused even he regard--had pointed his by her elated
she had what or done, she had now--what And reference! significant
change? a such merit to do, to omitted

been had herself accuse could she which of him against offence only The
own her and Henry knowledge. his reach to possible scarcely was as such
idly so had she which suspicions shocking the to privy were only heart
each. with secret her believe she did safe equally and entertained;
by indeed, If, her. betrayed have not could Henry least, at Designedly,
of intelligence gained have should father his mischance strange any
fancies causeless her of for, look and think to dared had she what
his of degree any at wonder not could she examinations, injurious and
could she murderer, a as him viewed having her of aware If indignation.
justification a But house. his from her turning even his at wonder not
power. his in be not would trusted, she herself, to torture of full so

however, not, was it point, this on conjectures her all were as Anxious
more a nearer, yet thought a was There most. dwelt she which on one the
feel, and think, would Henry How concern. impetuous more prevailing,
of heard and Northanger to morrow the on returned he when look, and
every over rise to interest and force of question a was gone, being her
it soothing; and irritating alternately ceasing, never be to other,
others at and acquiescence, calm his of dread the suggested sometimes
To resentment. and regret his in confidence sweetest the by answered was
Eleanor--what to but speak; to dare not would he course, of general, the
her? about Eleanor to say not he might

article one any on inquiries, and doubts of recurrence unceasing this In
hours the repose, momentary than more of incapable was mind her which of
for. looked she than faster much advanced journey her and away, passed
noticing from her prevented which thought, of anxieties pressing The
Woodston, of neighbourhood the beyond once when her, before anything
no though and progress; her watching from time same the at her saved
stage no found she attention, moment’s a engage could road the on object
by cause, another by too preserved was she this, From tedious. it of
such in return to for conclusion; journey’s her for eagerness no feeling
meeting a of pleasure the destroy to almost was Fullerton to manner a
eleven hers--an as such absence an after even best, loved she those with
and herself humble not would that say to she had What absence. weeks’
confession the by grief own her increase not would that family, her pain
innocent the involve perhaps and resentment, useless an extend it, of
justice do never could She will? ill undistinguishing in guilty the with
expression; for strongly too it felt she merit; Eleanor’s and Henry to
of thought be they should them, against taken be dislike a should and
heart. the to her cut would it account, father’s their on unfavourably,

view first the for sought than dreaded rather she feelings, these With
of miles twenty within her announce would which spire well-known that of
but Northanger; leaving on point her be to known had she Salisbury home.
the for post-masters the to indebted been had she stage first the after
great so it; to her conduct to then were which places the of names
however, nothing, with met She route. her of ignorance her been had
liberal and manners, civil youth, Her her. frighten or distress to
could herself like traveller a that attention the all her procured pay
for on travelled she horses, change to only stopping and require;
seven and six between and alarm, or accident without hours eleven about
Fullerton. entering herself found evening the in o’clock

village, native her to career, her of close the at returning, heroine A
of dignity the all and reputation, recovered of triumph the all in
several their in relations noble of train long a with countess, a
four, and chaise travelling a in waiting-maids three and phaetons,
well may contriver the of pen the which on event an is her, behind
author the and conclusion, every to credit gives it dwell; to delight
is affair my But bestows. liberally so she glory the in share must
and solitude in home her to heroine my back bring I different; widely
minuteness. into me lead can spirits of elation sweet no and disgrace;
no as sentiment, upon blow a such is post-chaise hack a in heroine A
her shall therefore Swiftly withstand. can pathos or grandeur at attempt
and groups, Sunday of gaze the amid village, the through drive post-boy
it. from descent her be shall speedy

thus she as mind, Catherine’s of distress the be might whatever But,
her of humiliation the whatever and parsonage, the towards advanced
everyday no of enjoyment preparing was she it, relating in biographer
her of appearance the in first, went; she whom to those for nature
being traveller a of chaise The herself. in secondly, carriage--and
the at immediately were family whole the Fullerton, in sight rare a
brighten to pleasure a was sweep-gate the at stop it have to and window;
all by for unlooked quite pleasure fancy--a every occupy and eye every
old, years four and six of girl and boy a children, youngest two the but
glance the Happy carriage. every in sister or brother a expected who
the proclaimed that voice the Happy Catherine! distinguished first that
George of property lawful the were happiness such whether But discovery!
understood. exactly be never could Harriet or

the at assembled all Harriet, and George, Sarah, mother, father, Her
awaken to sight a was eagerness, affectionate with her welcome to door
as each, of embrace the in and heart; Catherine’s of feelings best the
anything beyond soothed herself found she carriage, the from stepped she
even was she caressed, so surrounded, So possible. believed had she that
was time short a for everything love family of joyfulness the In happy!
little first at them leaving her, seeing of pleasure the and subdued,
tea-table, the round seated all were they curiosity, calm for leisure
traveller, poor the of comfort the for hurried had Morland Mrs. which
so inquiry any before notice, her caught soon looks jaded and pale whose
her. to addressed was answer positive a demand to as direct

might what begin then she did hesitation, much with and Reluctantly,
her of courtesy the by termed, be hour, an half of end the at perhaps,
they could time, that within scarcely, but explanation; an hearers,
sudden her of particulars, the collect or cause, the discover all at
any from far race; irritable an being from far were They return.
here, but affronts: resenting, in bitterness or catching, in quickness
nor, overlooked, be to not insult an was unfolded, was whole the when
any suffering Without pardoned. easily be to hour, half first the for
lonely and long daughter’s their of consideration the in alarm, romantic
been have might it that feel but not could Morland Mrs. and Mr. journey,
could they what was it that her; to unpleasantness much of productive
such on her forcing in that, and suffered; voluntarily have never
nor honourably neither acted had Tilney General measure, a
it, done had he Why parent. a as nor gentleman a as feelingly--neither
so and hospitality, of breach a such to him provoked have could what
actual into daughter their for regard partial his all turned suddenly
divining from far as least at were they which matter a was will, ill
long; so means any by them oppress not did it but herself; Catherine as
strange a was “it that conjecture, useless of course due a after and,
all for enough grew man,” strange very a be must he that and business,
the in indulged still indeed Sarah though wonder; and indignation their
youthful with conjecturing and exclaiming incomprehensibility, of sweets
trouble,” needless of deal great a yourself give you dear, “My ardour.
all at not something is it it, upon “depend last; at mother her said
understanding.” worth

this recollected he when away, Catherine wishing his for allow can “I
civilly?” it do not why “but Sarah, said engagement,”

must “they Morland; Mrs. returned people,” young the for sorry am “I
now; matter no is it else, anything for as but it; of time sad a have
General upon depend not does comfort our and home, at safe is Catherine
“I mother, philosophic her continued “Well,” sighed. Catherine Tilney.”
all is it now but time; the at journey your of know not did I glad am
for good always is It done. harm great no is there perhaps over,
dear my know, you and themselves; exerting upon put be to people young
but creature; scatter-brained little sad a were always you Catherine,
much so with you, about wits your have to forced been have must you now
you that appear will it hope I and forth; so and chaises of changing
pockets.” the of any in you behind anything left not have

own her in interest an feel to tried and too, so hoped Catherine
and silent be to and, down; worn quite were spirits her but amendment,
mother’s her to agreed readily she wish, only her soon becoming alone
in nothing seeing parents, Her bed. to early going of counsel next
mortified of consequence natural the but agitation and looks ill her
journey, a such of fatigue and exertion unusual the of and feelings,
and away; slept soon being their of doubt any without her from parted
equal not was recovery her morning, next the met all they when though,
being there of unsuspicious perfectly still were they hopes, their to
the for which, heart, her of thought once never They evil. deeper any
first her from returned just seventeen, of lady young a of parents
enough! odd was home, from excursion

to promise her fulfil to down sat she over, was breakfast as soon As
her on distance and time of effect the in trust whose Tilney, Miss
Catherine did already for justified, already was disposition friend’s
with coldly, Eleanor from parted having with herself reproach
enough never and kindness, or merits her valued enough never having
The endure. to left yesterday been had she what for her commiserated
pen; her assisting from far was however, feelings, these of strength
Eleanor addressing in than write to her for harder been it had never and
her to justice do once at might which letter a compose To Tilney.
regret, servile without gratitude convey situation, her and sentiments
letter resentment--a without honest and coldness, without guarded be
all, above of--and, perusal the by pained be not might Eleanor which
an was see, to chance should Henry if herself, blush not might she which
after and, performance; of powers her all away frighten to undertaking
she that all was brief very be to perplexity, much and thought long
therefore money The safety. of confidence any with on determine could
grateful than more little with enclosed was advanced had Eleanor which
heart. affectionate most a of wishes good thousand the and thanks,

the as Morland, Mrs. observed acquaintance,” strange a been has “This
happens it sorry am I ended. soon and made “soon finished; was letter
and people; young of kind pretty very them thought Allen Mrs. for so,
Well, James! Poor Ah! Isabella. your in too luck of out sadly were you
be will hope I make you friends new next the and learn; and live must we
keeping.” worth better

better be can friend “No answered, warmly she as coloured Catherine
Eleanor.” than keeping worth

do other; or time some again meet will you say dare I dear, my so, “If
the in again together thrown are you but one to ten is It uneasy. be not
be!” will it pleasure a what then and years; few a of course

hope The consolation. at attempt her in happy not was Morland Mrs.
into put only could years few a of course the in again meeting of
meeting a make to time that within happen might what head Catherine’s
him of think or Tilney, Henry forget never could She her. to dreadful
forget might he but moment; that at did she than tenderness less with
she as tears with filled eyes Her meet--! to case, that in and her;
her perceiving mother, her and renewed; so acquaintance her pictured
another as proposed, effect, good no had have to suggestions comfortable
Mrs. on call should they that spirits, her restoring for expedient
Allen.

walked, they as and, apart; mile a of quarter a only were houses two The
of score the on felt she that all dispatched quickly Morland Mrs.
otherwise “but she; said him,” for sorry are “We disappointment. James’s
be not could it for off; going match the in done harm no is there
the not had we whom girl a to engaged him have to thing desirable a
and fortune; without entirely so was who and with, acquaintance smallest
at Just her. of well all at think cannot we behaviour, such after now,
and forever; last not will that but James; poor to hard comes it present
foolishness the for life, his all man discreeter a be will he say dare I
choice.” first his of

could Catherine as affair the of view summary a such just was This
complaisance, her endangered have might sentence another to; listen
powers thinking her all were soon for rational; less reply her made and
spirits and feelings of change own her of reflection the in up swallowed
months three not was It road. well-known that trodden had she last since
backwards run there had she expectation, joyful with wild since, ago
and gay, light, heart an with day, a times ten some forwards and
and unalloyed, and untasted pleasures to forward looking independent;
Three it. of knowledge the from as evil of apprehension the from free
she did being a altered how now, and this; all her seen had ago months
return!

her which kindness the all with Allens the by received was She
naturally would affection, steady a on acting appearance, unlooked-for
displeasure, their warm and surprise, their was great and forth; call
of account Morland’s Mrs. treated--though been had she how hearing on
passions. their to appeal studied no representation, inflated no was it
“She she. said evening,” yesterday surprise by quite us took “Catherine
till coming of nothing knew and herself, by post way the all travelled
all other, or fancy odd some from Tilney, General for night; Saturday
out her turned almost and there, her having of tired grew sudden a of
odd very a be must he and certainly; unfriendly, Very house. the of
great a is it And again! us amongst her have to glad so are we but man;
shift can but creature, helpless poor a not is she that find to comfort
herself.” for well very

reasonable the with occasion the on himself expressed Allen Mr.
expressions his thought Allen Mrs. and friend; sensible a of resentment
His herself. by again of use made immediately be to enough good quite
hers, succession in became explanations his and conjectures, his wonder,
patience not have really remark--“I single this of addition the with
really “I And, pause. accidental every up fill general”--to the with
Mr. after twice uttered was general,” the with patience not have
material any or anger, of relaxation any without room, the left Allen
attended wandering of degree considerable more A thought. of digression
immediately she fourth, the completing after and, repetition; third the
rent great frightful that got having my of dear, my think, “Only added,
one that Bath, left I before mended, charmingly so Mechlin best my in
Bath other. or day some you it show must I was. it where see hardly can
half above not did I you assure I all. after Catherine, place, nice a is
us, to comfort a such was there being Thorpe’s Mrs. away. coming like
first.” at forlorn quite were I and you know, You it? not was

brightening eyes her Catherine, said long,” last not did that but “Yes,
existence her to spirit given first had what of recollection the at
there.

for wanted we then and Thorpe, Mrs. with met soon we true: “Very
well? very wear gloves silk these think you not do dear, My nothing.
you Rooms, Lower the to going our of time first the new on them put I
that remember you Do since. deal great a them worn have I and know,
evening?”

Perfectly.” Oh! I! “Do

I and us, with tea drank Tilney Mr. it? not was agreeable, very was “It
a have I agreeable. very so is he addition, great a him thought always
my had I remember I sure. quite not am but him, with danced you notion
on.” gown favourite

subjects, other of trial short a after and, answer; not could Catherine
the with patience not have really to--“I returned again Allen Mrs.
not do I be! to seemed he as man worthy agreeable, an Such general!
His life. your in man better-bred a saw ever you Morland, Mrs. suppose,
no But Catherine. them, left he after day very the taken were lodgings
know.” you Street, Milsom wonder;

her on impress to endeavoured Morland Mrs. again, home walked they As
Mr. as well-wishers steady such having of happiness the mind daughter’s
or neglect the which consideration little very the and Allen, Mrs. and
with have to ought Tilneys the like acquaintance slight of unkindness
her of affection and opinion good the preserve could she while her,
but this; all in sense good of deal great a was There friends. earliest
has sense good which in mind human the of situations some are there
every almost contradicted feelings Catherine’s and power; little very
very these of behaviour the upon was It advanced. mother her position
and depended; happiness present her all that acquaintance slight
the by opinions own her confirming successfully was Morland Mrs. while
reflecting silently was Catherine representations, own her of justness
heard have must he now Northanger; at arrived have must Henry now that
for off setting all were they perhaps, now, and departure; her of
Hereford.




30 CHAPTER


habits her had nor sedentary, naturally not was disposition Catherine’s
her been have hitherto might whatever but industrious; very ever been
be to now them perceive but not could mother her sort, that of defects
for herself employ nor still sit neither could She increased. greatly
and again orchard and garden the round walking together, minutes ten
she if as seemed it and voluntary; was motion but nothing if as again,
time any for fixed remain than rather house the about walk even could
her In alteration. greater yet a was spirits of loss Her parlour. the in
but herself; of caricature a be only might she idleness her and rambling
had she that all of reverse very the was she sadness and silence her in
before. been

hint; a without even pass to it allowed Morland Mrs. days two For
cheerfulness, her restored neither had rest night’s third a when but
for inclination greater a her given nor activity, useful in her improved
“My of, reproof gentle the from refrain longer no could she needlework,
not do I lady. fine a quite growing are you afraid am I Catherine, dear
friend no had he if done, be would cravats Richard’s poor when know
for time a is there but Bath; upon much too runs head Your you. but
have You work. for time a and plays, and balls for time everything--a
useful.” be to try must you now and amusement, of run long a had

that voice, dejected a in saying, directly, work her up took Catherine
Bath--much.” upon run not did head “her

simple very is that and Tilney, General about fretting are you “Then
never should You again. him see ever you whether one to ten for you; of
you Catherine, my hope, silence--“I short a After trifles.” about fret
grand so not is it because home with humour of out getting not are
indeed. evil an into visit your turning be would That Northanger. as
home, at especially but contented, be always should you are you Wherever
quite not did I time. your of most the spend must you there because
at bread French the about much so talk you hear to breakfast, at like,
Northanger.”

what me to same the all is It bread. the about care not do I sure am “I
eat.” I

much upon upstairs books the of one in essay clever very a is “There
by home for spoilt been have that girls young about subject, a such
some you for out it look will I think. I Mirror, acquaintance--The great
good.” you do will it sure am I because other, or day

applied right, do to endeavour an with and, more, no said Catherine
it knowing without again, sunk minutes, few a after but, work; her to
chair, her in herself moving listlessness, and languor into herself,
her moved she than oftener much weariness, of irritation the from
seeing, and relapse; this of progress the watched Morland Mrs. needle.
that of proof full the look, dissatisfied and absent daughter’s her in
of want her attribute to begun now had she which to spirit repining
question, in book the fetch to room the left hastily cheerfulness,
some was It malady. a dreadful so attacking in time no lose to anxious
matters family other and for; looked she what find could she before time
she ere elapsed had hour an of quarter a her, detain to occurring
Her hoped. was much so which from volume the with downstairs returned
herself, created she what but noise all out shut having above avocations
minutes, few last the within arrived had visitor a that not knew she
young a was beheld she object first the room, the entering on till,
he respect, much of look a With before. seen never had she whom man
daughter conscious her by her to introduced being and rose, immediately
began sensibility real of embarrassment the with Tilney,” Henry “Mr. as
had what after that acknowledging there, appearance his for apologize to
stating and Fullerton, at welcome a expect to right little had he passed
home her reached having Morland’s Miss of assured be to impatience his
to himself address not did He intrusion. his of cause the as safety, in
or him comprehending from Far heart. resentful a or judge uncandid an
always been had Morland Mrs. misconduct, father’s their in sister his
appearance, his by pleased instantly, and each, towards disposed kindly
benevolence; unaffected of professions simple the with him received
that him assuring daughter, her to attention an such for him thanking
entreating and there, welcome always were children her of friends the
past. the of word another not say to him

was heart his though for, request, this obey to ill-inclined not was He
that at just not was it mildness, unlooked-for such by relieved greatly
silence in Returning purpose. the to anything say to power his in moment
civilly most minutes some for remained he therefore, seat, his to
and weather the about remarks common Morland’s Mrs. all answering
feverish happy, agitated, anxious, meanwhile--the Catherine roads.
eye brightened and cheek glowing her but word; a not Catherine--said
set least at would visit good-natured this that trust mother her made
the aside lay she did therefore gladly and time, a for ease at heart her
hour. future a for Mirror The of volume first

encouragement, giving in well as assistance, Morland’s Mr. of Desirous
his on embarrassment whose guest, her for conversation finding in as
early very had Morland Mrs. pitied, earnestly she account father’s
from was Morland Mr. but him; summon to children the of one dispatched
of quarter a of end the at support, any without thus being home--and
unbroken minutes’ of couple a After say. to nothing had she hour an
her since time first the for Catherine to turning Henry, silence,
Mrs. and Mr. if alacrity, sudden with her, asked entrance, mother’s
her all amidst from developing, on And Fullerton? at now were Allen
syllable short one which meaning, the reply, in words of perplexity
his paying of intention his expressed immediately given, have would
would she if her asked colour, rising a with and, them, to respects
this from house the see may “You way. the him show to goodness the have
a only produced which side, Sarah’s on information was sir,” window,
from nod silencing a and gentleman, the from acknowledgment of bow
secondary a as probable, it thinking Morland, Mrs. for mother; her
he that neighbours, worthy their on waiting of wish his in consideration
it which behaviour, father’s his of give to explanation some have might
would Catherine, to only communicate to him for pleasant more be must
walk, their began They him. accompanying her prevent account any on not
it. wishing in object his in mistaken entirely not was Morland Mrs. and
first his but give; to had he account father’s his on explanation Some
Allen’s Mr. reached they before and himself, explain to was purpose
could it think not did Catherine that well so it done had he grounds
that and affection; his of assured was She often. too repeated be ever
equally pretty they perhaps, which, solicited, was return in heart
sincerely now was Henry though for, own; his entirely already was knew
excellencies the all in delighted and felt he though her, to attached
his that confess must I society, her loved truly and character her of
other in or, gratitude, than better nothing in originated affection
only the been had him for partiality her of persuasion a that words,
in circumstance new a is It thought. serious a her giving of cause
heroine’s an of derogatory dreadfully and acknowledge, I romance,
wild a of credit the life, common in new as be it if but dignity;
own. my all be least at will imagination

random, at talked Henry which in Allen, Mrs. to visit short very A
of contemplation the in rapt Catherine, and connection, or sense without
them dismissed lips, her opened scarcely happiness, unutterable own her
to suffered was it before and tete-a-tete; another of ecstasies the to
parental by sanctioned was he far how judge to enabled was she close,
two Woodston, from return his On application. present his in authority
father, impatient his by abbey the near met been had he before, days
ordered and departure, Morland’s Miss of terms angry in informed hastily
more. no her of think to

hand. his her offered now had he which upon permission the was Such
she as expectation, of terrors the all amidst Catherine, affrighted The
caution kind the in rejoice but not could account, this to listened
conscientious a of necessity the from her saved had Henry which with
and subject; the mentioned he before faith her engaging by rejection,
of motives the explain and particulars, the give to proceeded he as
triumphant a even into hardened soon feelings her conduct, father’s his
lay to nothing of, her accuse to nothing had had general The delight.
a of object unconscious involuntary, the being her but charge, her to
pride better a which and pardon, not could pride his which deception
rich less being of only guilty was She own. to ashamed been have would
her of persuasion mistaken a Under be. to her supposed had he than
Bath, in acquaintance her courted had he claims, and possessions
his for her designed and Northanger, at company her solicited
house the from her turn to error, his discovering On daughter-in-law.
his of proof inadequate an feelings his to though best, the seemed
family. her of contempt his and herself, towards resentment

son his perceiving general, The him. misled first had Thorpe John
Miss to attention considerable paying be to theatre the at night one
her of more knew he if Thorpe of inquired accidentally had Morland,
man a with terms speaking on be to happy most Thorpe, name. her than
proudly and joyfully been had importance, Tilney’s General of
expectation daily in only not time that at being and communicative;
upon resolved well pretty likewise but Isabella, engaging Morland’s of
the represent to him induced vanity his himself, Catherine marrying
him made had avarice and vanity his than wealthy more yet as family
his connected, be to likely was or was, he whomsoever With them. believe
his as and great, be should theirs that required always consequence own
fortune. their grew regularly so grew, acquaintance any with intimacy
first the from therefore, Morland, friend his of expectations The
gradually been Isabella to introduction his since ever had overrated,
the of grandeur the for much as twice adding merely by and increasing;
Morland’s Mr. of amount the think to chose he what doubling by moment,
and aunt, rich a bestowing fortune, private his trebling preferment,
family whole the represent to able was he children, the half sinking
the however, Catherine, For light. respectable most a in general the to
speculations, own his and curiosity, general’s the of object peculiar
thousand fifteen or ten the and reserve, in more something yet had he
Mr. to addition pretty a be would her give could father her which pounds
on determine seriously him made had there intimacy Her estate. Allen’s
therefore her of speak to and hereafter; legacied handsomely being her
naturally Fullerton of heiress future acknowledged almost the as
never for proceeded; had general the intelligence such Upon followed.
the in interest Thorpe’s authority. its doubt to him to occurred it had
members, its of one with connection approaching sister’s his by family,
with boasted he which of (circumstances another on views own his and
and truth; his for vouchers sufficient seemed openness), equal almost
and wealthy being Allens the of facts absolute the added were these to
his as soon and--as care, their under being Morland’s Miss of childless,
parental with her treating their judge--of to him allowed acquaintance
a discerned he had Already formed. soon was resolution His kindness.
thankful and son; his of countenance the in Morland Miss towards liking
spare to determined instantly almost he communication, Thorpe’s Mr. for
dearest his ruining and interest boasted his weakening in pains no
all of time the at ignorant more be not could herself Catherine hopes.
in nothing perceiving Eleanor, and Henry children. own his than this,
had respect, particular father’s their engage to likely situation her
his of extent and continuance, suddenness, the astonishment with seen
an accompanied had which hints some from latterly, though and attention;
to power his in everything doing of son his to command positive almost
be to it believing father’s his of convinced was Henry her, attach
at explanation late the till not was it connection, advantageous an
calculations false the of idea smallest the had they that Northanger
learnt had general the false, were they That on. him hurried had which
whom himself, Thorpe from them, suggested had who person very the from
of influence the under who, and town, in again meet to chanced had he
and refusal, Catherine’s by irritated feelings, opposite exactly
a accomplish to endeavour recent very a of failure the by more yet
were they that convinced Isabella, and Morland between reconciliation
longer no be could which friendship a spurning and forever, separated
to before said had he that all contradict to hastened serviceable,
totally been have to himself Morlands--confessed the of advantage the
by misled character, and circumstances their of opinion his in mistaken
substance of man a father his believe to friend his of rhodomontade the
weeks last three or two the of transactions the whereas credit, and
first the on forward eagerly coming after for neither; be to him proved
liberal most the with families, the between marriage a of overture
of shrewdness the by point the to brought being on had, he proposals,
of incapable himself acknowledge to constrained been relator, the
a fact, in were, They support. decent a even people young the giving
means no by example; beyond almost too, numerous, family; necessitous
particular had lately had he as neighbourhood, own their in respected
their which life of style a at aiming discovering; of opportunities
wealthy by themselves better to seeking warrant; not could fortune
race. scheming bragging, forward, a connections;

inquiring an with Allen of name the pronounced general terrified The
believed, he Allens, The error. his learnt had Thorpe too here and look;
the whom on man young the knew he and long, too them near lived had
with Enraged more. no needed general The devolve. must estate Fullerton
for day next the out set he himself, but world the in everybody almost
seen. been have performances his where abbey, the

this all of much how determine to sagacity reader’s my to it leave I
how Catherine, to time this at communicate to Henry for possible was it
own his points what in father, his from learnt have could he it of much
be to remain yet must portion what and him, assist might conjectures
must they what ease their for united have I James. from letter a in told
in that feel to enough heard rate, any at Catherine, mine. for divide
wife, his up shutting or murdering either of Tilney General suspecting
cruelty. his magnified or character, his against sinned scarcely had she

almost was father, his of relate to things such having in Henry,
the for blushed He himself. to avowal first their in as pitiable as
conversation The expose. to obliged was he which counsel narrow-minded
Henry’s kind. unfriendly most the of been had Northanger at them between
comprehending on treated, been had Catherine how hearing on indignation
been had them, in acquiesce to ordered being and views, father’s his
to occasion ordinary every on accustomed general, The bold. and open
feeling, of but reluctance no for prepared family, his in law the give
ill could words, in itself clothe to dare should that desire opposing no
and reason of sanction the as steady son, his of opposition the brook
his cause, a such in But, it. make could conscience of dictate the
was who Henry, intimidate not could shock, must it though anger,
himself felt He justice. its of conviction a by purpose his in sustained
believing and Morland, Miss to affection in as honour in much as bound
unworthy no gain, to directed been had he which own his be to heart that
unjustifiable of decree reversing no consent, tacit a of retraction
it resolutions the influence or fidelity, his shake could anger,
prompted.

an Herefordshire, into father his accompany to refused steadily He
of dismissal the promote to moment the at almost formed engagement
his her offering of intention his declared steadily as and Catherine,
dreadful in parted they and anger, his in furious was general The hand.
hours solitary many which mind of agitation an in Henry, disagreement.
Woodston, to instantly almost returned had compose, to required were
to journey his begun had day, following the of afternoon the on and,
Fullerton.




31 CHAPTER


for Tilney Mr. by to applied being on surprise Morland’s Mrs. and Mr.
minutes, few a for was, daughter their marrying his to consent their
an suspect to heads their entered never having it considerable,
more be could all, after nothing, as but side; either on attachment
it consider to learnt soon they beloved, being Catherine’s than natural
they as far as and, pride, gratified of agitation happy the only with
pleasing His start. to objection single a not had concerned, were alone
having and recommendations; self-evident were sense good and manners
could evil any suppose to way their not was it him, of evil heard never
character his experience, of place the supplying Goodwill told. be
young heedless sad, a make would “Catherine attestation. no needed
quick but remark; foreboding mother’s her was sure,” be to housekeeper
practice. like nothing being there of consolation the was

one that till but mentioned; be to short, in obstacle, one but was There
engagement. the sanction to them for impossible be must it removed, was
while and steady, were principles their but mild, were tempers Their
allow not could they connection, the forbade expressly so parent his
to forward come should general the That it. encourage to themselves
it, approve heartily very even should he that or alliance, the solicit
but stipulation; parading any make to enough refined not were they
once that and yielded, be must consent of appearance decent the
be not could it that trust them made hearts own their obtained--and
His follow. to instantly was approbation willing denied--their long very
than inclined more no were They for. wished they that all was consent
son his fortune, considerable very a Of money. his demand to entitled
was income present his secure; eventually settlements, marriage by was,
view, pecuniary every under and comfort, and independence of income an
daughter. their of claims the beyond match a was it

They this. like decision a at surprised be not could people young The
parted, they and it; resent not could they deplored--but they and felt
believed each as general, the in change a such that hope to endeavouring
in again them unite to place, take speedily might impossible, almost
now was what to returned Henry affection. privileged of fullness the
his extend and plantations, young his over watch to home, only his
anxiously looked he them in share whose to sake, her for improvements
the Whether cry. to Fullerton at remained Catherine and forward;
let correspondence, clandestine a by softened were absence of torments
kind too been had did--they never Morland Mrs. and Mr. inquire. not us
at as, letter, a received Catherine whenever and promise; any exact to
way. another looked always they often, pretty happened time, that

portion the be must attachment their of state this in which anxiety, The
final its to as either, loved who all of and Catherine, and Henry of
will who readers, my of bosom the to fear, I extend, hardly can event,
are we that them, before pages the of compression tell-tale the in see
their which by means The felicity. perfect to together hastening all
probable what doubt: only the be can effected was marriage early
The general’s? the like temper a upon work could circumstance
with daughter his of marriage the was availed chiefly which circumstance
of course the in place took which consequence, and fortune of man a
good of fit a into him threw that dignity of accession summer--an the
obtained had Eleanor after till recover not did he which from humour,
he if fool a be “to him for permission his and Henry, of forgiveness his
it!” liked

such of evils the all from removal her Tilney, Eleanor of marriage The
of home the to banishment, Henry’s by made been had Northanger as home a
to expect I which event an is choice, her of man the and choice her
the on joy own My acquaintance. her all among satisfaction general give
unpretending by entitled, more one no know I sincere. very is occasion
enjoy and receive to suffering, habitual by prepared better or merit,
origin; recent of not was gentleman this for partiality Her felicity.
from situation of inferiority by only withheld long been had he and
had fortune and title to accession unexpected His her. addressing
his loved general the had never and difficulties; his all removed
patient and utility, companionship, of hours her all in well so daughter
was husband Her Ladyship!” “Your her hailed first he when as endurance
and wealth, his peerage, his of independent her; of deserving really
the in man young charming most the precision a to being attachment, his
the unnecessary; be must merits his of definition further Any world.
imagination the before instantly is world the in man young charming most
to only have I therefore, question, in one the Concerning all. us of
a of introduction the forbid composition of rules the that add--aware
very the was this fable--that my with connected not character
of collection that him behind left servant negligent whose gentleman
my which by Northanger, at visit long a from resulting washing-bills,
adventures. alarming most her of one in involved was heroine

behalf brother’s their in viscountess and viscount the of influence The
circumstances Morland’s Mr. of understanding right that by assisted was
they informed, be to himself allow would general the as soon as which,
scarcely been had he that him taught It give. to qualified were
his by than wealth family the of boast first Thorpe’s by misled more
were word the of sense no in that it; of overthrow malicious subsequent
thousand three have would Catherine that and poor, or necessitous they
that expectations late his of amendment an material so was This pounds.
no by and pride; his of descent the smooth to contributed greatly it
at was he which intelligence, private the was effect its without means
at entirely being estate, Fullerton the that procure, to pains some
every to open consequently was proprietor, present its of disposal the
speculation. greedy

marriage, Eleanor’s after soon general, the this, of strength the On
the him made thence and Northanger, to return to son his permitted
empty of full page a in worded courteously very consent, his of bearer
followed: soon authorized it which event The Morland. Mr. to professions
smiled; everybody and rang, bells the married, were Catherine and Henry
their of day first the from twelvemonth a within place took this as and,
by occasioned delays dreadful the all after appear, not will it meeting,
begin To it. by hurt essentially were they that cruelty, general’s the
is eighteen and twenty-six of ages respective the at happiness perfect
the that convinced moreover myself professing and well; pretty do to
to injurious really being from far so interference, unjust general’s
their improving by it, to conducive rather perhaps was felicity, their
attachment, their to strength adding and other, each of knowledge
the whether concern, may it whomsoever by settled, be to it leave I
or tyranny, parental recommend to altogether be work this of tendency
disobedience. filial reward



Rambler. II, Vol. 97, No. Richardson, Mr. from letter a *Vide
who, man a was Somersetshire, in Hall, Kellynch of Elliot, Walter ﻿Sir
there Baronetage; the but book any up took never amusement, own his for
distressed a in consolation and hour, idle an for occupation found he
by respect, and admiration into roused were faculties his there one;
any there patents; earliest the of remnant limited the contemplating
naturally changed affairs domestic from arising sensations, unwelcome
creations endless almost the over turned he as contempt and pity into
he powerless, were leaf other every if there, and century; last the of
This failed. never which interest an with history own his read could
opened: always volume favourite the which at page the was

HALL. KELLYNCH OF "ELLIOT

Elizabeth, 1784, 15, July married, 1760, 1, March born Elliot, "Walter
of county the in Park, South of Esq. Stevenson, James of daughter
born Elizabeth, issue has he 1800) died (who lady which by Gloucester,
5, November son, still-born a 1787; 9, August born Anne, 1785; 1, June
1791." 20, November born Mary, 1789;

printer's the from stood originally paragraph the had such Precisely
of information the for adding, by it improved had Walter Sir but hands;
birth-- Mary's of date the after words, these family, his and himself
Musgrove, Charles of heir and son Charles, 1810, 16, December "Married,
most inserting by and Somerset," of county the in Uppercross, of Esq.
wife. his lost had he which on month the of day the accurately

respectable and ancient the of rise and history the followed Then
Cheshire; in settled first been had it how terms; usual the in family,
sheriff, high of office the serving Dugdale, in mentioned how
of exertions parliaments, successive three in borough a representing
with II, Charles of year first the in baronet, of dignity and loyalty,
two altogether forming married; had they Elizabeths and Marys the all
and arms the with concluding and pages, duodecimo handsome
and Somerset," of county the in Hall, Kellynch seat, motto:--"Principal
finale:-- this in again handwriting Walter's Sir

the of grandson great Esq., Elliot, Walter William presumptive, "Heir
Walter." Sir second

character; Elliot's Walter Sir of end the and beginning the was Vanity
in handsome remarkably been had He situation. of and person of vanity
women Few man. fine very a still was fifty-four, at and, youth; his
could nor did, he than appearance personal their of more think could
held he place the with delighted more be lord made new any of valet the
to only inferior as beauty of blessing the considered He society. in
united who Elliot, Walter Sir the and baronetcy; a of blessing the
and respect warmest his of object constant the was gifts, these
devotion.

since attachment; his on claim fair one had rank his and looks good His
any to character superior very of wife a owed have must he them to
woman, excellent an been had Elliot Lady own. his by deserved thing
be might they if conduct, and judgement whose amiable; and sensible
never had Elliot, Lady her made which infatuation youthful the pardoned
or softened, or humoured, had afterwards.--She indulgence required
for respectability real his promoted and failings, his concealed
world the in being happiest very the not though and years; seventeen
children, her and friends, her duties, her in enough found had herself,
her to indifference of matter no it make and life, to her attach to
eldest two the girls, them.--Three quit to on called was she when
an bequeath, to mother a for legacy awful an was fourteen, and sixteen
a of guidance and authority the to confide to rather, charge awful
a friend, intimate very one however, had, She father. silly conceited,
attachment strong by brought, been had who woman, deserving sensible,
on and Kellynch; of village the in her, by close settle to herself, to
help best the for relied mainly Elliot Lady advice, and kindness her
had she which instruction and principles good the of maintenance and
daughters. her giving anxiously been

been have might whatever marry, not did Walter, Sir and friend, This
had years Thirteen acquaintance. their by head that on anticipated
near still were they and death, Elliot's Lady since away passed
other the widower, a remained one and friends, intimate and neighbours
widow. a

well extremely and character, and age steady of Russell, Lady That
no needs marriage, second a of thought no have should for, provided
unreasonably be to apt rather is which public, the to apology
but not; does she when than again, marry does woman a when discontented
it Be explanation. requires singleness in continuing Walter's Sir
one with met (having father, good a like Walter, Sir that then, known
applications), unreasonable very in disappointments private two or
For sake. daughters' dear his for single remaining on himself prided
thing, any up given have really would he eldest, his daughter, one
had Elizabeth do. to tempted much very been not had he which
rights mother's her of possible, was that all to sixteen, at succeeded,
her himself, like very and handsome, very being and consequence; and
most together on gone had they and great, been always had influence
had Mary value. inferior very of were children other two His happily.
Charles Mrs becoming by importance, artificial little a acquired
of sweetness and mind of elegance an with Anne, but Musgrove;
real of people any with high her placed have must which character,
no had word her sister; or father either with nobody was understanding,
Anne. only was way--she give to always was convenience her weight,

valued highly and dear most a was she indeed, Russell, Lady To
but all; them loved Russell Lady friend. and favourite, god-daughter,
again. revive to mother the fancy could she that Anne in only was it

her but girl, pretty very a been had Elliot Anne before, years few A
had father her height, its in even as and early; vanished had bloom
delicate her were different totally (so her, in admire to little found
in nothing be could there own), his from eyes dark mild and features
had He esteem. his excite to thin, and faded was she that now them,
in name her reading ever of none, now had he hope, much indulged never
must alliance of equality All work. favourite his of page other any
old an with herself connected merely had Mary for Elizabeth, with rest
therefore had and fortune, large and respectability of family country
or day one would, Elizabeth none: received and honour the all given
suitably. marry other,

she than twenty-nine at handsomer is woman a that happens sometimes It
been has there if speaking, generally and, before; years ten was
scarcely which at life of time a is it anxiety, nor health ill neither
handsome same the still Elizabeth, with so was It lost. is charm any
Walter Sir and ago, years thirteen be to begun had she that Elliot Miss
be least, at or, age, her forgetting in therefore, excused, be might
blooming as Elizabeth and himself thinking for fool, a half only deemed
he for else; everybody of looks good the of wreck the amidst ever, as
acquaintance and family his of rest the all old how see plainly could
the in face every coarse, Mary haggard, Anne growing. were
about foot crow's the of increase rapid the and worsting, neighbourhood
him. to distress a been long had temples Russell's Lady

contentment. personal in father her equal quite not did Elizabeth
and presiding Hall, Kellynch of mistress her seen had years Thirteen
have never could which decision and self-possession a with directing
years thirteen For was. she than younger being her of idea the given
at law domestic the down laying and honours, the doing been she had
walking and four, and chaise the to way the leading and home,
and drawing-rooms the all of out Russell Lady after immediately
had frosts revolving winters' Thirteen country. the in dining-rooms
neighbourhood scanty a which credit of ball every opening her seen
travelled she as blossoms, their shewn springs thirteen and afforded,
the of enjoyment annual weeks' few a for father, her with London to up
the had she this, all of remembrance the had She world. great
and regrets some her give to nine-and-twenty being of consciousness
as quite still being of satisfied fully was she apprehensions; some
and danger, of years the to approach her felt she but ever, as handsome
by solicited properly being of certain be to rejoiced have would
again she might Then two. or twelvemonth next the within baronet-blood
youth, early her in as enjoyment much as with books of book the up take
her of date the with presented be to Always not. it liked she now but
sister, youngest a of that but follow marriage no see and birth own
it left had father her when once, than more and evil; an book the made
and eyes, averted with it, closed she had her, near table the on open
away. it pushed

especially and book, that which moreover, disappointment, a had had She
of. remembrance the present ever must family, own her of history the
whose Esq., Elliot, Walter William very the presumptive, heir The
disappointed had father, her by supported generously so been had rights
her.

be, to him known had she as soon as girl, young very a while had, She
to meant baronet, future the brother, no having her of event the in
not had He should. she that meant always had father her and him, marry
Sir death, Elliot's Lady after soon but boy; a as them to known been
not had overtures his though and acquaintance, the sought had Walter
making it, seeking in persevered had he warmth, any with met been
their of one in and, youth; of drawing-back modest the for allowance
Mr bloom, first her in was Elizabeth when London, to excursions spring
introduction. the into forced been had Elliot

the of study the in engaged just man, young very a time that at was He
his in plan every and agreeable, extremely him found Elizabeth and law;
talked was he Hall; Kellynch to invited was He confirmed. was favour
The came. never he but year; the of rest the all expected and of
agreeable, equally found town, in again seen was he spring following
and come; not did he again and expected, and invited, encouraged, again
his pushing of Instead married. was he that were tidings next the
he Elliot, of house the of heir the for out marked line the in fortune
of woman rich a to himself uniting by independence purchased had
birth. inferior

he that felt he house, the of head the As it. resented had Walter Sir
so man young the taking after especially consulted, been have to ought
he together," seen been have must they "For hand; the by publicly
of House the of lobby the in twice and Tattersall's, at "once observed,
little very apparently but expressed, was disapprobation His Commons."
as himself shewn and apology, no attempted had Elliot Mr regarded.
Walter Sir as family, the by noticed longer being of unsolicitous
had them between acquaintance all it: of unworthy him considered
ceased.

of interval an after still, was Elliot Mr of history awkward very This
for man the liked had who Elizabeth, by anger with felt years, several
strong whose and heir, father's her being for more still and himself,
Walter Sir for match proper a him in only see could pride family
her whom Z to A from baronet a not was There daughter. eldest Elliot's
so Yet equal. an as acknowledged willingly so have could feelings
present this at was she though that himself, conducted he had miserably
could she wife, his for ribbons black wearing 1814) of summer (the time
first his of disgrace The again. of thinking worth be to him admit not
it suppose to reason no was there as perhaps, might, marriage
worse; done not he had over, got been have offspring, by perpetuated
they friends, kind of intervention accustomary the by as had, he but
most all, them of disrespectfully most spoken informed, been had
and to, belonged he blood very the of contemptuously and slightingly
be not could This own. his be to hereafter were which honours the
pardoned.

cares the such sensations; and sentiments Elliot's Elizabeth were Such
the elegance, the and sameness the vary, to agitations the alloy, to
feelings the such life; of scene her of nothingness the and prosperity
circle, country one in residence uneventful long, a to interest give to
no abroad, utility of habits no were there which vacancies the fill to
occupy. to home, for accomplishments or talents

be to beginning was mind of solicitude and occupation another now, But
She money. for distressed growing was father Her these. to added
the drive to was it Baronetage, the up took now he when that knew,
Mr of hints unwelcome the and tradespeople, his of bills heavy
was property Kellynch The thoughts. his from agent, his Shepherd,
required state the of apprehension Walter's Sir to equal not but good,
method, been had there lived, Elliot Lady While possessor. its in
but income; his within him kept just had which economy, and moderation,
he period that from and right-mindedness, such all died had her with
to him for possible been not had It it. exceeding constantly been had
was Elliot Walter Sir what but nothing done had he less; spend
only not was he was, he as blameless but do; to on called imperiously
it that often, so it of hearing was but debt, in dreadfully growing
his from partially, even longer, it concealing attempt to vain became
town; in spring last the it of hints some her given had He daughter.
to occur it Does retrench? we "Can say, to as even far so gone had he
and retrench?" can we which in article one any is there that you
alarm, female of ardour first the in had, justice, her do to Elizabeth,
proposed finally had and done, be could what think to seriously set
charities, unnecessary some off cut to economy, of branches two these
which to drawing-room; the furnishing new from refrain to and
no taking their of thought happy the added afterwards she expedients
these But custom. yearly usual the been had as Anne, to down present
real the for insufficient were themselves, in good however measures,
obliged himself found Walter Sir which of whole the evil, the of extent
of propose to nothing had Elizabeth afterwards. soon her to confess to
her did as unfortunate, and ill-used herself felt She efficacy. deeper
of means any devise to able them of neither were they and father;
or dignity, their compromising without expenses their lessening
borne. be to not way a in comforts their relinquishing

dispose could Walter Sir that estate his of part small a only was There
no made have would it alienable, been acre every had but of;
the had he as far as mortgage to condescended had He difference.
never would he No; sell. to condescend never would he but power,
transmitted be should estate Kellynch The far. so name his disgrace
it. received had he as entire, and whole

the in lived who Shepherd, Mr friends, confidential two Their
them; advise to called were Russell, Lady and town, market neighbouring
be should something that expect to seemed daughter and father both and
and embarrassments their remove to other the or one by out struck
indulgence any of loss the involving without expenditure, their reduce
pride. or taste of



2 Chapter


hold his be might whatever who, lawyer, cautious civil, a Shepherd, Mr
prompted disagreeable the have rather would Walter, Sir on views his or
and hint, slightest the offering from himself excused else, anybody by
excellent the to reference implicit an recommend to leave begged only
fully he sense good known whose from Russell, Lady of judgement
see to meant he as advised measures resolute such just have to expected
adopted. finally

it gave and subject, the on zealous anxiously most was Russell Lady
of than sound of rather woman a was She consideration. serious much
this in decision any to coming in difficulties whose abilities, quick
principles. leading two of opposition the from great, were instance
honour; of sense delicate a with herself, integrity strict of was She
solicitous as feelings, Walter's Sir saving of desirous as was she but
was what of ideas her in aristocratic as family, the of credit the for
a was She be. well could honesty and sense of anybody as them, to due
attachments, strong of capable and woman, good charitable, benevolent,
with and decorum, of notions her in strict conduct, her in correct most
a had She good-breeding. of standard a held were that manners
consistent; and rational speaking, generally was, and mind, cultivated
for value a had she ancestry; of side the on prejudices had she but
those of faults the to little a her blinded which consequence, and rank
the gave she knight, a only of widow the Herself them. possessed who
his of independent Walter, Sir and due; its all baronet a of dignity
obliging an neighbour, attentive an acquaintance, old an as claims
and Anne of father the friend, dear very her of husband the landlord,
to entitled apprehension, her in Walter, Sir being as was, sisters, her
present his under consideration and compassion of deal great a
difficulties.

very was she But doubt. a of admit not did that retrench; must They
and him to pain possible least the with done it have to anxious
calculations, exact made she economy, of plans up drew She Elizabeth.
who Anne, consulted she doing: of thought else nobody what did she and
the in interest any having as others the by considered seemed never
in her by influenced was degree a in and consulted, She question.
to submitted last at was which retrenchment of scheme the out marking
honesty of side the on been had Anne's of emendation Every Walter. Sir
complete more a measures, vigorous more wanted She importance. against
of tone higher much a debt, from release quicker a reformation,
equity. and justice but everything for indifference

Russell, Lady said this," all to father your persuade can we "If
these adopt will he If done. be may "much paper, her over looking
able be may we hope I and clear; be will he years seven in regulations,
respectability a has Hall Kellynch that Elizabeth, and him convince to
the that and reductions; these by affected be cannot which itself in
the in lessened from far very be will Elliot Walter Sir of dignity true
will What principle. of man a like acting by people, sensible of eyes
have families first our of many very what but fact, in doing, be he
and case; his in singular nothing be will There do? to ought or done,
as suffering, our of part worst the makes often which singularity is it
We prevailing. of hope great have I conduct. our of does always it
has who person the all, after for decided; and serious be must
the to due is deal great a though and them; pay must debts contracted
father, your like house, a of head the and gentleman, the of feelings
man." honest an of character the to due more still is there

be to father her wanted Anne which on principle the was This
act an as it considered She him. urging be to friends his proceeding,
all with creditors of claims the away clear to duty indispensable of
secure, could retrenchments comprehensive most the which expedition the
be to it wanted She it. of short anything in dignity no saw and
influence Russell's Lady rated She duty. a as felt and prescribed,
own her which self-denial of degree severe the to as and highly;
difficulty more little be might there believed she prompted, conscience
Her reformation. a half to than complete, a to them persuading in
the that think to her inclined Elizabeth and father her of knowledge
of than painful less hardly be would horses of pair one of sacrifice
gentle too Russell's Lady of list whole the through on, so and both,
reductions.

little of is taken been have might requisitions rigid more Anne's How
up put be not could all: at success no had Russell's Lady consequence.
off! knocked life of comfort every "What! borne. be to not were with,
and table--contractions horses, servants, London, Journeys,
of even decencies the with longer no live To where! every restrictions
once, at Hall Kellynch quit sooner would he No, gentleman! private a
terms." disgraceful such on it in remain than

Mr by up taken immediately was hint The Hall." Kellynch "Quit
Walter's Sir of reality the in involved was interest whose Shepherd,
done be would nothing that persuaded perfectly was who and retrenching,
the in started been had idea the "Since abode. of change a without
"in said, he scruple," no had he dictate, to ought which quarter very
not did It side. that on entirely be to judgement his confessing
of style his alter materially could Walter Sir that him to appear
ancient and hospitality of character a such had which house a in living
for judge might Walter Sir place other any In support. to dignity
in life of modes the regulating as to, up looked be would and himself;
household." his model to choose might he way whatever

of more days few very a after and Hall; Kellynch quit would Walter Sir
was go should he whither of question great the indecision, and doubt
out. made change important this of outline first the and settled,

in house another or Bath, London, alternatives, three been had There
house small A latter. the for been had wishes Anne's All country. the
Russell's Lady have still might they where neighbourhood, own their in
sometimes of pleasure the have still and Mary, near be still society,
her of object the was Kellynch, of groves and lawns the seeing
something having in her, attended Anne of fate usual the But ambition.
and Bath, disliked She on. fixed inclination her from opposite very
home. her be to was Bath and her; with agreed it think not did

felt Shepherd Mr but London; of more thought first at had Walter Sir
to enough skilful been had and London, in trusted be not could he that
safer much a was It preferred. Bath make and it, from him dissuade
important be there might he predicament: his in gentleman a for place
over Bath of advantages material Two expense. little comparatively at
convenient more its weight: their all given been course of had London
spending Russell's Lady and miles, fifty only Kellynch, from distance
of satisfaction great very the to and there; winter every of part some
for been had change projected the on views first whose Russell, Lady
should they that believe to induced were Elizabeth and Walter Sir Bath,
there. settling by enjoyment nor consequence neither lose

It wishes. known Anne's dear her oppose to obliged felt Russell Lady
in house small a into descend to Walter Sir expect to much too be would
the found have would herself Anne neighbourhood. own his
Walter's Sir to and foresaw, she than more it of mortifications
Anne's to regard with And dreadful. been have must they feelings
arising, mistake and prejudice a as it considered she Bath, of dislike
school at years three been having her of circumstance the from first,
be to happening her from secondly, and death; mother's her after there,
afterwards had she which winter only the spirits good perfectly in not
herself. with there spent

must it think to disposed and short, in Bath, of fond was Russell Lady
the all passing by health, friend's young her to as and all; them suit
avoided; be would danger every Lodge, Kellynch at her with months warm
spirits and health both do must which change a fact, in was it and
spirits Her seen. little too home, from little too been had Anne good.
to her wanted She them. improve would society larger A high. not were
known. more be

for neighbourhood same the in house other any of undesirableness The
very a and part, one by strengthened much certainly was Walter Sir
the on engrafted happily been had which scheme, the of part material
the in it see to but home, his quit to only not was He beginning.
Sir than heads stronger which fortitude, of trial a others; of hands
This, let. be to was Hall Kellynch much. too found have Walter's
own their beyond breathed be to not secret, profound a was however,
circle.

to known being of degradation the borne have not could Walter Sir
word the mentioned once had Shepherd Mr house. his letting design
the spurned Walter Sir again. it approach dared never but "advertise,"
hint slightest the forbad manner; any in offered being its of idea
the on only was it and intention; an such having his of dropped being
most some by solicited spontaneously being his of supposition
favour, great a as and terms, own his on applicant, unexceptionable
all. at it let would he that

Russell Lady like! we what approving for reasons the come quick How
Sir that glad extremely being for hand, at one excellent another had
had Elizabeth country. the from remove to were family his and Walter
interrupted. see to wished she which intimacy, an forming lately been
an after returned, had who Shepherd, Mr of daughter the with was It
additional the with house, father's her to marriage, unprosperous
understood who woman, young clever a was She children. two of burden
Hall; Kellynch at least, at pleasing, of art pleasing--the of art the
been have to as Elliot, Miss to acceptable so herself made had who and
Lady that all of spite in once, than more there staying already
of hint could place, of out quite friendship a it thought who Russell,
reserve. and caution

and Elizabeth, with influence any scarcely had indeed, Russell, Lady
because than her, love would she because rather her, love to seemed
than more her from received never had She it. deserved Elizabeth
had complaisance; of observances the beyond nothing attention, outward
against carry, to wanted she which point any in succeeded never
trying in earnest very repeatedly been had She inclination. previous
the all to open sensibly London, to visit the in included Anne get to
shut which arrangements selfish the of discredit the all and injustice
Elizabeth give to endeavoured had occasions lesser many on and out, her
in always but experience; and judgement better own her of advantage the
in it pursued she had never and way; own her go would Elizabeth vain:
Mrs of selection this in than Russell Lady to opposition decided more
her bestow to sister, a deserving so of society the from turning Clay;
her to nothing been have to ought who one on confidence and affection
civility. distant of object the but

very a estimate, Russell's Lady in was, Clay Mrs situation, From
companion; dangerous very a believed she character her in and unequal,
of choice a bring and behind, Clay Mrs leave would that removal a and
an therefore was reach, Elliot's Miss within intimates suitable more
importance. first-rate of object



3 Chapter


one Shepherd Mr said Walter," Sir observe, to leave take must "I
the "that newspaper, the down laid he as Hall, Kellynch at morning
all turning be will peace This favour. our in much is juncture present
home. a wanting all be will They ashore. officers naval rich our
tenants, of choice a having for Walter, Sir time, better a be not Could
during made been has fortune noble a Many tenants. responsible very
Walter--" Sir way, our in come to were admiral rich a If war. the

"that's Walter; Sir replied Shepherd," man, lucky very a be would "He
him; to be Hall Kellynch would indeed prize A remark. to have I all
many so ever taken have him let all, of prize greatest the rather
Shepherd?" hey, before;

added-- then and wit, this at must, he knew he as laughed, Shepherd Mr

business, of way the in that, Walter, Sir observe, to presume "I
little a had have I with. deal to well are navy the of gentlemen
confess to free am I and business; doing of methods their of knowledge
make to likely as are and notions, liberal very have they that
with. meet should one people of set any as tenants desirable
if that is, suggest to leave take would I what Walter, Sir Therefore,
which intention; your of abroad getting rumours any of consequence in
difficult how know we because thing, possible a as contemplated be must
the from world the of part one of designs and actions the keep to is it
John I, tax; its has consequence other; the of curiosity and notice
nobody for chose, I that family-matters any conceal might Shepherd,
Elliot Walter Sir but me; observe to while their worth it think would
and elude; to difficult very be may it which him upon eyes has
surprise greatly not will it that upon, venture I much thus therefore,
get should truth the of rumour some caution, our all with if, me
since observe, to going was I as which, of supposition the in abroad;
our from any think should I follow, unquestionably will applications
leave beg and to; attending worth particularly commanders naval wealthy
the you save to time, any at over me bring will hours two that add, to
replying." of trouble

the pacing and rising afterwards, soon But nodded. only Walter Sir
sarcastically-- observed he room,

would who imagine, I navy, the of gentlemen the among few are "There
description." this of house a in themselves find to surprised be not

fortune," good their bless and doubt, no them, around look would "They
her driven had father her present: was Clay Mrs for Clay, Mrs said
to drive a as health Clay's Mrs to use much so of being nothing over,
might sailor a thinking in father my with agree quite I "but Kellynch:
the of deal good a known have I tenant. desirable very a be
careful and neat so are they liberality, their besides and profession;
if Walter, Sir yours, of pictures valuable These ways! their all in
and in Everything safe. perfectly be would them, leave to chose you
and gardens The of! care excellent such taken be would house the about
You now. are they as order high as almost in kept be would shrubberies
being gardens flower sweet own your of Elliot, Miss afraid, be not need
neglected."

induced were I "supposing coolly, Walter Sir rejoined that," all to "As
the to as mind my up made means no by have I house, my let to
to disposed particularly not am I it. to annexed be to privileges
navy few and course, of him to open be would park The tenant. a favour
range; a such had have can description, other any of men or officers,
the of use the on impose might I restrictions what but
my of idea the of fond not am I thing. another is pleasure-grounds,
Miss recommend should I and approachable; always being shrubberies
very am I garden. flower her to respect with guard her on be to Elliot
extraordinary any Hall Kellynch of tenant a grant to disposed little
soldier." or sailor he be you, assure I favour,

say-- to presumed Shepherd Mr pause, short a After

everything make which usages established are there cases, these all "In
Walter, Sir interest, Your tenant. and landlord between easy and plain
tenant no that care taking for me upon Depend hands. safe pretty in is
Walter Sir that hint, to venture I rights. just his than more has
be will Shepherd John as own, his for jealous so half be cannot Elliot
him." for

spoke-- Anne Here

an least at have us, for much so done have who think, I navy, "The
the all and comforts the all for men, of set other any with claim equal
their for enough hard work Sailors give. can home any which privileges
allow." all must we comforts,

Mr was true," very is says, Anne Miss What true. very true, "Very
Sir but daughter's; his was certainly," "Oh! and rejoinder, Shepherd's
afterwards-- soon was, remark Walter's

any see to sorry be should I but utility, its has profession "The
it." to belonging mine of friend

surprise. of look a with and reply, the was "Indeed!"

of grounds strong two have I me; to offensive points two in is it "Yes;
of persons bringing of means the being as First, it. to objection
which honours to men raising and distinction, undue into birth obscure
it as secondly, and of; dreamt never grandfathers and fathers their
old grows sailor a horribly; most vigour and youth man's a up cuts
is man A life. my all it observed have I man. other any than sooner
one of rise the by insulted being of navy the in danger greater in
of and to, speak to disdained have might father his father, whose
other any in than himself, disgust of object an prematurely becoming
men, two with company in was I town, in spring, last day One line.
father whose Ives, St Lord of; talking am I what of instances striking
was I eat; to bread without curate, country a been have to know all we
most the Baldwin, Admiral certain a and Ives, St Lord to place give to
of colour the face his imagine; can you personage deplorable-looking
wrinkles, and lines all degree; last the to rugged and rough mahogany,
'In top. at powder of dab a but nothing and side, a of hairs grey nine
mine of friend a to I said fellow?' old that is who heaven, of name the
Sir cried fellow!' 'Old Morley). Basil (Sir near, standing was who
be?' to age his take you do What Baldwin. Admiral is 'it Basil,
Basil, Sir replied 'Forty,' sixty-two.' perhaps 'or I, said 'Sixty,'
not shall I amazement; my yourselves to Picture more.' no and 'forty,
an wretched so quite saw never I Baldwin. Admiral forget easily
is it know I degree, a to but do; can life sea-faring a what of example
to exposed and about, knocked all are they all: them with same the
It seen. be to fit not are they till weather, every and climate, every
reach they before once, at head the on knocked not are they pity a is
age." Baldwin's Admiral

Have indeed. severe being is "this Clay, Mrs cried Walter," Sir "Nay,
handsome. be to born all not are We men. poor the on mercy little a
I betimes; old grow do sailors certainly; beautifier, no is sea The
not is then, But youth. of look the lose soon they it; observed have
Soldiers, other? most perhaps professions, other many with same the it
quieter the in even and off: better all at not are service, active in
the of not if mind, the of labour a and toil a is there professions,
time. of effect natural the to looks man's a leaves seldom which body,
hours, all at up is physician the care-worn; quite plods, lawyer The
a stopt she clergyman--" the even and weather; all in travelling and
the even clergyman;--"and the for do might what consider to moment
expose and rooms, infected into go to obliged is know you clergyman,
In atmosphere. poisonous a of injury the all to looks and health his
is profession every though convinced, been long have I as fact,
who those of lot the only is it turn, its in honourable and necessary
the in way, regular a in live can who any, follow to obliged not are
and pursuits, own their following hours, own their choosing country,
more; for trying of torment the without property, own their on living
good a and health of blessings the hold to say, I lot, their only is it
lose what but men of set other no know I utmost: the to appearance
young." quite be to cease they when personableness their of something

Walter's Sir bespeak to anxiety this in Shepherd, Mr if as seemed It
with gifted been had tenant, as officer naval a towards will good
an from was house the for application first very the for foresight;
in company into fell afterwards shortly he whom with Croft, Admiral
received had he indeed, and Taunton; at sessions quarter the attending
which report the By correspondent. London a from Admiral the of hint a
of native a was Croft Admiral make, to Kellynch to over hastened he
wishing was fortune, handsome very a acquired having who Somersetshire,
to order in Taunton to down come had and country, own his in settle to
which, neighbourhood, immediate that in places advertised some at look
as just was hearing--(it accidentally that him; suited not had however,
not could concerns Walter's Sir observed, Shepherd Mr foretold, had he
of possibility the of hearing secret,)--accidentally a kept be
Shepherd's) (Mr his understanding and let, to being Hall Kellynch
to order in him to himself introduced had he owner, the with connection
long pretty a of course the in had, and inquiries, particular make
man a as place the for inclination an strong as expressed conference,
in Shepherd, Mr given and feel; could description by only it knew who
most a being his of proof every himself, of account explicit his
tenant. eligible responsible,

inquiry. suspicious cold Walter's Sir was Croft?" Admiral is who "And

and family, gentleman's a of being his for answered Shepherd Mr
followed, which pause little the after Anne, and place; a mentioned
added--

action, Trafalgar the in was He white. the of admiral rear a is "He
I there, stationed was he since; Indies East the in been has and
years." several believe,

is face his "that Walter, Sir observed granted," for it take I "Then
livery." my of capes and cuffs the as orange as about

hale, very a was Croft Admiral that him, assure to hastened Shepherd Mr
not but sure, be to weather-beaten, little a man, well-looking hearty,
not behaviour; and notions his all in gentleman the quite and much,
a wanted only terms, about difficulty smallest the make to likely
must he knew possible; as soon as it into get to and home, comfortable
that of house ready-furnished a rent what knew convenience; his for pay
Walter Sir if surprised been have not should fetch; might consequence
the of glad be would manor; the about inquired had more; asked had
sometimes he said it; of point great no made but certainly, deputation,
gentleman. the quite killed; never but gun, a out took

the all out pointing subject; the on eloquent was Shepherd Mr
peculiarly him made which family, Admiral's the of circumstances
the children; without and man, married a was He tenant. a as desirable
Mr of, care good taken never was house A for. wished be to state very
furniture whether know, not did he lady: a without observed, Shepherd
as lady, no was there where much as suffering of danger in be not might
very the was family, a without lady, A children. many were there where
too; Croft, Mrs seen had He world. the in furniture of preserver best
all almost present been had and admiral, the with Taunton at was she
over. matter the talking were they time the

be," to seemed she lady, shrewd genteel, well-spoken, very a "And
and terms, and house, the about questions more "asked he; continued
with conversant more seemed and himself, Admiral the than taxes,
quite not was she found I Walter, Sir moreover, and business;
say, to is that husband; her than more any country, this in unconnected
me told she once; us amongst live did who gentleman a to sister is she
at back years few a lived who gentleman the to sister herself: so
cannot I moment this At name? his was what me! Bless Monkford.
my Penelope, lately. so it heard have I though name, his recollect
at lived who gentleman the of name the to me help you can dear,
brother?" Croft's Mrs Monkford:

not did she that Elliot, Miss with eagerly so talking was Clay Mrs But
appeal. the hear

no remember I Shepherd; mean, can you whom conception no have "I
Trent." Governor old of time the since Monkford at resident gentleman

suppose. I soon, name own my forget shall I odd! very how me! "Bless
so gentleman the knew with; acquainted well very so am I that name A
I once, me consult to came times; hundred a him seen sight; by well
man farmer's neighbours; his of one of trespass a about remember,
the in caught stolen; apples down; torn wall orchard; his into breaking
an to submitted judgement, my to contrary afterwards, and fact;
indeed!" odd Very compromise. amicable

moment-- another waiting After

Anne. said suppose?" I Wentworth, Mr mean "You

gratitude. all was Shepherd Mr

had He man. very the was Wentworth Mr name! very the was "Wentworth
two for back, time some Walter, Sir know, you Monkford, of curacy the
You it. take I ---5, year the about there Came years. three or
sure." am I him, remember

misled You Monkford. of curate the Wentworth, ay,--Mr Oh! "Wentworth?
of man some of speaking were you thought I gentleman. term the by me
unconnected; quite remember; I nobody, was Wentworth Mr property:
of names the how wonders One family. Strafford the with do to nothing
common." so become nobility our of many

no them did Crofts the of connexion this that perceived Shepherd Mr As
all with returning, more; no it mentioned he Walter, Sir with service
their in indisputably more circumstances the on dwell to zeal, his
had they idea high the fortune; and number, and age, their favour;
of advantage the for solicitude extreme and Hall, Kellynch of formed
the beyond nothing ranked they if as appear it making it; renting
extraordinary an Elliot: Walter Sir of tenants the being of happiness
Sir of secret the in supposed been have they could certainly, taste,
tenant. a of dues the of estimate Walter's

an with look ever must Walter Sir though and however; succeeded, It
them think and house, that inhabit to intending anyone on eye evil
highest the on it rent to permitted being in off well too infinitely
the in proceed to Shepherd Mr allowing into talked was he terms,
still who Croft, Admiral on wait to him authorising and treaty,
seen. being house the for day a fix and Taunton, at remained

the of enough experience had he still but wise; very not was Walter Sir
essentials, all in tenant, unobjectionable more a that feel, to world
his went far So offer. hardly could be, to fair bid Croft Admiral than
in soothing, additional little a supplied vanity his and understanding;
not and enough, high just was which life, in situation Admiral's the
sound would Croft," Admiral to house my let have "I high. too
(save, Mr a Mr--; mere any to than better much very well; extremely
of note a needs always nation,) the in dozen half some perhaps,
same the at and, consequence, own his speaks admiral An explanation.
and dealings their all In small. look baronet a make never can time,
precedence. the have ever must Elliot Walter Sir intercourse,

her but Elizabeth: to reference a without done be could Nothing
to happy was she that removal, a for strong so growing was inclination
to word a not and hand; at tenant a by expedited and fixed it have
her. by uttered was decision suspend

an such had sooner no and act; to empowered completely was Shepherd Mr
to listener attentive most a been had who Anne, than reached, been end
her for air cool of comfort the seek to room, the left whole, the
a with said, grove, favourite a along walked she as and cheeks; flushed
here." walking be may perhaps, he, and more, months few "A sigh, gentle



4 Chapter


however Monkford, of curate former the Wentworth, Mr not was He
his Wentworth, Frederick Captain a but be, may appearances suspicious
St off action the of consequence in commander made being who brother,
in Somersetshire, into come had employed, immediately not and Domingo,
half for home a found living, parent no having and 1806; of summer the
man, young fine remarkably a time, that at was, He Monkford. at year a
an Anne and brilliancy; and spirit, intelligence, of deal great a with
feeling. and taste, modesty, gentleness, with girl, pretty extremely
for enough, been have might side, either on attraction, of sum the Half
the but love; to anybody hardly had she and do, to nothing had he
were They fail. not could recommendations lavish such of encounter
love. in deeply and rapidly acquainted, when and acquainted, gradually
the in perfection highest seen had which say to difficult be would It
his receiving in she, happiest: the been had which or other,
accepted. them having in he or proposals, and declarations

one. short a but and followed, felicity exquisite of period short A
actually without to, applied being on Walter, Sir arose. soon Troubles
the all it gave be, never should it saying or consent, his withholding
a and silence, great coldness, great astonishment, great of negative
it thought He daughter. his for nothing doing of resolution professed
tempered more with though Russell, Lady and alliance; degrading very a
one. unfortunate most a as it received pride, pardonable and

throw to mind, and beauty, birth, of claims her all with Elliot, Anne
engagement an in nineteen at herself involve nineteen; at away herself
no and him, recommend to himself but nothing had who man, young a with
uncertain most a of chances the in but affluence, attaining of hopes
the in rise farther his even secure to connexions no and profession,
to grieved she which away, throwing a indeed, be, would profession,
off snatched be to few, so to known young; so Elliot, Anne of! think
a into him by sunk rather or fortune; or alliance without stranger a by
not must It dependence! youth-killing anxious, wearing, most of state
from representations any friendship, of interference fair any by if be,
be would it rights, mother's and love, mother's a almost had who one
prevented.

profession; his in lucky been had He fortune. no had Wentworth Captain
But nothing. realized had freely, come had what freely, spending but
ardour, and life of full rich: be soon should he that confident was he
that station a on be soon and ship, a have soon should he that knew he
knew he lucky; been always had He wanted. he everything to lead would
warmth, own its in powerful confidence, Such still. so be should he
been have must it, expressed often which wit the in bewitching and
His differently. very it saw Russell Lady but Anne; for enough
on differently very operated mind, of fearlessness and temper, sanguine
a added only It evil. the of aggravation an but it in saw She her.
headstrong. was he brilliant, was He himself. to character dangerous
to approaching anything of and wit, for taste little had Russell Lady
light. every in connexion the deprecated She horror. a imprudence

could Anne than more was produced, feelings these as opposition, Such
possible been have yet might it was, she as gentle and Young combat.
word kind one by unsoftened though ill-will, father's her withstand to
had she whom Russell, Lady but sister; her of part the on look or
opinion, of steadiness such with not, could on, relied and loved always
vain. in her advising continually be manner, of tenderness such and
indiscreet, thing: wrong a engagement the believe to persuaded was She
was it But it. deserving not and success, of capable hardly improper,
end an putting in acted, she which under caution, selfish merely a not
more even good, his consulting herself imagined not she Had it. to
being of belief The up. him given have hardly could she own, her than
chief her was advantage, his for principally self-denying, and prudent,
every and parting; final a parting, a of misery the under consolation,
additional the all encounter to had she for required, was consolation
and unbending, and unconvinced totally side, his on opinions, of pain
had He relinquishment. a forced so by used ill himself feeling his of
consequence. in country the left

acquaintance; their of end the and beginning the seen had months few A
Her it. from suffering of share Anne's ended months few a with not but
of enjoyment every clouded time, long a for had, regrets and attachment
lasting their been had spirits and bloom of loss early an and youth,
effect.

sorrowful of history little this since gone were years seven than More
much, down softened had time and close; its reached had interest
too been had she but him, to attachment peculiar of all nearly perhaps
place of change in given been had aid no alone; time on dependent
novelty any in or rupture), the after soon Bath to visit one in (except
Kellynch the within come ever had one No society. of enlargement or
he as Wentworth, Frederick with comparison a bear could who circle,
thoroughly only the attachment, second No memory. her in stood
been had life, of time her at cure, sufficient and happy, natural,
taste, her of fastidiousness the mind, her of tone nice the to possible
been had She them. around society the of limits small the in
young the by name, her change to two-and-twenty, about when solicited,
younger her in mind willing more a found afterwards long not who man,
Musgrove Charles for refusal; her lamented had Russell Lady and sister;
general and property landed whose man, a of son eldest the was
of and Walter's, Sir to only country, that in second were importance
have might Russell Lady however and appearance; and character good
have would she nineteen, was Anne while more, something for yet asked
the from removed respectably so twenty-two at her see to rejoiced
so settled and house, father's her of injustice and partialities
for nothing left had Anne case, this in But herself. near permanently
her with ever as satisfied as Russell, Lady though and do; to advice
the have to now began she undone, past the wished never discretion, own
some by tempted, being Anne's for hopelessness on borders which anxiety
held she which for state a enter to independence, and talents of man
habits. domestic and affections warm her by fitted peculiarly be to her

change, its or constancy its either opinion, other's each not knew They
never was subject the for conduct, Anne's of point leading one the on
differently very thought seven-and-twenty, at Anne, but to; alluded
blame not did She nineteen. at think to made been had she what from
her; by guided been having for herself blame not did she Russell, Lady
to circumstances, similar in person, young any were that felt she but
certain such of any receive never would they counsel, for her to apply
persuaded was She good. future uncertain such wretchedness, immediate
every and home, at disapprobation of disadvantage every under that
and delays, fears, probable their all profession, his attending anxiety
in woman happier a been have yet should she disappointments,
it; of sacrifice the in been had she than engagement, the maintaining
than more even had share, usual the had believed, fully she this, and
theirs, been suspense and solicitudes such all of share usual the
it as which, case, their of results actual the to reference without
be could than prosperity earlier bestowed have would happened,
his all expectations, sanguine his All on. calculated reasonably
to seemed had ardour and genius His justified. been had confidence
after soon very had, He path. prosperous his command to and foresee
would her told had he that all and employ: got ceased, engagement their
early and himself, distinguished had He place. taken had follow,
captures, successive by now, must and rank, in step other the gained
newspapers and lists navy only had She fortune. handsome a made have
in and, rich; being his doubt not could she but authority, her for
married. him believe to reason no had she constancy, his of favour

were least, at eloquent, how been! have Elliot Anne could eloquent How
cheerful a and attachment, warm early of side the on wishes her
seems which caution over-anxious that against futurity, in confidence
into forced been had She Providence! distrust and exertion insult to
the older: grew she as romance learned she youth, her in prudence
beginning. unnatural an of sequel natural

not could she feelings, and recollections circumstances, these all With
Kellynch at live to likely was sister Wentworth's Captain that hear
sigh, a many and stroll, a many and pain; former of revival a without
told often She idea. the of agitation the dispel to necessary were
sufficiently nerves her harden could she before folly, was it herself
no business their and Crofts the of discussion continual the feel to
and indifference perfect that by however, assisted, was She evil.
in friends own her of three only the among unconsciousness, apparent
of recollection any deny to almost seemed which past, the of secret the
motives Russell's Lady of superiority the to justice do could She it.
all honour could she Elizabeth; and father her of those over this, in
oblivion of air general the but calmness; her of feelings better the
the in and sprung; it whatever from important highly was them among
anew rejoiced she Hall, Kellynch taking really Croft's Admiral of event
the of her, to grateful most been always had which conviction the over
no whom by connexions, her among only three those to known being past
that trust the in and whispered, be ever would believed, she syllable,
had residing, been had he whom with only brother the his, among
brother That engagement. short-lived their of information any received
and, man, sensible a being and country the from removed long been had
no on dependence fond a had she time, the at man single a moreover,
him. from it of heard having creature's human

her accompanying England, of out been then had Croft, Mrs sister, The
at been had Mary, sister, own her and station, foreign a on husband
some, of pride the by admitted never and occurred; all it while school
afterwards. it of knowledge smallest the to others, of delicacy the and

herself between acquaintance the that hoped she supports, these With
Kellynch, in resident still Russell, Lady with which, Crofts, the and
not need anticipated, be must off, miles three only fixed Mary and
awkwardness. particular any involve



5 Chapter


Kellynch seeing Croft's Mrs and Admiral for appointed morning the On
Lady to walk daily almost her take to natural most it found Anne Hall,
it found she when over; was all till way the of out keep and Russell's,
seeing of opportunity the missed had she that sorry be to natural most
them.

decided and satisfactory, highly proved parties two the of meeting This
for disposed well previously was lady Each once. at business whole the
the in manners good but therefore, nothing, saw and agreement, an
good hearty an such was there gentlemen, the to regard with and other;
as side, Admiral's the on liberality trusting open, an such humour,
into flattered been besides had who Walter, Sir influence but not could
assurances Shepherd's Mr by behaviour polished most and best very his
good of model a as Admiral, the to report, by known, being his of
breeding.

were Crofts the approved, were furniture, and grounds, and house The
Mr and right; was body, every and thing, every time, terms, approved,
single a been having there without work, to set were clerks Shepherd's
sheweth." indenture "This that all of modify to difference preliminary

the be to Admiral the declared hesitation, without Walter, Sir
say, to as far so went and with, met ever had he sailor best-looking
should he hair, his of arranging the had have might man own his if that
with Admiral, the and where; any him with seen being of ashamed be not
through back drove they as wife his to observed cordiality, sympathetic
spite in dear, my deal, a to come soon should we thought "I park, the
Thames the set never will Baronet The Taunton. at us told they what of
him."--reciprocal in harm no be to seems there but fire, on
equal. about esteemed been have would which compliments,

Walter Sir as and Michaelmas; at possession have to were Crofts The
there month, preceding the of course the in Bath to removing proposed
arrangement. dependent every making in lost be to time no was

any of be to allowed be not would Anne that convinced Russell, Lady
were they which house the of choice the in importance, any or use,
soon, so away hurried her have to unwilling very was secure, to going
might she till behind stay to her for possible it make to wanted and
of engagements having but Christmas; after herself Bath to her convey
was she weeks, several for Kellynch from her take must which own her
dreading though Anne and wished, she invitation full the give to unable
and Bath, of glare white the all in September of heats possible the
the of sad so and sweet so influence the all forego to grieving
everything that, think not did country, the in months autumnal
most and right, most be would It remain. to wished she considered,
others. the with go to suffering least involve must therefore and, wise,

often Mary, duty. different a her give to however, occurred, Something
own her of deal great a thinking always and unwell, little a
was anything when Anne claiming of habit the in always and complaints,
a have not should she that foreseeing and indisposed; was matter, the
it for her, required rather or entreated, autumn, the all health day's
her bear and Cottage, Uppercross to come to entreaty, hardly was
Bath. to going of instead her, want should she as long as company

and reasoning; Mary's was Anne," without do possibly cannot "I
nobody for stay, better had Anne sure am I "Then was, reply Elizabeth's
Bath." in her want will

least at is style, improper an in though good, a as claimed be To
be to glad Anne, and all; at good no as rejected being than better
and duty, a as out marked anything have to glad use, some of thought
own her and country, the in it of scene the have to sorry not certainly
stay. to agreed readily country, dear

and difficulties, Russell's Lady all removed Mary's of invitation This
till Bath to go not should Anne that settled soon consequently was it
be should time intervening the all that and her, took Russell Lady
Lodge. Kellynch and Cottage Uppercross between divided

by startled almost was Russell Lady but right; perfectly was all far So
her, on burst it when plan, Hall Kellynch the of part one of wrong the
and Walter Sir with Bath to go to engaged being Clay's Mrs was, which
in latter the to assistant valuable and important most a as Elizabeth,
that sorry extremely was Russell Lady her. before business the all
grieved, wondered, all, at to resorted been have should measure a such
being Clay's Mrs in Anne, to contained it affront the and feared; and
sore very a was none, of be could Anne while use, much so of
aggravation.

the felt she but affronts; such to hardened become was herself Anne
a With Russell. Lady as keenly as quite arrangement the of imprudence
often she which knowledge, a and observation, quiet of deal great
results that sensible was she character, father's her of less, wished
than more were intimacy the from family his to serious most the
idea an present at had father her that imagine not did She possible.
a and tooth, projecting a and freckles, had Clay Mrs kind. the of
in upon, remarks severe making continually was he which wrist, clumsy
well-looking, altogether certainly and young, was she but absence; her
manners, pleasing assiduous and mind acute an in possessed, and
might personal merely any than attractions dangerous more infinitely
that danger, their of degree the by impressed so was Anne been. have
her to perceptible it make to trying from herself excuse not could she
the in who Elizabeth, but success; of hope little had She sister.
than pitied be to more much so be would reverse a such of event
for her reproach to reason have thought, she never, should herself,
warning. no giving

how conceive not could Elizabeth offend. to only seemed and spoke, She
answered indignantly and her, to occur should suspicion absurd an such
situation. their knowing perfectly party's each for

am I as and is; she who forgets "never warmly, she, said Clay," "Mrs
can I be, can you than sentiments her with acquainted better rather
particularly are they marriage of subject the upon that you, assure
more rank and condition of inequality all reprobates she that and nice,
not should really I father, my to as And people. most than strongly
our for long so single himself kept has who he, that thought have
woman, beautiful very a were Clay Mrs If now. suspected be need sakes,
that not me; with much so her have to wrong be might it you, grant I
a make to father my induce would sure, am I world, the in anything
Clay Mrs poor But unhappy. rendered be might he but match, degrading
tolerably reckoned been have never can merits, her all with who,
perfect in here staying be may Clay Mrs poor think really I pretty,
her of speak father my heard never had you imagine would One safety.
tooth That times. fifty must you know I though misfortunes, personal
much very so me disgust not do Freckles freckles. those and her's of
a by disfigured materially not face a known have I him. do they as
Clay's Mrs notice him heard have must You them. abominates he but few,
freckles."

an "which Anne, replied defect," personal any hardly is "There
to." one reconcile gradually not might manner agreeable

agreeable "an shortly; Elizabeth, answered differently," very think "I
ones. plain alter never can but features, handsome off set may manner
this on stake at more deal great a have I as rate, any at However,
you in unnecessary rather it think I have, can else anybody than point
me." advising be to

of hopeless absolutely not and over, was it that glad done; had Anne
be yet might suspicion, the resenting though Elizabeth, good. doing
it. by observant made

Walter, Sir draw to was carriage-horses four the of office last The
good very in off drove party The Bath. to Clay Mrs and Elliot, Miss
the all for bows condescending with prepared Walter Sir spirits;
show to hint a had have might who cottagers and tenantry afflicted
desolate of sort a in time, same the at up walked Anne and themselves,
week. first the spend to was she where Lodge, the to tranquillity,

felt Russell Lady herself. than spirits better in not was friend Her
as was respectability Their exceedingly. family the of break-up this
by precious become had intercourse daily a and own, her as her to dear
still and grounds, deserted their upon look to painful was It habit.
escape to and into; fall to were they hands new the anticipate to worse
out be and village, a altered so of melancholy the and solitariness the
determined had she arrived, first Croft Mrs and Admiral when way the of
Anne. up give must she when begin home from absence own her make to
at down set was Anne and together, made was removal their Accordingly
journey. Russell's Lady of stage first the in Cottage, Uppercross

had back years few a which village, moderate-sized a was Uppercross
houses two only containing style, English old the in completely been
the labourers; and yeomen the of those to appearance in superior
trees, old and gates, great walls, high its with squire, the of mansion
parsonage, tight compact, the and unmodernized, and substantial
trained pear-tree a and vine a with garden, neat own its in enclosed
had it 'squire, young the of marriage the upon but casements; its round
for cottage, a into elevated farm-house a of improvement the received
French veranda, its with Cottage, Uppercross and residence, his
the catch to likely as quite was prettiness, other and windows,
and aspect considerable and consistent more the as eye traveller's
on. farther mile a of quarter a about House, Great the of premises

as Uppercross of ways the knew She staying. been often had Anne Here
continually so were families two The Kellynch. of those as well
other's each of out and in running of habit the in much so meeting,
Mary find to her to surprise a rather was it that hours, all at house
almost was spirits of out and unwell being her alone, being but alone;
Mary sister, elder the than endowed better Though course. of matter a
and happy, and well, While temper. nor understanding Anne's not had
spirits; excellent and humour good great had she to, attended properly
for resources no had She completely. her sunk indisposition any but
Elliot the of share considerable a inheriting and solitude;
of that distress other every to add to prone very was self-importance,
to inferior was she person, In ill-used. and neglected herself fancying
of dignity the reached only bloom, her in even had, and sisters, both
pretty the of sofa faded the on lying now was She girl." fine "a being
been had which of furniture elegant once the drawing-room, little
two and summers four of influence the under shabby, growing gradually
with-- her greeted appearing, Anne's on and, children;

I you. see never should I think to began I last! at come are you "So,
whole the creature a seen not have I speak. hardly can I ill so am
morning!"

a such me sent "You Anne. replied unwell," you find to sorry am "I
Thursday!" on yourself of account good

well from far very was I but do: always I it; of best the made I "Yes,
have I as life my in ill so was ever I think not do I and time; the at
sure. am I alone, left be to unfit very morning: this all been
not and way, dreadful some in sudden a of seized be to were I Suppose
not do I out. get not would Russell Lady So, bell! the ring to able
summer." this times three house this in been has she think

"Oh! husband. her after enquired and proper, was what said Anne
He o'clock. seven since him seen not have I shooting. out is Charles
stay not should he said He was. I ill how him told I though go, would
I one. almost is it now and back, come never has he but long; out
morning." long whole this soul a seen not have I you, assure

you?" with boys little your had have "You

unmanageable so are they but noise; their bear could I as long as "Yes,
a mind not does Charles Little good. than harm more me do they that
bad." as quite growing is Walter and say, I word

"You cheerfully. Anne, replied now," better be soon will you "Well,
the at neighbours your are How come. I when you cure always I know
House?" Great

them of one seen not have I them. of account no you give can "I
the through spoke and stopped just who Musgrove, Mr except to-day,
how him told I though and horse; his off getting without but window,
to happen not did It me. near been have them of one not was, I ill
out themselves put never they and suppose, I Musgroves, Miss the suit
way." their of

is It gone. is morning the before perhaps, yet, them see will "You
early."

too deal great a laugh and talk They you. assure I them, want never "I
of unkind quite was It unwell! very so am I Anne, Oh! me. for much
Thursday." on come to not you

of me sent you account comfortable a what recollect Mary, dear "My
were you said and manner, cheerfullest the in wrote You yourself!
you case, the being that and me; for hurry no in and well, perfectly
the to Russell Lady with remain to be would wish my that aware be must
so been really have I account, her on felt I what besides and last:
have conveniently very not could I that do, to much so had have busy,
sooner." Kellynch left

do?" to have possibly you can what me! "Dear

a in recollect can I than More you. assure I things, many great "A
the of duplicate a making been have I some. you tell can I but moment;
times several been have I pictures. and books father's my of catalogue
him make and understand, to trying Mackenzie, with garden the in
have I Russell. Lady for are plants Elizabeth's of which understand,
divide, to music and books arrange, to concerns little own my all had
what time in understood having not from repack, to trunks my all and
Mary, do, to had have I thing one and waggons: the to as intended was
as parish, the in house every almost to going nature: trying more a of
these all But it. wished they that told was I take-leave. of sort a
time." of deal great a up took things

me asked never have you "but pause, moment's a after and well!" "Oh!
yesterday." Pooles the at dinner our about word one

you concluded I because enquiries, no made have I then? go you "Did
party." the up give to obliged been have must

matter the all at nothing yesterday; well very was I went. I yes! "Oh
not had I if strange been have would It morning. this till me with
gone."

pleasant a had you hope I and enough, well were you glad very am "I
party."

will dinner the what beforehand knows always One remarkable. "Nothing
a having not uncomfortable very so is it and there; be will who and be,
so were we and me, took Musgrove Mrs and Mr own. one's of carriage
Mr and room; much so up take and large, very so both are They crowded!
back the into crowded I, was there So, forward. sits always Musgrove
my that likely very it think I and Louisa; and Henrietta with seat
it." to owing be may to-day illness

on cheerfulness forced and patience in perseverance further little A
sit soon could She Mary's. on cure a nearly produced side Anne's
by it leave to able be might she hope to began and sofa, the on upright
end other the at was she it, of think to forgetting Then, dinner-time.
and meat; cold her ate she then, nosegay; a beautifying room, the of
walk. little a propose to enough well was she then

you suppose "I ready. were they when she, said go?" we shall "Where
see to been have they before House Great the at call to like not will
you?"

"I Anne. replied account," that on objection smallest the not have "I
so know I people with ceremony such on standing of think never should
Musgroves." Miss the and Mrs as well

ought They possible. as soon as you upon call to ought they but "Oh!
go well as may we However, sister. my as you to due is what feel to
can we over, that have we when and while, little a them with sit and
walk." our enjoy

imprudent; highly intercourse of style a such thought always had Anne
that, believing from it, check to endeavour to ceased had she but
neither offence, of subjects continual side each on were there though
they accordingly House Great the To it. without do now could family
parlour, square old-fashioned the in hour half full the sit to went,
daughters present the which to floor, shining and carpet small a with
a by confusion of air proper the giving gradually were house the of
in placed tables little and flower-stands harp, a and piano-forte grand
the against portraits the of originals the could Oh! direction. every
blue in ladies the and velvet brown in gentlemen the could wainscot,
an such of conscious been have on, going was what seen have satin
seemed themselves portraits The neatness! and order all of overthrow
astonishment. in staring be to

alteration, of state a in were houses, their like Musgroves, The
English old the in were mother and father The improvement. of perhaps
a were Musgrove Mrs and Mr new. the in people young the and style,
educated, much not hospitable, and friendly people; of sort good very
and minds modern more had children Their elegant. all at not and
up, grown two only the but family; numerous a was There manners.
nineteen of ladies young Louisa, and Henrietta were Charles, excepting
stock usual the all Exeter at school from brought had who twenty, and
ladies, young other of thousands like now were and accomplishments, of
every had dress Their merry. and happy, fashionable, be to living
extremely spirits their pretty, rather were faces their advantage,
consequence of were they pleasant; and unembarrassed manner their good,
some as them contemplated always Anne abroad. favourites and home, at
we as saved still, but acquaintance; her of creatures happiest the of
for wishing from superiority of feeling comfortable some by are, all
more own her up given have not would she exchange, of possibility the
them envied and enjoyments; their all for mind cultivated and elegant
agreement and understanding good perfect seemingly that but nothing
known had she which of affection, mutual good-humoured that together,
sisters. her of either with herself little so

the on amiss seemed Nothing cordiality. great with received were They
well very Anne as generally, was which family, House Great the of side
pleasantly away chatted was hour half The blame. to least the knew,
have to it, of end the at surprised, all at not was she and enough;
Mary's at Musgroves, Miss the both by joined party walking their
invitation. particular



6 Chapter


removal a that learn to Uppercross, to visit this wanted not had Anne
three only of distance a at though another, to people of set one from
and opinion, conversation, of change total a include often will miles,
by struck being without before, there staying been never had She idea.
in advantage her have could Elliots other that wishing without or it,
at which affairs the were there, unconsidered or unknown, how seeing
pervading and publicity general such of as treated were Hall Kellynch
now must she believed she experience, this all with yet, interest;
own our knowing of art the in lesson, another that feel to submit
for her; for necessary become was circle, own our beyond nothingness
which subject the of full heart a with did, she as coming certainly,
weeks, many for Kellynch in houses both occupying completely been had
in found she than sympathy and curiosity more rather expected had she
Miss "So, Musgrove: Mrs and Mr of remark similar very but separate the
you do Bath of part what and gone; are sister your and Walter Sir Anne,
an for waiting much without this, and in?" settle will they think
in be shall we hope "I of, addition ladies' young the in or answer;
a in be must we go, do we if papa, remember, but winter; the in Bath
anxious the in or us!" for Squares Queen your of none situation: good
off, well pretty be shall I word, my of--"Upon Mary, from supplement
Bath!" at happy be to away gone all are you when

think and future, in self-delusion such avoid to resolve only could She
one having of blessing extraordinary the of gratitude heightened with
Russell. Lady as friend sympathising truly such

own their destroy, to and guard, to game own their had Musgroves Mr The
fully were females the and them, engage to newspapers and dogs, horses,
neighbours, housekeeping, of subjects common other the all in occupied
fitting, very be to it acknowledged She music. and dancing, dress,
of matters own its dictate should commonwealth social little every that
the of member unworthy not a become to long, ere hoped, and discourse;
at spending of prospect the With into. transplanted now was she one
to her on incumbent highly was it Uppercross, at months two least
of much as in ideas her all and memory, her imagination, her clothe
possible. as Uppercross

and repulsive so not was Mary months. two these of dread no had She
hers; of influence all to inaccessible so nor Elizabeth, as unsisterly
the of parts component other the among anything there was neither
her with terms friendly on always was She comfort. to inimical cottage
and well, as nearly her loved who children, the in and brother-in-law;
of object an had she mother, their than more deal great a her respected
exertion. wholesome and amusement, interest,

was he temper and sense in agreeable; and civil was Musgrove Charles
conversation, or powers, of not but wife, his to superior undoubtedly
a all at together, connected were they as past, the make to grace, or
believe, could Anne time, same the at though, contemplation; dangerous
improved greatly have might match equal more a that Russell, Lady with
more given have might understanding real of woman a that and him;
and rationality, usefulness, more and character, his to consequence
with nothing did he was, it As pursuits. and habits his to elegance
without away, trifled otherwise was time his and sport; but zeal, much
which spirits, good very had He else. anything or books from benefit
with bore lowness, occasional wife's his by affected much seemed never
the upon and admiration, Anne's to sometimes unreasonableness her
she which (in disagreement little a often very was there though whole,
both by to appealed being wished, she than share more sometimes had
always were They couple. happy a for pass might they parties),
inclination strong a and money, more of want the in agreed perfectly
he topics, most on as here, but father; his from present handsome a for
such that shame great a it thought Mary while for superiority, the had
having father's his for contended always he made, not was present a
liked. he as it spend to right a and money, his for uses other many

than better much was theory his children, their of management the to As
very them manage could "I bad. so not practice his and wife's, his
often Anne what was interference," Mary's for not were it if well,
in listening when but in; faith of deal good a had and say, him heard
I that so children the spoils "Charles of reproach Mary's to turn
temptation smallest the had never she order," any into them get cannot
true." "Very say, to

her was there residence her of circumstances agreeable least the of One
too being and parties, all by confidence much too with treated being
some have to Known house. each of complaints the of secret the in much
least at or requested, continually was she sister, her with influence
you wish "I practicable. was what beyond it, exert to hints receiving
was ill," herself fancying always be to not Mary persuade could
do "I Mary: spoke thus mood, unhappy an in and, language; Charles's
was there think not would he dying, me see to were Charles if believe
might you would, you if Anne, sure, am I me. with matter the anything
ever I than worse deal great ill--a very am really I that him persuade
own."

Great the to children the sending hate "I was, declaration Mary's
she for them, see to wanting always is grandmamma their though House,
much so them gives and degree, a such to them indulges and humours
cross and sick back come to sure are they that things, sweet and trash
opportunity first the took Musgrove Mrs And day." the of rest the for
wishing help cannot I Anne, Miss "Oh! say, to Anne, with alone being of
are They children. those with method your of little a had Charles Mrs
they general in sure, be to But you! with creatures different quite
of way the in sister your put cannot you pity a is It spoilt! so are
seen, were ever as children healthy fine as are They them. managing
more no knows Charles Mrs but partiality; without dears! little poor
are they troublesome how me! Bless treated--! be should they how
them see to wishing my prevents it Anne, Miss you, assure I sometimes.
is Charles Mrs believe I should. otherwise I as often so house our at
is it know you but oftener; them inviting not my with pleased quite not
checking be to obligated is one that one with children have to bad very
can one that or that;" do "don't and this," do "don't moment; every
them." for good is than cake more by order tolerable in keep only

thinks Musgrove "Mrs Mary. from moreover, communication, this had She
in it call to treason high be would it that steady, so servants her all
upper her that exaggeration, without sure, am I but question;
are business, their in being of instead laundry-maid, and house-maid
go; I wherever them meet I long. day all village, the about gadding
seeing without nursery my into twice go never I declare, I and
steadiest trustiest, the not were Jemima If them. of something
tells she for her; spoil to enough be would it world, the in creature
Mrs on And them." with walk a take to her tempting always are they me,
of any in interfering never of rule a make "I was, it side, Musgrove's
shall I but do; not would it know I for concerns, daughter-in-law's my
rights, to things set to able be may you because Anne, Miss you, tell
hear I nursery-maid: Charles's Mrs of opinion good very no have I that
own my from and gad; the upon always is she her; of stories strange
is she that lady, fine-dressing a such is she declare, can I knowledge,
swears quite Charles Mrs near. comes she servants any ruin to enough
the upon be may you that hint, this you give just I but know; I her, by
of afraid be not need you amiss, anything see you if because, watch;
it." mentioning

to not apt very was Musgrove Mrs that complaint, Mary's was it Again,
Great the at dined they when due, her was that precedence the her give
was she why reason any see not did she and families; other with House
day one And place. her lose to as home at much so considered be to
after them of one Musgroves, the only with walking was Anne when
no have "I said, rank, of jealousy and rank, of people rank, of talking
about are persons some nonsensical how you, to observing of scruple
you indifferent and easy how knows world the all because place, their
would it that hint a Mary give could anybody wish I but it; about are
if especially tenacious, very so not were she if better deal great a be
mamma. of place take to forward herself putting always be not would she
be would it but mamma, of precedence have to right her doubts Nobody
that not is It it. on insisting always be to not her in becoming more
taken is it know I but world, the in least the it about cares mamma
persons." many by of notice

little do could She rights? to matters these all set to Anne was How
to each excuse and grievance, every soften patiently, listen than more
between necessary forbearance the of hints all them give other; the
meant were which broadest hints those make and neighbours, near such
benefit. sister's her for

Her well. very proceeded and began visit her respects, other all In
removed being by subject, and place of change by improved spirits own
a having by lessened ailments Mary's Kellynch; from miles three
family, other the with intercourse daily their and companion, constant
employment nor confidence, affection, superior neither was there since
It advantage. an rather was it, by interrupted be to cottage, the in
every met they for possible, as far as nearly carried certainly was
believed she but asunder; evening an spent ever hardly and morning,
Mrs and Mr of sight the without well so done have not should they
the without or places, usual the in forms respectable Musgrove's
daughters. their of singing and laughing, talking,

but Musgroves, Miss the of either than better deal great a played She
sit to parents, fond no and harp, the of knowledge no voice, no having
thought little was performance her delighted, themselves fancy and by
well was she as others, the refresh to or civility, of out only of,
to only pleasure giving was she played she when that knew She aware.
of period short one Excepting sensation. new no was this but herself;
the since never fourteen, of age the since never, had she life, her
or to, listened being of happiness the known mother, dear her of loss
had she music In taste. real or appreciation just any by encouraged
Musgrove's Mrs and Mr and world; the in alone feel to used always been
total and performance, daughters' own their for partiality fond
for pleasure more much her gave person's, other any to indifference
own. her for mortification than sakes, their

company. other by increased sometimes was House Great the at party The
by visited were Musgroves the but large, not was neighbourhood The
visitors more callers, more and dinner-parties, more had and everybody,
more were They family. other any than chance, by and invitation by
popular. completely

occasionally, ended, evenings the and dancing; for wild were girls The
within cousins of family a was There ball. little unpremeditated an in
on depended who circumstances, affluent less in Uppercross, of walk a
time, any at come would they pleasures: their all for Musgroves the
much very Anne, and anywhere; dance or anything, at play help and
country played post, active more a to musician of office the preferring
always which kindness a together; hour the by them to dances
Musgrove Mrs and Mr of notice the to powers musical her recommended
done, compliment;--"Well this drew often and else, anything than more
little those how me! bless Lord indeed! done well very Anne! Miss
about!" fly yours of fingers

heart Anne's now and came; Michaelmas weeks. three first the passed So
the all others; to over made home beloved A again. Kellynch in be must
own to beginning prospects, and groves, furniture, and rooms precious
the on else much of think not could She limbs! other and eyes other
evening the in touch sympathetic this had she and September; of 29th
month, the of day the down note to occasion having on who, Mary, from
to come to were Crofts the day the this not is me, "Dear exclaimed,
makes it low How before. it of think not did I glad am I Kellynch?
me!"

be to were and alertness, naval true with possession took Crofts The
how knew "Nobody herself. for necessity the deplored Mary visited.
could;" she as long as off it put should She suffer. should she much
on over her driving into Charles talked had she till easy not was but
of state comfortable animated, very a in was and day, early an
sincerely very had Anne back. came she when agitation, imaginary
to however wished, She going. her of means no being there in rejoiced
returned. was visit the when within be to glad was and Crofts, the see
two the but home, at not was house the of master the came: They
the to fell Croft Mrs that chanced it as and together; were sisters
very himself made and Mary, by sat Admiral the while Anne, of share
well was she boys, little her of notice good-humoured his by agreeable
to features, the in her failed it if and likeness, a for watch to able
expression. and sentiment of turn the in or voice, the in it catch

uprightness, squareness, a had fat, nor tall neither though Croft, Mrs
had She person. her to importance gave which form, of vigour and
though face; agreeable an altogether and teeth, good eyes, dark bright
her of consequence the complexion, weather-beaten and reddened her
have to seem her made husband, her as sea at much as almost been having
eight-and-thirty. real her than world the in longer years some lived
distrust no had who one like decided, and easy, open, were manners Her
to approach any without do; to what of doubts no and herself, of
credit, her gave Anne humour. good of want any or however, coarseness,
all in herself, towards consideration great of feelings for indeed,
had she as especially, her: pleased it and Kellynch, to related that
of even instant the in minute, half first very the in herself satisfied
knowledge any of symptom smallest the not was there that introduction,
was She sort. any of bias a give to side, Croft's Mrs on suspicion or
courage, and strength of full consequently and head, that on easy quite
saying,-- suddenly Croft's Mrs by electrified moment a for till

the had brother my that find, I sister, your not and you, was "It
country." this in was he when with, acquainted being of pleasure

emotion of age the but blushing; of age the outlived had she hoped Anne
not. had certainly she

Croft. Mrs added married?" is he that heard have not may you "Perhaps

Mrs when feel, to happy was and ought; she as answer now could She
spoke, she whom of Wentworth Mr be to it explained words next Croft's
She brother. either for do not might which nothing said had she that
be should Croft Mrs that was, it reasonable how felt immediately
shame with and Frederick; of not and Edward, of speaking and thinking
their of knowledge the to herself applied forgetfulness own her at
interest. proper with state present neighbour's former

she moving, were they as just till, tranquillity; all was rest The
Mary-- to say Admiral the heard

you say dare I soon; here Croft's Mrs of brother a expecting are "We
name." by him know

to clinging boys, little the of attacks eager the by short cut was He
too being and go; not should he declaring and friend, old an like him
pockets, coat his in away them carrying of proposals by engrossed much
had he what recollecting or finishing for moment another have to &c.,
that could, she as well as herself, persuade to left was Anne begun,
however, not, could She question. in be still must brother same the
whether hear to anxious be to not as certainty, of degree a such reach
the where house, other the at subject the on said been had anything
calling. been previously had Crofts

at day this of evening the spend to were House Great the of folks The
to visits such for year the in late too now being it and Cottage; the
the when for, listened be to beginning was coach the foot, on made be
apologize, to coming was she That in. walked Musgrove Miss youngest
the was themselves, by evening the spend to have should they that and
Louisa when affronted, be to ready quite was Mary and idea; black first
more leave to foot, on came only she that saying, by right all made
carriage. the in bringing was which harp, the for room

am I it. about all "and added, she reason," our you tell will I "And
this spirits of out are mamma and papa that notice, you give to on come
Richard! poor of much so thinking is she mamma; especially evening,
amuse to seems it for harp, the have to best be would it agreed we And
of out is she why you tell will I piano-forte. the than more her
here called (they morning, this called Crofts the When spirits.
brother, her that say, to happened they they?), not did afterwards,
or off, paid or England, to returned just is Wentworth, Captain
most and directly; almost them see to coming is and something,
that gone, were they when head, mamma's into came it unluckily
Richard's poor of name the was it, like very something or Wentworth,
while great a but where, or when know not do I time; one at captain
and letters his over looking upon And fellow! poor died, he before
be must this that sure perfectly is and so, was it found she things,
Richard! poor of and it, of full quite is head her and man, very the
upon dwelling be not may she that can, we as merry as be must we So
things." gloomy such

were, history family of piece pathetic this of circumstances real The
troublesome, very a of fortune ill the had had Musgroves the that
his reached he before him lose to fortune good the and son; hopeless
and stupid was he because sea to sent been had he that year; twentieth
any at for cared little very been had he that shore; on unmanageable
heard seldom deserved; he as much as quite though family, his by time
death his of intelligence the when regretted, all at scarcely and of,
before. years two Uppercross, to way its worked had abroad

for could they all doing now were sisters his though fact, in had, He
a than better nothing been Richard," "poor him calling by him,
done never had who Musgrove, Dick unprofitable unfeeling, thick-headed,
name, his of abbreviation the than more to himself entitle to anything
dead. or living

those of course the in had, and sea, at years several been had He
such especially and liable, are midshipmen all which to removals
on months six been of, rid get to wishes captain every as midshipmen
the from and Laconia; the frigate, Wentworth's Frederick Captain board
only the written captain, his of influence the under had, he Laconia
him from received ever had mother and father his which letters two
two only the say, to is that absence; his of whole the during
for applications mere been had rest the all letters; disinterested
money.

little so yet, but captain; his of well spoken had he letter each In
and unobservant so matters, such to attending of habit the in they were
made had it that ships, or men of names the to as they were incurious
have should Musgrove Mrs that and time; the at impression any scarcely
of name the of recollection a with day, very this struck, suddenly been
extraordinary those of one seemed son, her with connected as Wentworth,
occur. sometimes do which mind of bursts

the and supposed; she as all it found and letters, her to gone had She
son poor her interval, an long so after letters, these of re-perusal
had forgotten, faults his of strength the all and ever, for gone
for grief greater into her thrown and exceedingly, spirits her affected
was, Musgrove Mr death. his of hearing first on known had she than him
the reached they when and likewise; affected degree, lesser a in
anew to listened being of first, want, in evidently were they cottage,
cheerful which relief the all of afterwards, and subject, this on
them. give could companions

name his repeating Wentworth, Captain of much so talking them hear To
it that ascertaining last at and years, past over puzzling often, so
Captain same very the be to out turn would, probably it that might,
their after twice, or once meeting, recollected they whom Wentworth
say not could they man--but young fine very Clifton--a from back coming
to trial of sort new a was ago, years eight or seven was it whether
must she which to one was it that however, found, She nerves. Anne's
must she country, the in expected was actually he Since herself. inure
it did only not And points. such on insensible be to herself teach
their in Musgroves, the but speedily, and expected, was he that appear
high very and Dick, poor shewn had he kindness the for gratitude warm
been having Dick's poor by was it as stamped character, his for respect
not though strong, in him mentioning and care, his under months six
two only felow, dashing fine "a as praise, well-spelt perfectly
introducing on bent were schoolmaster," the about perticular
of hear could they as soon as acquaintance, his seeking and themselves,
arrival. his

evening. their of comfort the form to helped so doing of resolution The



7 Chapter


at be to known was Wentworth Captain and more, days few very A
his in warm back come and him, on called had Musgrove Mr and Kellynch,
by Uppercross, at dine to Crofts the with engaged was he and praise,
Mr to disappointment great a been had It week. another of end the
was impatient so fixed, be could day earlier no that find to Musgrove
own his under Wentworth Captain seeing by gratitude, his shew to he
his in best and strongest was that all to him welcoming and roof,
and reckoning, Anne's in week, a only pass; must week a But cellars.
she that wish to began she soon and meet; must they supposed, she then,
week. a for even secure feel could

civility, Musgrove's Mr to return early very a made Wentworth Captain
Mary and She hour. half same the in there calling but all was she and
she as where, House, Great the for forward setting actually were
were they when him, found have inevitably must they learnt, afterwards
in home brought moment that at being boy's eldest the by stopped
visit the put situation child's The fall. bad a of consequence
indifference, with escape her of hear not could she but aside; entirely
on felt afterwards they which anxiety serious the of midst the in even
account. his

in received injury such and dislocated, be to found was collar-bone His
of afternoon an was It ideas. alarming most the roused as back, the
to apothecary the once; at do to thing every had Anne and distress,
to mother the informed, and pursued have to father the for, send
youngest the control, to servants the hysterics, from keep and support
soothe; and attend to one suffering poor the and banish, to child
the to notice proper it, recollected she as soon as sending, besides
frightened, of rather accession an her brought which house, other
assistants. useful very of than companions, enquiring

of care best take could he comfort; first the was return brother's Her
apothecary. the of arrival the was blessing second the and wife; his
the were apprehensions their child, the examined had and came he Till
where; not knew but injury, great suspected they vague; being for worse
felt Robinson Mr though and replaced, soon was collar-bone the now but
the to both words low spoke and grave, looked and rubbed, and felt, and
be to and best, the hope to all were they still aunt, the and father
then and mind; of ease tolerable in dinner their eat and part to able
so able were aunts young two the that parted, they before just was, it
of information the give to as state, nephew's their from digress to far
and father their behind minutes five staying visit; Wentworth's Captain
with were they delighted perfectly how express to endeavour to mother,
him thought they agreeable more infinitely how handsomer, much how him,
all at been had who acquaintance, male their among individual any than
to him invite papa hear to been had they glad How before. favourite a
and power, his of out quite was it said he when sorry how dinner, stay
mamma's and papa to reply in promised had he when again glad how
the on them with dine and come to invitations pressing farther
a pleasant so in it promised had he and morrow; the on morrow--actually
he as just attention their of motive the all felt he if as manner,
such with everything said and looked had he short, in And ought.
both were heads their all, them assure could they that grace, exquisite
and love, of as glee of full as quite ran, they off and him; by turned
Charles. little of than Wentworth Captain of full more apparently

girls two the when repeated, were raptures same the and story same The
make to evening, the of gloom the through father, their with came
about uneasiness first the under longer no Musgrove, Mr and enquiries;
would there hope and praise, and confirmation his add could heir, his
sorry be only and off, Wentworth Captain putting for occasion no now be
the leave to like not would probably, party, cottage the that think to
little the leaving to as no; "Oh meeting. the him give to boy, little
alarm recent and strong too much in were mother and father both boy,"
help not could escape, the of joy the in Anne, and thought; the bear to
theirs. to protestations warm her adding

"the inclination; of more shewed afterwards, indeed, Musgrove, Charles
to introduced be to much so wished he and well, so on going was child
he evening; the in them join might he perhaps, that, Wentworth, Captain
But hour." an half for in walk might he but home, from dine not would
indeed, no, "Oh! with wife, his by opposed eagerly was he this in
anything if think Only away. go you have to bear cannot I Charles,
happen?" should

It day. next the well on going was and night, good a had child The
the to done been had injury no that ascertain to time of work a be must
Charles and alarm, increase to nothing found Robinson Mr but spine;
longer for necessity no feel to consequently, began, Musgrove
as quietly as amused and bed in kept be to was child The confinement.
a quite was This do? to father a for there was what but possible;
no of be could who him, in absurd highly be would it and case, female
to him wished much very father His up. himself shut to home, at use
against reason sufficient no being there and Wentworth, Captain meet
public bold, a making his in ended it and go; to ought he it,
dress to meaning his of shooting, from in came he when declaration,
house. other the at dine and directly,

my told I "so he; said child," the than better on going be can "Nothing
right. quite me thought he and come, would I that now, just father,
You all. at scruple no have I love, my you, with being sister Your
use. no of be can I see you but yourself, him leave to like not would
matter." the is anything if me for send will Anne

vain. be will opposition when understand generally wives and Husbands
quite was he that speaking, of manner Charles's from knew, Mary
She him. teaze to use no of be would it that and going, on determined
as soon as but room, the of out was he till therefore, nothing, said
hear-- to Anne only was there

sick poor this with ourselves, by shift to left be to are I and you "So
how knew I evening! the all us near coming creature a not and child;
anything is there If luck. my always is This be. would it
Charles and it, of out get to sure always are men on going disagreeable
very is it say must I unfeeling! Very them. of any as bad as is
of Talks boy. little poor his from away running be to him of unfeeling
well, on going is he that know he does How well! so on going being his
not did I hence? hour an half change sudden a be not may there that or
away go to is he here So unfeeling. so been have would Charles think
be to not am I mother, poor the am I because and himself, enjoy and
else anybody than unfit more am I sure, am I yet, and stir; to allowed
my why reason very the is mother the being My child. the about be to
saw You it. to equal all at not am I tried. be not should feelings
yesterday." was I hysterical how

the alarm--of your of suddenness the of effect the only was that "But
have shall we say dare I again. hysterical be not will You shock.
Robinson's Mr understand perfectly I us. distress to nothing
at wonder cannot I Mary, indeed, and fears; no have and directions,
his not is it man; a to belong not does Nursing husband. your
own her property: mother's the always is child sick A province.
so." it make generally feelings

that know not do I but mother, any as child my of fond as am I hope "I
be cannot I for Charles, than sick-room the in use more any of am I
saw, you and ill; is it when child poor the teazing and scolding always
begin to sure was he quiet, keep to him told I if that morning, this
thing." of sort the for nerves not have I about. kicking

whole the spending be to yourself, comfortable be you could "But,
boy?" poor the from away evening

so is Jemima I? not should why and can, papa his see you "Yes;
really I was. he how hour every word us send could she and careful;
I come. all would we father his told have well as might Charles think
was I is. he than now Charles little about alarmed more not am
to-day." different very is case the but yesterday, alarmed dreadfully

yourself, for notice give to late too it think not do you if "Well,
Charles little Leave husband. your as well as go, to were you suppose
remain I while wrong it think cannot Musgrove Mrs and Mr care. my to
him." with

that's me! "Dear brightening. eyes her Mary, cried serious?" you "Are
well as just may I sure, be To indeed. good, very thought, good very a
me. harasses only it and I? home--am at use no of am I for not, as go
properest the deal great a are feelings, mother's a not have who You,
you minds always he anything; do Charles little make can You person.
with only him leaving than better deal great a be will It word. a at
as quite can, I if ought I sure am I go; certainly shall I Oh! Jemima.
with acquainted be to excessively me want they for Charles, as much
An alone. left being mind not do you know I and Wentworth, Captain
Charles, tell and go will I Anne. indeed, yours, of thought excellent
moment's a at know, you us, for send can You directly. ready get and
nothing be will there say dare I but matter; the is anything if notice,
feel not did I if sure, be may you go, not should I you. alarm to
child." dear my about ease at quite

door, dressing-room husband's her at tapping was she moment next The
whole the for time in was she stairs, up her followed Anne as and
great of tone a in saying, Mary's with began which conversation,
exultation--

than home at use more no of am I for Charles, you, with go to mean "I
should I child, the with ever for up myself shut to were I If are. you
will Anne like. not did he anything do to him persuade to able be not
is It him. of care take and home at stay to undertakes Anne stay;
great a be will which you, with go shall I so and proposal, own Anne's
Tuesday." since house other the at dined not have I for better, deal

be should I "and answer, husband's her was Anne," of kind very is "This
be should she that hard rather seems it but go; you have to glad very
child." sick our nurse to herself, by home at left

her of sincerity the and cause, own her up take to hand at now was Anne
at was conviction where him, convince to sufficient soon being manner
left being her to as scruples farther no had he agreeable, very least
evening, the in them join to her wanted still he though alone, dine to
to her urged kindly and night, the for rest at be might child the when
this and unpersuadable; quite was she but her, fetch and come him let
off set them seeing of pleasure the long ere had she case, the being
happy, be to hoped, she gone, were They spirits. high in together
herself, for as seem; might happiness such constructed oddly however
ever perhaps, were, as comfort, of sensations many as with left was she
the to utility first the of be to herself knew She hers. be to likely
a half only were Wentworth Frederick if her to it was what and child;
others? to agreeable himself making distant, mile

Perhaps meeting. a to as felt he how know to liked have would She
He circumstances. such under exist could indifference if indifferent,
her see to ever wished he Had unwilling. or indifferent either be must
what done have would he time; this till waited have not need he again,
long done have should she place his in that believe but not could she
alone which independence the him giving early been had events when ago,
wanting. been had

acquaintance, new their with delighted back came sister and brother Her
talking, singing, music, been had There general. in visit their and
Captain in manners charming agreeable; most was that all laughing,
other each know to all seemed they reserve; or shyness no Wentworth,
with shoot to morning next very the coming was he and perfectly,
though Cottage, the at not but breakfast, to come to was He Charles.
come to pressed been had he then but first; at proposed been had that
Mrs in being of afraid seemed he and instead, House Great the to
therefore, and child, the of account on way, Musgrove's Charles
him meet to being Charles's in ended it how, knew hardly they somehow,
father's. his at breakfast to

inquired had He her. seeing avoid to wished He it. understood Anne
slight former a suit might as slightly, found, she her, after
acknowledged, had she as such acknowledge to seeming acquaintance,
they when introduction escaping of view same the by perhaps, actuated,
meet. to were

the of those than later always were Cottage the of hours morning The
Mary that great so was difference the morrow the on and house, other
to in came Charles when breakfast beginning than more not were Anne and
dogs, his for come was he that off, setting just were they that say
sisters his Wentworth; Captain with following were sisters his that
proposing Wentworth Captain and child, the and Mary visit to meaning
though and inconvenient; not if minutes few a for her on wait to also
could as state such no in being child's the for answered had Charles
without satisfied be not would Wentworth Captain inconvenient, it make
notice. give to on running his

receive to delighted was attention, this by gratified much very Mary,
the was this which of Anne, on rushed feelings thousand a while him,
In over. soon was it And over. be soon would it that consoling, most
were they appeared; others the preparation, Charles's after minutes two
a bow, a Wentworth's, Captain met half eye Her drawing-room. the in
that all said Mary, to talked he voice; his heard she passed; curtsey
easy an mark to enough Musgroves, Miss the to something said right, was
few a but voices, and persons of full full, seemed room the footing;
ready, was all window, the at himself shewed Charles it. ended minutes
too, gone were Musgroves Miss the gone, was and bowed had visitor their
the with village the of end the to walk to resolving suddenly
breakfast her finish might Anne and cleared, was room the sportsmen:
could. she as

in again, and again herself to repeated she over!" is it over! is "It
over!" is worst "The gratitude. nervous

had They him. seen had She attend. not could she but talked, Mary
room. same the in more once been had They met.

feeling be to try and herself, with reason to began she however, Soon,
been had all since passed, had years eight almost years, Eight less.
an such which agitation the resuming be to absurd How up. given
not might What indistinctness! and distance into banished had interval
alienations, changes, description, every of Events do? years eight
past-- the of oblivion and it, in comprised be must all removals--all,
her of part third a nearly included It too! certain how natural, how
life. own

feelings retentive to that found, she reasoning, her all with Alas!
nothing. than more little be may years eight

to wishing like this Was read? be to sentiments his were how Now,
folly the for herself hating was she moment next the And her? avoid
question. the asked which

have not might wisdom utmost her perhaps which question other one On
Miss the after for, suspense; all spared soon was she prevented,
had she Cottage the at visit their finished and returned had Musgroves
Mary:-- from information spontaneous this

so was he though Anne, you, by gallant very not is Wentworth "Captain
they when you, of thought he what him asked Henrietta me. to attentive
known have not should he altered so were 'You said, he and away, went
again.'" you

way, common a in sister's her respect her make to feelings no had Mary
peculiar any inflicting being of unsuspicious perfectly was she but
wound.

deep silent, in submitted, fully Anne knowledge." his beyond "Altered
for revenge, no take could she and so, was it Doubtless mortification.
acknowledged already had She worse. the for not or altered, not was he
of think him let differently, think not could she and herself, to it
and youth her destroyed had which years the No: would. he as her
no in look, open manly, glowing, more a him given only had bloom
same the seen had She advantages. personal his lessening respect
Wentworth. Frederick

words were These again!" her known have not should he that altered "So
that rejoice to began soon she Yet her. with dwell but not could which
allayed they tendency; sobering of were They them. heard had she
happier. her make must consequently and composed, they agitation;

but them, like something or words, such used had Wentworth Frederick
had He her. to round carried be would they that idea an without
had appeal, of moment first the in and altered, wretchedly her thought
him used had She Elliot. Anne forgiven not had He felt. he as spoken
a shewn had she worse, and him; disappointed and deserted ill,
confident decided, own his which so, doing in character of feebleness
It others. oblige to up him given had She endure. not could temper
and weakness been had It over-persuasion. of effect the been had
timidity.

woman a seen never had and her, to attached warmly most been had He
natural some from except but, equal; her thought he whom since
Her again. her meeting of desire no had he curiosity, of sensation
ever. for gone was him with power

on turned being and rich, was He marry. to object his now was It
properly be could he as soon as settle to intended fully shore,
the all with love in fall to ready round, looking actually tempted;
heart a had He allow. could taste quick a and head clear a which speed
in heart, a it; catch could they if Musgroves, Miss the of either for
Anne excepting way, his in came who woman young pleasing any for short,
his to said he when exception, secret only his was This Elliot.
suppositions:-- her to answer in sister,

Anybody match. foolish a make to ready quite Sophia, am, I here "Yes,
beauty, little A asking. for me have may thirty and fifteen between
lost a am I and navy, the to compliments few a and smiles, few a and
society no had has who sailor, a for enough be this not Should man.
nice?" him make to women among

spoke eye proud bright His contradicted. be to knew, she it, said He
his of out not was Elliot Anne and nice; was he that conviction the
to wish should he woman the described seriously more he when thoughts,
first the made manner," of sweetness with mind, strong "A with. meet
description. the of last the and

I inferior little a "Something he. said want," I woman the is "That
fool, a am I If much. be not must it but with, up put course of shall
than more subject the on thought have I for indeed, fool a be shall I
men." most



8 Chapter


the in repeatedly were Elliot Anne and Wentworth Captain time this From
Mr at together company in dining soon were They circle. same
aunt his supply longer no could state boy's little the for Musgrove's,
beginning the but was this and herself; absenting for pretence a with
meetings. other and dinings other of

the to brought be must renewed be to were feelings former Whether
of recollection the to brought be undoubtedly must times former proof;
engagement their of year the to; reverted be but not could they each;
descriptions or narratives little the in him, by named be but not could
his him, qualified profession His forth. called conversation which
"That six;" year the in was "That and talk; to him, lead disposition
course the in occurred six," year the in sea to went I before happened
not did voice his though and together: spent they evening first the of
wandering eye his suppose to reason no had she though and falter,
her from impossibility, utter the felt Anne spoke, he while her towards
any remembrance by unvisited be could he that mind, his of knowledge
of association immediate same the be must There herself. than more
pain. equal of be to it conceiving from far very was she though thought,

the what but intercourse no together, conversation no had They
nothing! Now other! each to much so Once required. civility commonest
the filling now party large the all of when time, a been had There
to difficult most it found have would they Uppercross, at drawing-room
Admiral of perhaps, exception, the With another. one to speak to cease
could (Anne happy, and attached particularly seemed who Croft, Mrs and
could there couples), married the among even exceptions other no allow
so feelings no similar, so tastes no open, so hearts two no been have
strangers; as were they Now beloved. so countenances no unison, in
It acquainted. become never could they for strangers, than worse nay,
estrangement. perpetual a was

mind. same the discerned and voice, same the heard she talked, he When
the throughout matters naval all of ignorance general very a was There
Miss two the by especially and questioned, much very was he and party;
the to as him, for but eyes any have to hardly seemed who Musgroves,
and &c., hours, food, regulations, daily board, on living of manner
accommodation of degree the learning at accounts, his at surprise their
pleasant some him from drew practicable, was which arrangement and
been had too she when days early the of Anne reminded which ridicule,
be to sailors supposing of accused been had too she and ignorant,
if it dress to cook any or eat, to anything without board on living
use. to fork and knife any or wait, to servant any or were, there

Mrs of whisper a by roused was she thinking, and listening thus From
saying-- help not could regrets, fond by overcome who, Musgrove's

dare I son, poor my spare to Heaven pleased had it if Anne, Miss "Ah!
time." this by another such just been have would he say

Musgrove Mrs while kindly, listened and smile, a suppressed Anne
therefore, minutes, few a for and more; little a heart her relieved
others. the of conversation the with pace keep not could

she again, course natural its take attention her let could she When
navy own (their List Navy the fetching just Musgroves Miss the found
down sitting and Uppercross), at been ever had that first the list,
the out finding of view professed the with it, over pore to together
commanded. had Wentworth Captain that ships

Asp." the for look will we remember; I Asp, the was first "Your

the was I up. broken and out worn Quite there. her find not will "You
fit Reported then. service for fit Hardly her. commanded who man last
West the to off sent was I so and two, or year a for service home for
Indies."

amazement. all looked girls The

with then, and now themselves "entertain continued, he Admiralty," "The
employed. be to fit not ship a in sea, to men hundred few a sending
that thousands the among and for; provide to many great a have they But
to them for impossible is it not, as bottom the to go well as just may
missed." least be may who set very the distinguish

talk! fellows young these stuff "what Admiral, the cried phoo!" "Phoo!
built old an For day. her in Asp the than sloop better a was Never
knows He her! get to fellow Lucky equal. her see not would you sloop,
at her for applying himself than men better twenty been have must there
more no with soon, so anything get to fellow Lucky time. same the
his." than interest

Wentworth, Captain replied you;" assure I Admiral, luck, my felt "I
can you as appointment my with satisfied well as was "I seriously.
a sea; at be to time that at me with object great a was It desire.
something." doing be to wanted I object, great very

for ashore do you like fellow young a should What did. you sure be "To
be to wants soon he wife, a not had man a If together? year a half
again." afloat

been have must you vexed "how Louisa, cried Wentworth," Captain "But,
you." given had they thing old an what see to Asp, the to came you when

smiling. he, said day;" that before was she what well pretty knew "I
the to as have would you than make to discoveries more no had "I
about lent seen had you which pelisse, old any of strength and fashion
which and remember, could you since ever acquaintance your half among
dear a was she Ah! yourself. to lent is day, wet very some on last, at
knew I would. she knew I wanted. I that all did She me. to Asp old
be would she that or together, bottom the to go either should we that
time the all weather foul of days two had never I and me; of making the
very be to enough privateers taking after and her; in sea at was I
autumn, next the home passage my in luck good the had I entertaining,
into her brought I wanted. I frigate French very the with in fall to
hours six been not had We luck. of instance another here and Plymouth;
nights, and days four lasted which on, came gale a when Sound, the in
touch our time; the half in Asp old poor for done have would which and
condition. our improved much having not Nation Great the with
gallant a been have only should I and later, hours Four-and-twenty
the of corner one at paragraph small a in Wentworth, Captain
thought have would nobody sloop, a only in lost being and newspapers;
Miss the but alone; herself to were shudderings Anne's me." about
exclamations their in sincere, were they as open as be could Musgroves
horror. and pity of

if as voice, low a in Musgrove, Mrs said suppose," I then, so "And
met he there and Laconia, the to away went he then "so aloud, thinking
ask "do her), to him (beckoning dear," my Charles, boy. poor our with
I brother. poor your with met first he was it where Wentworth Captain
forgot." always

at ill left been had Dick know. I mother, Gibraltar, at was "It
Captain to captain former his from recommendation a with Gibraltar,
Wentworth."

of afraid be not need he Wentworth, Captain tell Charles, but, "Oh!
to pleasure a rather be would it for me, before Dick poor mentioning
friend." good a such by of talked him hear

case, the of probabilities the of mindful more somewhat being Charles,
away. walked and reply, in nodded only

could Wentworth Captain and Laconia; the for hunting now were girls The
his into volume precious the taking of pleasure the himself deny not
little the aloud read more once and trouble, the them save to hands own
class, non-commissioned present and rate, and name her of statement
man friends best the of one been had too she that it over observing
had. ever

made I fast How Laconia! the had I when days pleasant were those "Ah!
together cruise lovely a such had I and mine of friend A her. in money
he much how know You sister! Harville, Poor Islands. Western the off
I fellow. Excellent wife. a had He myself. than worse money: wanted
her for much so all, it felt He happiness. his forget never shall
the still had I when summer, next the again him for wished I sake.
Mediterranean." the in luck same

us, for day lucky a was "it Musgrove, Mrs said Sir," sure, am I "And
what forget never shall We ship. that into captain put were you when
did." you

in only hearing Wentworth, Captain and low; speak her made feelings Her
thoughts, his near all at Musgrove Dick having not probably and part,
more. for waiting if as and suspense, in rather looked

poor of thinking is "mamma girls; the of one whispered brother," "My
Richard."

steady, so grown was "he Musgrove; Mrs continued fellow!" dear "Poor
Ah! care! your under was he while correspondent, excellent an such and
assure I you. left never had he if thing, happy a been have would it
you." left ever he sorry very are we Wentworth, Captain you,

this at face Wentworth's Captain in expression momentary a was There
handsome his of curl and eye, bright his of glance certain a speech,
Musgrove's Mrs in sharing of instead that Anne, convinced which mouth,
get to pains some at been probably had he son, her to as wishes, kind
to self-amusement of indulgence an transient too was it but him; of rid
another in herself; than less him understood who any by detected be
instantly almost and serious, and collected perfectly was he moment
were Musgrove Mrs and she which on sofa, the to up coming afterwards
with conversation into entered and latter, the by place a took sitting,
and sympathy much so with it doing son, her about voice, low a in her,
was that all for consideration kindest the shewed as grace, natural
feelings. parent's the in unabsurd and real

readily most had Musgrove Mrs for sofa, same the on actually were They
no was It Musgrove. Mrs by only divided were they him; for room made
comfortable, a of was Musgrove Mrs indeed. barrier, insignificant
good express to nature by fitted more infinitely size, substantial
the while and sentiment; and tenderness than humour, good and cheer
considered be may face, pensive and form, slender Anne's of agitations
some allowed be should Wentworth Captain screened, completely very as
fat large her to attended he which with self-command the for credit
for. cared had nobody alive whom son, a of destiny the over sighings

necessary no certainly have sorrow mental and size Personal
deep in be to right a good as has figure bulky large A proportions.
fair But, world. the in limbs of set graceful most the as affliction,
will reason which conjunctions, unbecoming are there fair, not or
will ridicule tolerate--which cannot taste vain--which in patronize
seize.

room the about turns refreshing three or two taking after Admiral, The
came now wife, his by order to called being him, behind hands his with
might he what of observation any without and Wentworth, Captain to up
with-- began thoughts, own his of only thinking interrupting, be

you Frederick, spring, last Lisbon, at later week a been had you "If
her and Grierson Mary Lady to passage a give to asked been have would
daughters."

then." later week a not was I glad am I I? "Should

himself; defended He gallantry. of want his for him abused Admiral The
on ladies any admit willingly never would he that professing though
few a which visit, a or ball, a for excepting his, of ship a board
comprehend. might hours

gallantry of want no from is "this he, said myself," know I if "But,
all with is, it impossible how feeling from rather is It them. towards
on accommodations the make to sacrifices, one's all and efforts, one's
gallantry, of want no be can There have. to ought women as such board
high, comfort personal every to women of claims the rating in Admiral,
see to or board, on women of hear to hate I do. I what is this and
family a convey ever shall command my under ship no and board; on them
it." help can I if anywhere, ladies of

him. upon sister his brought This

idle you.--All of it believe cannot I But Frederick! "Oh!
house best the in as board, on comfortable as be may refinement!--Women
and women, most as board on much as lived have I believe I England. in
I man-of-war. a of accommodations the to superior nothing know I
at even me, about indulgence an or comfort a not have I declare
in had always I what "beyond Anne), to bow kind a (with Hall," Kellynch
altogether." five been have they and in; lived have I ships the of most

with living were "You brother. her replied purpose," the to "Nothing
board." on woman only the were and husband, your

and cousin, her sister, her Harville, Mrs brought yourself, you, "But
this was Where Plymouth. to Portsmouth from round children, three
then?" yours of gallantry of sort extraordinary superfine,

brother any assist would I Sophia. friendship, my in merged "All
Harville's of anything bring would I and could, I that wife officer's
did I that imagine not do But it. wanted he if end, world's the from
itself." in evil an it feel not

comfortable." perfectly all were they it, upon "Depend

of number a Such perhaps. that for better the them like not might "I
board." on comfortable be to right no have children and women

would what Pray, idly. quite talking are you Frederick, dear "My
one to conveyed be to want often who wives, sailors' poor us of become
feelings?" your had everybody if husbands, our after another, or port

all and Harville Mrs taking my prevent not did see, you feelings, "My
Plymouth." to family her

if as and gentleman, fine a like so talking you hear to hate I "But
of none We creatures. rational of instead ladies, fine all were women
days." our all water smooth in be to expect us

sing will he wife, a got had he "when Admiral, the said dear," my "Ah!
live to luck good the have we if married, is he When tune. different a
many great a and I, and you as do him see shall we war, another to
that anybody to thankful very him have shall We done. have others,
wife." his him bring will

shall." we that "Ay,

people married once "When Wentworth. Captain cried done," have I "Now
when differently, very think will you with,--'Oh! me attack to begin
say they then and not;' shall I 'No, say, only can I married.' are you
it." of end an is there and will,' you 'Yes, again,

away. moved and up got He

Musgrove Mrs said ma'am!" been, have must you traveller great a "What
Croft. Mrs to

many though marriage; my of years fifteen the in ma'am well, "Pretty
have and times, four Atlantic the crossed have I more. done have women
besides once; only and again, back and Indies, East the to once been
Gibraltar. and Lisbon, and Cork, home: about places different in being
West the in was never and Streights, the beyond went never I But
Indies." West the know, you Bahama, or Bermuda call not do We Indies.

accuse not could she dissent; in say to word a not had Musgrove Mrs
her of course whole the in anything them called ever having of herself
life.

can nothing "that Croft, Mrs pursued ma'am," you, assure do I "And
the of know, you speak, I man-of-war; a of accommodations the exceed
more are you course, of frigate, a to come you When rates. higher
of one in happy perfectly be may woman reasonable any though confined;
been has life my of part happiest the that say, safely can I and them;
was there know, you together, were we While ship. a board on spent
with blessed been always have I God! Thank feared. be to nothing
little A me. with disagrees climate no and health, excellent
but sea, to going of hours twenty-four first the always disordered
really ever I time only The afterwards. was sickness what knew never
myself fancied ever I that time only the mind, or body in suffered
by passed I that winter the was danger, of ideas any had or unwell,
North the in was then) Croft (Captain Admiral the when Deal, at myself
of manner all had and time, that at fright perpetual in lived I Seas.
I when or myself, with do to what knowing not from complaints imaginary
nothing together, be could we as long as but next; him from hear should
inconvenience." smallest the with met never I and me, ailed ever

opinion, your of quite am I yes! oh indeed, Yes, sure. be to "Aye,
bad so nothing is "There answer. hearty Musgrove's Mrs was Croft," Mrs
for is, it what know I opinion. your of quite am I separation. a as
are they when glad so am I and assizes, the attends always Musgrove Mr
again." back safe is he and over,

offered Anne proposed, being its On dancing. with ended evening The
with fill sometimes would eyes her though and usual; as services, her
be to glad extremely was she instrument, the at sat she as tears
unobserved. be to but return in nothing desired and employed,

than spirits higher in seemed one no and party, joyous merry, a was It
him elevate to thing every had he that felt She Wentworth. Captain
of attention the especially and deference, and attention general which
the of females the Hayters, Miss The do. could women, young the all
the to admitted apparently were mentioned, already cousins of family
they Louisa, and Henrietta for as and him; with love in being of honour
continued the but nothing that him, by occupied entirely so seemed both
have could themselves between good-will perfect most the of appearance
a were he If rivals. decided not were they that credible it made
could who admiration, eager such universal, such by spoilt little
wonder?

fingers her while Anne, occupied which thoughts the of some were These
together, hour an half for proceeding work, at mechanically were
that felt she Once consciousness. without and error, without equally
perhaps, features, altered her observing herself, at looking was he
charmed once had which face the of ruins the them in trace to trying
hardly was she her; of spoken have must he that knew she once and him;
his of sure was she then but answer; the heard she till it, of aware
answer The danced? never Elliot Miss whether partner his asked having
rather had She dancing. up given quite has she never; no; "Oh, was,
her. to spoke he too, Once, playing." of tired never is She play.
sat had he and over, being dancing the on instrument the left had She
Miss the give to wished he which air an out make to try to down
the of part that to returned she Unintentionally of. idea an Musgroves
politeness-- studied with said, rising, instantly and, her, saw he room;

she though and seat;" your is this madam, pardon, your beg "I
induced be to not was he negative, decided a with back drew immediately
again. down sit to

cold His speeches. and looks such of more for wish not did Anne
anything. than worse were grace, ceremonious his politeness,



9 Chapter


as long as stay to home, a to as Kellynch to come was Wentworth Captain
fraternal Admiral's the of object the thoroughly as being liked, he
to arriving, first on intended, had He wife's. his of as kindness
in settled brother the visit and Shropshire, into soon very proceed
this put to him induced Uppercross of attractions the but country, that
of and flattery, of and friendliness, of much so was There off.
so were old the there; reception his in bewitching most everything
to resolve but not could he that agreeable, so young the hospitable,
of perfections and charms the all take and was, he where remain
longer. little a credit upon wife Edward's

could Musgroves The day. every almost him with Uppercross soon was It
the in particularly come, to he than invite to ready more be hardly
Mrs and Admiral the for home, at companion no had he when morning,
in themselves interesting together, doors of out generally were Croft
about dawdling and sheep, their and grass, their possessions, new their
gig, a in out driving or person, third a to endurable not way a in
establishment. their to added lately

the among Wentworth Captain of opinion one but been had there Hitherto
admiration warm unvarying, was It dependencies. their and Musgroves
established, than more not was footing intimate this but everywhere;
deal good a be to them, among returned Hayter Charles certain a when
way. the in much very Wentworth Captain think to and it, by disturbed

amiable, very a and cousins, the all of eldest the was Hayter Charles
a been had there Henrietta and whom between man, young pleasing
Wentworth's Captain to previous attachment of appearance considerable
the in curacy a having and orders; in was He introduction.
father's his at lived required, not was residence where neighbourhood,
had home from absence short A Uppercross. from miles two only house,
period, critical this at attentions his by unguarded one fair his left
manners, altered very finding of pain the had he back came he when and
Wentworth. Captain seeing of and

but money, had each had They sisters. were Hayter Mrs and Musgrove Mrs
of degree their in difference material a made had marriages their
was it but own, his of property some had Hayter Mr consequence.
were Musgroves the while and Musgrove's; Mr with compared insignificant
would, Hayters young the country, the in society of class first the in
living, of way unpolished and retired, inferior, parents' their from
at class any in hardly been have education, defective own their and
course of son eldest this Uppercross, with connexion their for but all,
was who and gentleman, a and scholar a be to chosen had who excepted,
rest. the all to manners and cultivation in superior very

no being there terms, excellent on been always had families two The
a such only and other, the on envy no and side, one on pride
them made as Musgroves, Miss the in superiority of consciousness
Henrietta to attentions Charles's cousins. their improve to pleased
disapprobation. any without mother and father her by observed been had
him,"-- liked Henrietta if but her; for match great a be not would "It
him. like to seem did Henrietta and

but came; Wentworth Captain before herself, so thought fully Henrietta
forgotten. much very been had Charles Cousin time that from

yet as was Wentworth Captain by preferred was sisters two the of Which
was Henrietta reached. observation Anne's as far as doubtful, quite
not knew she and spirits; higher the had Louisa prettiest, the perhaps
most were character lively more the or gentle more the whether now,
him. attract to likely

entire an from or little, seeing from either Musgrove, Mrs and Mr
the all of and daughters, their both of discretion the in confidence
its take to everything leave to seemed them, near came who men young
remark or solicitude of appearance smallest the not was There chance.
Cottage: the at different was it but Mansion-house; the in them about
and wonder; and speculate to disposed more were there couple young the
Miss the in times five or four above been not had Wentworth Captain
when reappeared, just but had Hayter Charles and company, Musgroves'
to as sister, and brother her of opinions the to listen to had Anne
for Mary Louisa, for it gave Charles best. liked one the was which
be could either marry him have to that agreeing quite but Henrietta,
delightful. extremely

he what from and life; his in man pleasanter a seen never "had Charles
had he that sure very was say, himself Wentworth Captain heard once had
a was Here war. the by pounds thousand twenty than less made not
might what of chance the be would there which, besides once; at fortune
as was Wentworth Captain sure was he and war; future any in done be
it Oh! navy. the in officer any as himself distinguish to man a likely
sisters." his of either for match capital a be would

to rise should he If me! "Dear Mary. replied would," it word my "Upon
'Lady baronet! a made be ever should he If honours! great very any
for indeed, thing, noble a be would That well. very sounds Wentworth'
not would Henrietta and then, me of place take would She Henrietta!
new a but be would It Wentworth! Lady and Frederick Sir that. dislike
creations." new your of much think never I and however, creation,

very the on preferred one the Henrietta think to best Mary suited It
an put see to wished she pretensions whose Hayter, Charles of account
thought and Hayters, the upon decidedly very down looked She to. end
between connection existing the have to misfortune a quite be would it
children. her and herself for sad renewed--very families the

for match fit a all at him think cannot "I she, said know," "You
made, have Musgroves the which alliances the considering and Henrietta;
woman young any think not do I away. herself throw to right no has she
inconvenient and disagreeable be may that choice a make to right a has
to connections bad giving be and family, her of part principal the to
Charles is who pray, And, them. to used been not have who those
Miss for match improper most A curate. country a but Nothing Hayter?
Uppercross." of Musgrove

having besides for here; her with agree not would however, husband, Her
saw he and son, eldest an was Hayter Charles cousin, his for regard a
himself. son eldest an as things

"It answer. his therefore was Mary," nonsense, talking are you "Now
fair very a has Charles but Henrietta, for match great a be not would
in Bishop the from something getting of Spicers, the through chance,
he that remember, to please will you and two; or year a of course the
pretty very into steps he dies, uncle my whenever son; eldest the is
and hundred two than less not is Winthrop at estate The property.
best the of some is which Taunton, near farm the besides acres, fifty
would Charles but them of any that you, grant I country. the in land
he be; not could it indeed and Henrietta, for match shocking very a be
good-natured, very a is he but possible; be could that one only the is
he hands, his into comes Winthrop whenever and fellow; a of sort good
different very a in live and it, of place of sort different a make will
contemptible a be never will he property, that with and way; of sort
than worse do might Henrietta no; No, property. freehold man--good,
Captain get can Louisa and him, has she if and Hayter; Charles marry
satisfied." well very be shall I Wentworth,

he as soon as Anne, to Mary cried pleases," he what say may "Charles
marry Henrietta have to shocking be would it "but room, the of out was
and me; for worse still and her, for thing bad very a Hayter; Charles
soon may Wentworth Captain that wished be to much very is it therefore
he that doubt little very have I and head, her of out quite him put
wish I yesterday. Hayter Charles of notice any hardly took She has.
Wentworth's Captain to as And behaviour. her see to there been had you
he for so; say to nonsense is it Henrietta, as well as Louisa liking
so is Charles But best. the deal great a Henrietta like does certainly
might you then for yesterday, us with been had you wish I positive!
did, I as thought have would you sure am I and us; between decided have
me." against it give to determined been had you unless

things these all when occasion the been had Musgrove's Mr at dinner A
the under home, at staid had she but Anne; by seen been have should
indisposition of return some and own, her of headache a of plea mixed
Wentworth; Captain avoiding of only thought had She Charles. little in
the to added now was umpire as to appealed being from escape an but
evening. quiet a of advantages

that consequence more of it deemed she views, Wentworth's Captain to As
the endangering be to not enough early mind own his know should he
he that than honour, own his impeaching or sister, either of happiness
of Either Henrietta. to Louisa or Louisa, to Henrietta prefer should
good-humoured affectionate, an him make probability, all in would, them
be must which delicacy had she Hayter, Charles to regard With wife.
a and woman, young well-meaning a in conduct of lightness any by pained
if but occasioned; it sufferings the of any in sympathize to heart
the feelings, her of nature the in mistaken herself found Henrietta
soon. too understood be not could alteration

his in him mortify and disquiet to much with met had Hayter Charles
wholly so be to him for regard a old too had She behaviour. cousin's
and hope, past every extinguish meetings two in might as estranged
there but Uppercross: from away keep to but do to nothing him leave
Captain as man a such when alarming, very became as change a such was
absent been had He cause. probable the as regarded be to was Wentworth
even interested, her left had parted, they when and Sundays, two only
his quitting soon of prospect his in wishes, his of height the to
then had It instead. Uppercross of that obtaining and curacy, present
who rector, the Shirley, Dr that heart, her nearest object the seemed
duties the all discharging zealously been had years forty than more for
should them, of many for infirm too growing now was but office, his of
as quite curacy his make should curate; a engaging on fixed quite be
of promise the Hayter Charles give should and afford, could he as good
of instead Uppercross, to only come to having his of advantage The it.
better a respect, every in having, his of way; another miles six going
Dr good dear, of and Shirley, Dr dear their to belonging his of curacy;
get longer no could he which duty the from relieved being Shirley's
to even deal, great a been had fatigue, injurious most without through
came he When Henrietta. to everything almost been had but Louisa,
not could Louisa by. gone was business the of zeal the alas! back,
held just had he which conversation a of account his to all at listen
Captain for out looking window, a at was she Shirley: Dr with
to attention divided a only best at had Henrietta even and Wentworth;
solicitude and doubt former the all forgotten have to seemed and give,
negotiation. the of

it; have would you thought always I but indeed: glad very am I "Well,
you short, that--in me to appear not did It sure. you thought always I
promise. his secured had you and curate, a have must Shirley Dr know,
Louisa?" coming, he Is

Anne which at Musgroves, the at dinner the after soon very morning, One
at drawing-room the into walked Wentworth Captain present, been not had
Charles, invalid little the and herself only were where Cottage, the
sofa. the on lying was who

deprived Elliot, Anne with alone almost himself finding of surprise The
say, only could and started, he composure: usual their of manners his
I me told Musgrove Mrs here: been had Musgroves Miss the thought "I
recollect to window the to walked he before here," them find should
behave. to ought he how feel and himself,

few a in down be will they sister: my with stairs up are "They
that confusion the all in reply, Anne's been had say," dare I moments,
do and come to her called not had child the if and natural; was
moment, next the room the of out been have would she him, for something
herself. as well as Wentworth Captain released and

"I saying, politely and calmly after and window; the at continued He
silent. was better," is boy little the hope

satisfy to there remain and sofa, the by down kneel to obliged was She
very her to when, minutes, few a continued they thus and patient; her
little the crossing person other some heard she satisfaction, great
the of master the see to head, her turning on hoped, She vestibule.
matters making for calculated less much one be to proved it but house;
sight the by pleased better all at not probably Hayter, easy--Charles
of sight the by been had Wentworth Captain than Wentworth Captain of
Anne.

The down? sit not you Will do? you do "How say, to attempted only She
presently." here be will others

not apparently window, his from came however, Wentworth, Captain
to end an put soon Hayter Charles but conversation; for ill-disposed
the up taking and table, the near himself seating by attempts his
window. his to returned Wentworth Captain and newspaper;

remarkable a boy, younger The addition. another brought minute Another
for opened door the got having old, years two of child, forward stout,
and them, among appearance determined his made without, one some by him
his in put and on, going was what see to sofa the to straight went
away. giving be might that good anything to claim

his as and play; some have only could he eat, to nothing being There
fasten to began he brother, sick his tease him let not would aunt
was she as busy that, way a such in knelt, she as her, upon himself
ordered, him, to spoke She off. him shake not could she Charles, about
him push to contrive did she Once vain. in insisted and entreated,
back her upon getting in pleasure greater the had boy the but away,
directly. again

extremely are You moment. this down "get she, said "Walter,"
you." with angry very am I troublesome.

Do bid? are you as do not you do "why Hayter, Charles cried "Walter,"
cousin to come Walter, me, to Come speak? aunt your hear you not
Charles."

stir. Walter did bit a not But

being of state the in herself found she however, moment, another In
bent had he though her, from him taking was one some him; from released
unfastened were hands sturdy little his that much, so head her down
knew she before away, borne resolutely was he and neck, her around from
it. done had Wentworth Captain that

She speechless. perfectly her made discovery the on sensations Her
Charles, little over hang only could She him. thank even not could
her to forward stepping in kindness His feelings. disordered most with
little the passed, had it which in silence the manner, the relief,
her on forced soon conviction the with circumstance, the of particulars
to meant he that child, the with making studiously was he noise the by
her that testify to sought rather and thanks, her hearing avoid
of confusion a such produced wants, his of last the was conversation
from, recover not could she as agitation, painful very but varying,
make to Musgroves Miss the and Mary of entrance the by enabled till
could She room. the leave and cares, their to patient little her over
and loves the watching of opportunity an been have might It stay. not
stay could she but altogether; now were four--they the of jealousies
well not was Hayter Charles that evident was It it. of none for
his of impression strong a had She Wentworth. Captain towards inclined
Wentworth's Captain after voice, of tone vext a in said, having
to not you told I Walter; me, minded have to ought "You interference,
Captain that regretting his comprehend could and aunt;" your teaze
neither But himself. done have to ought he what do should Wentworth
her, interest could feelings, anybody's nor feelings, Hayter's Charles
of ashamed was She own. her arranged better little a had she till
a such by overcome so nervous, so being of ashamed quite herself,
solitude of application long a required it and was, it so but trifle;
her. recover to reflection and



10 Chapter


occur. to fail not could observations her making of opportunities Other
enough often together four the all with company in been soon had Anne
home, at much as acknowledge to wise too though opinion, an have to
for wife; nor husband neither satisfied have would it knew she where
not could she favourite, the rather be to Louisa considered she while
and memory from judge to dare might she as far as think, but
They either. with love in not was Wentworth Captain that experience,
little a was It love. not was it there yet him; with love in more were
with love in end must, probably might, it but admiration; of fever
Henrietta yet and slighted, being of aware seemed Hayter Charles some.
for longed Anne them. between divided being of air the sometimes had
of and about, were they what all them to representing of power the
She to. themselves exposing were they evils the of some out pointing
her to satisfaction highest the was It any. to guile attribute not did
was he pain the of aware least the in not Wentworth Captain believe to
manner. his in triumph pitiful no triumph, no was There occasioning.
of claims any of thought never and heard, never probably, had, He
(for attentions the accepting in wrong only was He Hayter. Charles
once. at women young two of word) the be must accepting

the quit to seemed Hayter Charles however, struggle, short a After
a Uppercross; to once coming his without passed had days Three field.
to invitation regular one refused even had He change. decided most
some with Musgrove Mr by occasion the on found been having and dinner;
be not could all sure were Musgrove Mrs and Mr him, before books large
death. to himself studying his of faces, grave with talked, and right,
dismissal positive a received had he that belief and hope Mary's was It
of dependence constant the under lived husband her and Henrietta, from
was Hayter Charles that feel only could Anne to-morrow. him seeing
wise.

Wentworth Captain and Musgrove Charles time this about morning, One
were Cottage the in sisters the as together, a-shooting gone being
sisters the by window the at visited were they work, at quietly sitting
Mansion-house. the from

through came Musgroves Miss the and day, November fine very a was It
that say, to than purpose other no for stopped and grounds, little the
could Mary concluded therefore and walk, long a take to going were they
some with replied, immediately Mary when and them; with go to like not
like should I yes, "Oh, walker, good a supposed being not at jealousy
felt Anne walk;" long a of fond very am I much, very you join to
what precisely was it that girls, two the of looks the by persuaded,
the which necessity of sort the again admired and wish, not did they
be to being everything of produce, to seemed habits family
however together, done be to being everything and communicated,
but going, from Mary dissuade to tried She inconvenient. and undesired
Miss the accept to best it thought case, the being that and vain; in
as likewise, go to herself to invitation cordial more much Musgroves'
the lessening and sister, her with back turning in useful be might she
own. their of plan any in interference

long a like not should I suppose should they why imagine cannot "I
always is "Everybody stairs. up went she as Mary, said walk,"
been have not would they yet and walker; good a not am I that supposing
this in come people When them. join to refused had we if pleased,
no?" say one can how us, ask to purpose on manner

taken had They returned. gentlemen the off, setting were they as Just
early. back them sent and sport, their spoilt had who dog, young a out
ready exactly therefore, were, spirits, and strength, and time Their
have Anne Could pleasure. with it into entered they and walk, this for
some from but, home; at staid have would she junction, a such foreseen
too was it that now fancied she curiosity, and interest of feelings
the in together forward set six whole the and retract, to late
the considered evidently who Musgroves, Miss the by chosen direction
guidance. their under as walk

the where and anybody; of way the in be to not was, object Anne's
keep to necessary, separations many made fields the across paths narrow
from arise must walk the in pleasure Her sister. and brother her with
year the of smiles last the of view the from day, the and exercise the
to repeating from and hedges, withered and leaves, tawny the upon
of extant descriptions poetical thousand the of few some herself
mind the on influence inexhaustible and peculiar of season that autumn,
poet, every from drawn had which season that tenderness, and taste of
of lines some or description, at attempt some read, being of worthy
like such in possible as much as mind her occupied She feeling.
reach within when that possible, not was it but quotations; and musings
Musgroves, Miss the of either with conversation Wentworth's Captain of
remarkable. very little caught she yet it; hear to try not should she
intimate an on persons, young any as such chat, lively mere was It
with than Louisa with engaged more was He into. fall might footing,
her than notice his for forward more put certainly Louisa Henrietta.
one was there and increase, to appeared distinction This sister.
of praises many the of one After her. struck which Louisa's of speech
Wentworth Captain forth, bursting continually were which day, the
added:--

to meant They sister! my and Admiral the for weather glorious "What
of some from them hail may we perhaps morning; this drive long a take
I country. the of side this into coming of talked They hills. these
very happen does it Oh! to-day. upset will they whereabouts wonder
as would she it; of nothing makes sister my but you; assure I often,
not." as out tossed be lieve

were it if "but Louisa, cried know," I it, of most the make You "Ah!
man, a loved I If place. her in same the just do should I so, really
should nothing him, with be always would I Admiral, the loves she as
driven than him, by overturned be rather would I and us, separate ever
else." anybody by safely

enthusiasm. with spoken was It

there And you!" honour "I tone; same the catching he, cried you?" "Had
while. little a for them between silence was

sweet The again. quotation a into fall immediately not could Anne
sonnet, tender some unless by, put while a for were autumn of scenes
declining with year, declining the of analogy apt the with fraught
gone all spring, and hope, and youth of images the and happiness,
they as say, to herself roused She memory. her blessed together,
to ways the of one this not "Is path, another into order by struck
her. answered nobody least, at or, heard, nobody But Winthrop?"

be to sometimes are, men young environs--for its or however, Winthrop,
after and destination; their home--was near about strolling with, met
the where enclosures, large through ascent gradual of mile half another
counteracting farmer the spoke path made fresh the and work, at ploughs
again, spring have to meaning and despondence, poetical of sweets the
parted which hill, considerable most the of summit the gained they
latter, the of view full a commanded soon and Winthrop, and Uppercross
side. other the on hill the of foot the at

them; before stretched was dignity, without and beauty without Winthrop,
and barns the by in hemmed and low, standing house, indifferent an
farm-yard. a of buildings

idea! no had I declare I Winthrop. is here me! "Bless exclaimed, Mary
tired." excessively am I back; turn better had we think I now, Well

walking Charles cousin no seeing and ashamed, and conscious Henrietta,
Mary as do to ready was gate, any against leaning or path, any along
Louisa cried no!" "No, and Musgrove, Charles said "No!" but wished;
the arguing be to seemed aside, sister her taking and eagerly, more
warmly. matter

resolution his declaring decidedly very was meanwhile, the in Charles,
evidently, very and near; so was he that now aunt, his on calling of
this But too. go to wife his induce to trying fearfully, more though
when and strength; her shewed lady the which on points the of one was
at hour an of quarter a herself resting of advantage the recommended he
no, "Oh! answered, resolutely she tired, so felt she as Winthrop,
any than harm more her do would again hill that up walking indeed!
manner and look her short, in and, good;" her do could down sitting
not. would she go that declared,

consultations, and debates of sort these of succession little a After
and he that sisters, two his and Charles between settled was it
and aunt their see to minutes, few a for down run just should Henrietta
the of top the at them for waited party the of rest the while cousins,
she as and, plan; the of arranger principal the seemed Louisa hill.
Henrietta, to talking still hill, the down them, with way little a went
saying and her, around scornfully looking of opportunity the took Mary
Wentworth-- Captain to

I you, assure I But, connexions! such having unpleasant, very is "It
life." my in twice above house the in been never have

smile, assenting artificial, an than answer, other no received She
Anne which away, turned he as glance, contemptuous a by followed
of. meaning the knew perfectly

Louisa spot: cheerful a was remained, they where hill, the of brow The
step the on herself for seat comfortable a finding Mary, and returned;
stood all others the as long so satisfied well very was stile, a of
a for try to away, Wentworth Captain drew Louisa when but her; about
by gone were they and hedge-row, adjoining an in nuts of gleaning
she longer; no happy was Mary sound, and sight of out quite degrees
better much a got had Louisa sure was seat, own her with quarrelled
a for look to going from her prevent could nothing and somewhere,
them. see not could but gate, same the through turned She also. better
the under bank, sunny dry a on her, for seat nice a found Anne
spot some in being, still their of doubt no had she which in hedge-row,
was she do; not would it but moment, a for down sat Mary other. or
on go would she and else, somewhere seat better a found had Louisa sure
her. overtook she till

soon very she and down; sit to glad was herself, tired really Anne,
if as her, behind hedge-row, the in Louisa and Wentworth Captain heard
the down channel, of sort wild rough, the along back way their making
the was voice Louisa's near. drew they as speaking were They centre.
eager some of middle the in be to seemed She distinguished. first
was-- heard first Anne What speech.

frightened be should she that bear not could I go. her made I so, "And
from back turned be I would What! nonsense. such by visit the from
right, be to knew I that and do, to determined had I that thing a doing
may I person any of or person, a such of interference and airs the by
have I When persuaded. easily so being of idea no have I No, say?
have to entirely seemed Henrietta and it; made have I mind, my up made
near as was she yet, and to-day; Winthrop at call to hers up made
complaisance!" nonsensical of out up, it giving

you?" for but then, back turned have would "She

it." say to ashamed almost am I indeed. would "She

hints the After hand! at yours as mind a such have to her, for "Happy
last the observations, own my confirm but did which now, just gave you
no have to affect not need I him, with company in was I time
dutiful mere a than more that see I on. going is what of comprehension
her and him, betide woe and question; in was aunt your to visit morning
in placed are they when consequence, of things to comes it when too,
not have she if mind, of strength and fortitude requiring circumstances
this. as trifle a such in interference idle resist to enough resolution
of character the is yours but creature; amiable an is sister Your
happiness, or conduct her value you If see. I firmness, and decision
no this, But can. you as her into spirit own your of much as infuse
too of evil worst the is It doing. always been have you doubt,
be can it over influence no that character, a indecisive and yielding
durable; being impression good a of sure never are You on. depended
is Here firm. be happy be would who those Let it. sway may everybody
exemplify: "to bough, upper an from down one catching he, said nut," a
has strength, original with blessed which, nut, glossy beautiful a
spot weak a not puncture, a Not autumn. of storms the all outlived
so "while solemnity, playful with continued, he nut," This anywhere.
still is foot, under trodden been and fallen have brethren his of many
supposed be can nut hazel a that happiness the all of possession in
first tone--"My earnest former his to returning Then of." capable
If firm. be should they that is in, interested am I whom all for wish
life, of November her in happy and beautiful be would Musgrove Louisa
mind." of powers present her all cherish will she

if Anne surprised have would It unanswered. was and done, had He
such of words speech: a such answered readily have could Louisa
what imagine could She warmth! serious such with spoken interest,
should she lest move, to feared she herself, For feeling. was Louisa
protected holly rambling low of bush a remained, she While seen. be
hearing, her beyond were they Before on. moving were they and her,
again. spoke Louisa however,

does she "but she; said respects," many in enough good-natured is "Mary
Elliot pride--the and nonsense her by excessively, me provoke sometimes
so do We pride. Elliot the of much too deal great a has She pride.
he know you suppose I instead. Anne married had Charles that wish
Anne?" marry to wanted

said-- Wentworth Captain pause, moment's a After

him?" refused she that mean you "Do

certainly." yes; "Oh!

happen?" that did "When

time; the at school at were I and Henrietta for know, exactly not do "I
had she wish I Mary. married he before year a about believe I but
and better; deal great a her liked have all should We him. accepted
Russell's Lady friend great her was it think always mamma and papa
and learned be not might Charles think They not. did she that doing,
she therefore, that and Russell, Lady please to enough bookish
him." refuse to Anne persuaded

own Her more. no distinguished Anne and retreating, were sounds The
before from, recover to much had She fixed. her kept still emotions
absolutely not was fate proverbial listener's The move. could she
deal great a heard had she but herself, of evil no heard had she hers;
considered was character own her how saw She import. painful very of
feeling of degree that just been had there and Wentworth, Captain by
extreme her give must which manner his in her about curiosity and
agitation.

walked and found, having and Mary, after went she could, she as soon As
comfort some felt stile, the by station, former their to her with back
once and collected, afterwards immediately being party whole their in
silence and solitude the wanted spirits Her together. motion in more
give. could numbers only which

conjectured, be may as bringing, returned, Henrietta and Charles
not could Anne business the of minutiae The them. with Hayter Charles
to admitted seem not did Wentworth Captain even understand; to attempt
the on withdrawing a been had there that but here; confidence perfect
now were they that and lady's, the on relenting a and side, gentleman's
Henrietta doubt. a admit not did again, together be to glad very
Hayter pleased;--Charles well very but ashamed, little a looked
the from almost other each to devoted were they and happy: exceedingly
Uppercross. for forward setting all their of instant first

could nothing Wentworth; Captain for Louisa out marked now Everything
they where even or necessary, were divisions many where and plainer; be
In two. other the as much as nearly side by side walked they not, were
they all, for space ample was there where land, meadow of strip long a
of party that to and parties; distinct three forming divided, thus were
Anne complaisance, least and animation, least boasted which three the
tired was and Mary, and Charles joined She belonged. necessarily
in though Charles, but arm; other Charles's of glad very be to enough
had Mary wife. his with temper of out was her, with humour good very
consequence, the reap to now was and him, to disobliging herself shewn
cut to moment every almost arm her dropping his was consequence which
when and switch; his with hedge the in nettles some of heads the off
according ill-used, being her lament and it, of complain to began Mary
incommoded never was Anne while side, hedge the on being in custom, to
which weasel a after hunt to both of arms the dropped he other, the on
at along him get hardly could they and of, glance momentary a had he
all.

of end the at footpath, their which lane, a bordered meadow long This
exit, of gate the reached all had party the when and cross, to was it
time some been had which direction, same the in advancing carriage the
He gig. Croft's Admiral be to proved and up, coming just was heard,
home. returning were and drive, intended their taken had wife his and
they in, engaged had people young the walk a long how hearing Upon
it tired; particularly be might who lady any to seat a offered kindly
Uppercross. through going were they and mile, full a her save would
Musgroves Miss The declined. generally and general, was invitation The
asked being not by offended, either was Mary and tired, all at not were
could pride Elliot the called Louisa what or others, the of any before
chaise. horse one a in third a make to endure not

an surmounting were and lane, the crossed had party walking The
again, motion in horse his putting was Admiral the and stile, opposite
something say to moment a in hedge the cleared Wentworth Captain when
effects. its by guessed be might something The sister. his to

us let "Do Croft. Mrs cried tired," are you sure am I Elliot, "Miss
for room excellent is Here home. you taking of pleasure the have
sit might we believe I you, like all were we If you. assure I three,
must." you indeed, must, You four.

to beginning instinctively though and lane; the in still was Anne
urgency kind Admiral's The proceed. to allowed not was she decline,
they refused; be not would they wife's; his of support in came
a her leave to space possible smallest the into themselves compressed
her, to turned word, a saying without Wentworth, Captain and corner,
carriage. the into assisted be to her obliged quietly and

had he that felt and carriage, the in was She it. done had he Yes;
she that it, done had hands his and will his that there, her placed
give to resolution his and fatigue, her of perception his to it owed
disposition his of view the by affected much very was She rest. her
little This apparent. made things these all which her, towards
She before. gone had that all of completion the seemed circumstance
be not could he but her, forgive not could He him. understood
with it considering and past, the for her condemning Though unfeeling.
and her, of careless perfectly though resentment, unjust and high
suffer, her see not could he still another, to attached becoming though
former of remainder a was It relief. her giving of desire the without
friendship; unacknowledged though pure, of impulse an was it sentiment;
not could she which heart, amiable and warm own his of proof a was it
that pain, and pleasure of compounded so emotions without contemplate
prevailed. which not knew she

at were companions her of remarks the and kindness the to answers Her
the along way their half travelled had They given. unconsciously first
then She said. they what to awake quite was she before lane, rough
"Frederick." of talking them found

Sophy," girls, two those of other or one have to means certainly "He
running been has He which. saying no is there "but Admiral; the said
mind. his up make to think, would one enough, long too, them, after
settled have would he now, war were it If peace. the of comes this Ay,
long make to afford cannot Elliot, Miss sailors, We ago. long it
the between dear, my it, was days many How war. of time in courtships
our in together down sitting our and you seeing my of time first
Yarmouth?" North at lodgings

Croft, Mrs replied dear," my it, about talk not better had "We
an to came we soon how hear to were Elliot Miss if "for pleasantly;
happy be could we that persuaded be never would she understanding,
before." long however, character, by you known had I together.

we were what and girl, pretty very a as you of heard had I and "Well,
hand. in long so things such having like not do I besides? for wait to
home us bring and canvass, more little a spread would Frederick wish I
be always would there Then Kellynch. to ladies young these of one
hardly I are; both they ladies young nice very And them. for company
other." the from one know

a in Croft, Mrs said indeed," girls, unaffected humoured, good "Very
powers keener her that suspect Anne made as such praise, calmer of tone
"and brother; her of worthy quite as them of either consider not might
better with connected be not could One family. respectable very a
that take certainly shall we post! that Admiral, dear My people.
post."

happily they herself direction better a reins the giving coolly by But
her out putting judiciously afterwards once by and danger; the passed
and dung-cart; a of foul ran nor rut, a into fell neither they hand
imagined she which driving, of style their at amusement some with Anne,
found affairs, their of guidance general the of representation bad no
Cottage. the at them by deposited safely herself



11 Chapter


even was day the return: Russell's Lady for approached now time The
was she as soon as her join to engaged being Anne, and fixed;
and Kellynch, to removal early an to forward looking was resettled,
it. by affected be to likely was comfort own her how think to beginning

within Wentworth, Captain with village same the in her place would It
and church, same the frequent to have would they him; of mile a half
against was This families. two the between intercourse be must there
Uppercross, at time his of much so spent he hand, other the on but her;
him leaving as rather considered be might she thence removing in that
believed she whole, the upon and, him; towards going as than behind,
as almost gainer, the be question, interesting this on must, she
Mary poor leaving in society, domestic of change her in as certainly
Russell. Lady for

Captain seeing ever avoid to her for possible be might it wished She
which meetings former witnessed had rooms those Hall: the at Wentworth
anxious more yet was she but her; before painfully too brought be would
meeting never Wentworth Captain and Russell Lady of possibility the for
acquaintance of renewal no and other, each like not did They anywhere.
she together, them see to Russell Lady were and good; any do could now
little. too she and self-possession, much too had he that think might

removal her anticipating in solicitude chief her formed points These
long quite stationed been had she felt she where Uppercross, from
some give always would Charles little to usefulness Her enough.
was he but there, visit months' two her of memory the to sweetness
for. stay to else nothing had she and apace, strength gaining

which way a in diversified was however, visit, her of conclusion The
and unseen being after Wentworth, Captain imagined. all at not had she
them among again appeared days, whole two for Uppercross at of unheard
away. him kept had what of relation a by himself justify to

at out him found having Harville, Captain friend, his from letter A
with settled being Harville's Captain of intelligence brought had last,
quite therefore, being their of winter; the for Lyme at family his
had Harville Captain other. each of miles twenty within unknowingly,
two received he which wound severe a since health good in been never
determined had him see to anxiety Wentworth's Captain and before, years
four-and-twenty for there been had He Lyme. to immediately go to him
a honoured, warmly friendship his complete, was acquittal His hours.
fine the of description his and friend, his for excited interest lively
an that party, the by to attended feelingly so Lyme about country
thither going for project a and themselves, Lyme see to desire earnest
consequence. the was

talked Wentworth Captain Lyme. see to wild all were people young The
from miles seventeen only was it himself, again there going of
in and, bad; means no by was weather the November, though Uppercross;
the formed having eager, the of eager most the was who Louisa, short,
being liked, she as doing of pleasure the besides and go, to resolution
down bore way, own her maintaining in merit of idea the with armed now
summer; till off it putting for mother and father her of wishes the all
Louisa, Henrietta, Anne, Mary, go--Charles, to were they Lyme to and
Wentworth. Captain and

at return and morning the in go to been had scheme heedless first The
not would horses, his of sake the for Musgrove, Mr this to but night;
the in day a considered, rationally be to came it when and consent;
place, new a seeing for time much leave not would November of middle
for required, country the of nature the as hours, seven deducting after
there, night the stay to consequently, were, They returning. and going
felt was This dinner. day's next the till back expected be to not and
Great the at met all they though and amendment; considerable a be to
punctually, very off set and hour, breakfast early an rather at House
coach Musgrove's Mr carriages, two the before noon past much so was it
drove he which in curricle, Charles's and ladies, four the containing
and Lyme, into hill long the descending were Wentworth, Captain
was it that itself, town the of street steeper still the upon entering
them, about looking for time than more have not would they evident very
gone. were day the of warmth and light the before

the of one at dinner a ordering and accommodations, securing After
directly walk to unquestionably was done be to thing next the inns,
amusement any for year the in late too come were They sea. the to down
were rooms The offer. might place, public a as Lyme, which variety or
the of but family any scarcely gone, all almost lodgers the up, shut
buildings the in admire to nothing is there as and, left; residents
street principal the town, the of situation remarkable the themselves,
round skirting Cobb, the to walk the water, the into hurrying almost
bathing with animated is season, the in which, bay, little pleasant the
new and wonders old its itself, Cobb the company; and machines
to out stretching cliffs of line beautiful very the with improvements,
very a and seek; will eye stranger's the what are town, the of east the
immediate the in charms see not does who be, must it stranger strange
in scenes The better. it know to wish him make to Lyme, of environs
extensive and grounds high its with Charmouth, neighbourhood, its
by backed bay, retired sweet, its more, still and country, of sweeps
the it make sands, the among rock low of fragments where cliffs, dark
in sitting for tide, the of flow the watching for spot happiest
of village cheerful the of varieties woody the contemplation; unwearied
romantic between chasms green its with Pinny, all, above and, Lyme; Up
luxuriant of orchards and trees forest scattered the where rocks,
the since away passed have must generation a many that declare growth,
a such for ground the prepared cliff the of falling partial first
may as exhibited, is lovely so and wonderful so scene a where state,
of Isle far-famed the of scenes resembling the of any equal than more
the make to again, visited and visited, be must places these Wight:
understood. Lyme of worth

and deserted now the by down passing Uppercross from party The
themselves found soon descending, still and rooms, looking melancholy
a on gaze and linger must all as only, lingering and sea-shore; the on
all, at it on look to deserved ever who sea, the to return first
on and itself in object their equally Cobb, the towards proceeded
an of foot the near house, small a in for account: Wentworth's Captain
Captain settled. Harvilles the were date, unknown of pier old
he and on, walked others the friend; his on call to in turned Wentworth
Cobb. the on them join to was

even not and admiring; and wondering of tired means no by were They
long, Wentworth Captain with parted had they that feel to seemed Louisa
well all companions, three with them, after coming him saw they when
a and Harville, Mrs and Captain be to description, by already, known
them. with staying was who Benwick, Captain

Laconia; the of lieutenant first been ago time some had Benwick Captain
return his on him, of given had Wentworth Captain which account the and
and man young excellent an as him of praise warm his before, Lyme from
stamped have must which highly, valued always had he whom officer, an
little a by followed been had listener, every of esteem the in well him
interesting perfectly him rendered which life, private his of history
Captain to engaged been had He ladies. the all of eyes the in
year a been had They loss. her mourning now was and sister, Harville's
his came, Fortune promotion. and fortune for waiting two or
last; at came too, promotion, great; being lieutenant as prize-money
preceding the died had She it. know to live not did Harville Fanny but
impossible it believed Wentworth Captain sea. at was he while summer
to been had Benwick poor than woman to attached more be to man for
dreadful the under afflicted deeply more be to or Harville, Fanny
suffer must which sort the of as disposition his considered He change.
retiring and serious, quiet, with feelings strong very uniting heavily,
To pursuits. sedentary and reading, for taste decided a and manners,
the and him between friendship the story, the of interest the finish
all closed which event the by augmented possible, if seemed, Harvilles
them with living now was Benwick Captain and alliance, of views their
a half for house present his taken had Harville Captain entirely.
to him directing all fortune, his and health, his and taste, his year;
the of grandeur the and sea; the by and inexpensive, residence a
exactly appeared winter, the in Lyme of retirement the and country,
good-will and sympathy The mind. of state Benwick's Captain to adapted
great. very was Benwick Captain towards excited

the meet to forward moved now they as herself, to Anne said yet," "And
I have. I than heart sorrowing more a perhaps, not, has "he party,
than younger is He ever. for blighted so prospects his believe cannot
will He man. a as younger fact; in not if feeling, in younger am; I
another." with happy be and again, rally

dark tall, a was Harville Captain introduced. were and met, all They
from and lame; little a countenance; benevolent sensible, a with man,
Captain than older much looking health, of want and features strong
three, the of youngest the was, and looked, Benwick Captain Wentworth.
pleasing a had He man. little a them, of either with compared and,
from back drew and have, to ought he as just air, melancholy a and face
conversation.

manners, in Wentworth Captain equalling not though Harville, Captain
Harville, Mrs obliging. and warm, unaffected, gentleman, perfect a was
the have to however, seemed, husband, her than polished less degree a
their than pleasant more be could nothing and feelings; good same
because own, their of friends as party whole the considering of desire
their than hospitable kindly more or Wentworth, Captain of friends the
dinner, The them. with dine to promising all their for entreaties
accepted unwillingly, though last, at was inn, the at ordered already
should Wentworth Captain that hurt almost seemed they but excuse; a as
thing a as it considering without Lyme, to party such any brought have
them. with dine should they that course of

such and this, all in Wentworth Captain to attachment much so was There
unlike so uncommon, so hospitality of degree a in charm bewitching a
formality of dinners and invitations, give-and-take of style usual the
by benefited be to likely not spirits her felt Anne that display, and
would "These brother-officers. his among acquaintance increasing an
struggle to had she and thought; her was friends," my all been have
lowness. to tendency great a against

friends, new their with in-doors went all they Cobb, the quitting On
heart the from invite who those but none as small so rooms found and
moment's a had Anne many. so accommodating of capable think could
the in lost soon was it but herself; subject the on astonishment
ingenious the all of sight the from sprang which feelings pleasanter
the turn to Harville, Captain of arrangements nice and contrivances
of deficiencies the supply to account, best the to space actual
the against doors and windows the defend and furniture, lodging-house
the of fitting-up the in varieties The expected. be to storms winter
the in owner, the by provided necessaries common the where rooms,
a of articles few some with contrasted were plight, indifferent common
curious something with and up, worked excellently wood, of species rare
had Harville Captain countries distant the all from valuable and
with was all it as connected Anne; to amusing than more were visited,
influence its of effect the labours, its of fruit the profession, his
it happiness domestic and repose of picture the habits, his on
gratification. than less, or more, something a her to it made presented,

excellent contrived had he but reader; no was Harville Captain
tolerable a for shelves, pretty very fashioned and accommodations,
His Benwick. Captain of property the volumes, well-bound of collection
of mind a but exercise; much taking from him prevented lameness
employment constant with him furnish to seemed ingenuity and usefulness
toys made he glued; he carpentered, he varnished, he drew, He within.
with pins and netting-needles new fashioned he children; the for
large his to down sat done, was else everything if and improvements;
room. the of corner one at fishing-net

the quitted they when her behind happiness great left she thought Anne
into forth burst walking, herself found she whom by Louisa, and house;
their navy; the of character the on delight and admiration of raptures
uprightness; their openness, their brotherliness, their friendliness,
and worth more having sailors of convinced was she that protesting
to how knew only they that England; in men of set other any than warmth
loved. and respected be to deserved only they and live,

answered scheme the had well so and dine; and dress to back went They
entirely "so being its though amiss; found was nothing that already,
"no the and Lyme," of thoroughfare "no the and season," of out
of heads the from apologies many brought had company," of expectation
inn. the

being to hardened more much so growing time this by herself found Anne
could imagined first at had she than company Wentworth's Captain in
the and now, him with table same the to down sitting the that be, ever
got never (they it on attending civilities common the of interchange
nothing. mere a become was beyond),

morrow, the till again meet to ladies the for dark too were nights The
he and evening; the in visit a them promised had Harville Captain but
expected, been had than more was which also, friend his bringing came,
of appearance the all had Benwick Captain that agreed been having it
ventured He strangers. many so of presence the by oppressed being
seem not did certainly spirits his though however, again, them among
general. in party the of mirth the for fit

the of side one on talk the led Harville and Wentworth Captains While
abundance in anecdotes supplied days, former to recurring by and room,
placed be to lot Anne's to fell it others, the entertain and occupy to
her of impulse good very a and Benwick; Captain with apart rather
and shy, was He him. with acquaintance an begin to her obliged nature
countenance, her of mildness engaging the but abstraction; to disposed
well was Anne and effect; their had soon manners, her of gentleness and
of man young a evidently was He exertion. of trouble first the repaid
and poetry; in principally though reading, in taste considerable
evening's an least at him given having of persuasion the besides
companions usual his which subjects, of discussion the in indulgence
to use real of being of hope the had she in, concern no probably had
struggling of benefit and duty the to as suggestions some in him
their of out grown naturally had which affliction, against
rather had it reserved; seem not did he shy, though For, conversation.
and restraints; usual their burst to glad feelings of appearance the
gone and age, present the of richness the poetry, of talked having
poets, first-rate the to as opinion of comparison brief a through
be to were Lake the of Lady The or Marmion whether ascertain to trying
and Abydos; of Bride The and Giaour the ranked how and preferred,
so himself showed he pronounced, be to was Giaour the how moreover,
and poet, one the of songs tenderest the all with acquainted intimately
he other; the of agony hopeless of descriptions impassioned the all
a imaged which lines various the feeling, tremulous such with repeated,
so looked and wretchedness, by destroyed mind a or heart, broken
he hope to ventured she that understood, be to meant he if as entirely
was it thought she that say, to and poetry, only read always not did
who those by enjoyed safely seldom be to poetry of misfortune the
could alone which feelings strong the that and completely; it enjoyed
but it taste to ought which feelings very the were truly it estimate
sparingly.

his to allusion this with pleased but pained, not him shewing looks His
the herself in feeling and on; go to emboldened was she situation,
larger a recommend to ventured she mind, of seniority of right
to requested being on and study; daily his in prose of allowance
such moralists, best our of works such mentioned particularize,
worth of characters of memoirs such letters, finest the of collections
rouse to calculated as moment the at her to occurred as suffering, and
strongest the and precepts, highest the by mind the fortify and
endurances. religious and moral of examples

the for grateful seemed and attentively, listened Benwick Captain
which sighs and head, the of shake a with though and implied; interest
like grief on books any of efficacy the in faith little his declared
to promised and recommended, she those of names the down noted his,
them. read and procure

of idea the at amused be but not could Anne over, was evening the When
man young a to resignation and patience preach to Lyme to coming her
more on fearing, help she could nor before; seen never had she whom
and moralists great other many like that, reflection, serious
conduct own her which in point a on eloquent been had she preachers,
examination. bear ill would



12 Chapter


the party the of earliest the themselves finding Henrietta, and Anne
They breakfast. before sea the to down stroll to agreed morning, next
fine a which tide, the of flowing the watch to sands, the to went
so which grandeur the all with in bringing was breeze south-easterly
sea; the in gloried morning; the praised They admitted. shore a flat
were breeze--and fresh-feeling the of delight the in sympathized
with-- again began suddenly Henrietta till silent;

the exceptions, few very with that, convinced quite am yes,--I "Oh!
of been having its of doubt no be can There good. does always sea-air
spring last illness, his after Shirley, Dr to service greatest the
month, a for Lyme to coming that himself, declares He twelve-month.
the by being that and, took; he medicine the all than good more him did
it thinking help cannot I Now, again. young feel him makes always sea,
had he think do I sea. the by entirely live not does he that pity a
Anne? you, not Do Lyme. at fix and entirely, Uppercross leave better
both do, could he thing best the is it that me, with agree you not Do
many and know, you here, cousins has She Shirley? Mrs and himself for
she sure am I and her, for cheerful it make would which acquaintance,
attendance medical have could she where place a to get to glad be would
it think I Indeed seizure. another having his of case in hand, at
Shirley, Mrs and Dr as people excellent such have to melancholy quite
days last their out wearing lives, their all good doing been have who
shut seem they family, our excepting where, Uppercross, like place a in
I him. to it propose would friends his wish I world. the all from out
there dispensation, a procuring to as And, ought. they think really
My character. his with and life, of time his at difficulty no be could
parish. his leave to him persuade could anything whether is, doubt only
I over-scrupulous notions; his in scrupulous and strict very so is He
not Do over-scrupulous? being is it Anne, think, you not Do say. must
clergyman a when conscience, of point mistaken a quite is it think you
well as just be may which duties, of sake the for health his sacrifices
miles seventeen only too, Lyme at And person? another by performed
was there thought people if hear, to enough near be would he off,
of." complain to anything

entered and speech, this during herself to once than more smiled Anne
of feelings the into entering by good do to ready as subject, the into
lower a of good was it here though man, young a of as lady young a
said She acquiescence? general but offered be could what for standard,
of claims the felt business; the on proper and reasonable was that all
that was it desirable very how saw ought; she as repose to Shirley Dr
resident a as man, young respectable active, some have should he
such of advantage the at hint to enough courteous even was and curate,
married. being curate's resident

wish "I companion, her with pleased well very Henrietta, said wish," "I
I Shirley. Dr with intimate were and Uppercross, at lived Russell Lady
influence greatest the of woman a as Russell Lady of heard always have
to person a persuade to able as her upon look always I everybody! with
afraid quite before, you told have I as her, of afraid am I anything!
and amazingly, her respect I but clever; very so is she because her, of
Uppercross." at neighbour a such had we wish

amused and grateful, being of manner Henrietta's by amused was Anne
Henrietta's of interests new the and events of course the that also
the of any with favour in all at friend her placed have should views
and answer, general a for however, time, only had she family; Musgrove
subjects all before Uppercross, at were woman another such that wish a
towards coming Wentworth Captain and Louisa seeing on ceased, suddenly
be to likely was breakfast till stroll a for also came They them.
had she that afterwards immediately recollecting, Louisa but ready;
her with back go to all them invited shop, a at procure to something
disposal. her at all were They town. the into

a beach, the from upwards leading steps, the to came they When
drew politely down, come to preparing moment same the at gentleman,
and him; passed and ascended They way. them give to stopped and back,
a with her at looked he and eye, his caught face Anne's passed, they as
of. insensible be not could she which admiration, earnest of degree
pretty very regular, very her well; remarkably looking was She
fine the by restored youth of freshness and bloom the having features,
of animation the by and complexion, her on blowing been had which wind
gentleman, the that evident was It produced. also had it which eye
Captain exceedingly. her admired manner) in gentleman a (completely
his shewed which way a in instantly her at round looked Wentworth
of glance a glance, momentary a her gave He it. of noticing
even and you, with struck is man "That say, to seemed which brightness,
again." Elliot Anne like something see moment, this at I,

a about loitering and business, her through Louisa attending After
passing in Anne, and inn; the to returned they longer, little
had dining-room, their to chamber own her from quickly afterwards
an of out came he as gentleman, same very the against run nearly
stranger a be to him conjectured before had She apartment. adjoining
was who groom, well-looking a that determined and themselves, like
his be should back, came they as inns two the near about strolling
It idea. the assisted mourning in being man and master Both servant.
this and themselves; as inn same the to belonged he that proved now was
gentleman's the by again proved also was, it as short meeting, second
and readiness the by and lovely, very hers thought he that looks,
good exceedingly of man a was he that apologies, his of propriety
an had handsome, not though and thirty, about seemed He manners.
was. he who know to like should she that felt Anne person. agreeable

(almost carriage, a of sound the when breakfast, done nearly had They
to party the half drew Lyme) entering since heard had they first the
coming only but curricle, a carriage, gentleman's a was It window. the
going be must somebody door; front the to stable-yard the from round
mourning. in servant a by driven was It away.

compare might he that up jump Musgrove Charles made curricle word The
and curiosity, Anne's roused mourning in servant the own; his with it
the of owner the time the by look, to collected were six whole the
and bows the amidst door the from issuing seen be to was curricle
off. drive to seat, his taking and household, the of civilities

at glance a half with and instantly, Wentworth, Captain cried "Ah!"
passed." we man very the is "it Anne,

as him watched kindly all having and it; to agreed Musgroves Miss The
table. breakfast the to returned they could, they as hill the up far
afterwards. soon room the into came waiter The

name the us tell you "can immediately, Wentworth, Captain said "Pray,"
away?" gone just is who gentleman the of

last in came fortune, large of gentleman a Elliot, Mr a Sir, "Yes,
you while sir, carriage, the heard you say Dare Sidmouth. from night
and Bath to way his in Crewkherne, for now on going and dinner; at were
London."

the repeated had many and other, each on looked had Many "Elliot!"
rapidity smart the by even through, got been had this all before name,
waiter. a of

Mr our be must it cousin; our be must "it Mary; cried me!" "Bless
you mourning, In it? not must Anne, Charles, indeed! must, it Elliot,
the In extraordinary! very How be. must Elliot Mr our as just see,
my Elliot? Mr our be it not must Anne, us! with inn same very
you not "did waiter, the to turning sir," Pray heir? next father's
Kellynch the to belonged he whether say servant his not did hear,
family?"

his said he but family; particular no mention not did he ma'am, "No,
day." some baronight a be would and gentleman, rich very a was master

to Heir said! I as "just ecstasy, an in Mary cried see!" you "There!
so. was it if out, come would that sure was I Elliot! Walter Sir
to care take servants his which circumstance a is that it, upon Depend
extraordinary! how conceive only Anne, But, goes. he wherever publish,
who time, in aware been had we wish I more. him at looked had I wish I
we that pity a What us. to introduced been have might he that was, it
the had he think you Do other! each to introduced been have not should
the at looking was I him, at looked hardly I countenance? Elliot
I countenance, Elliot the of something had he think I but horses;
over hanging was great-coat the Oh! me! strike not did arms the wonder
should I sure, am I otherwise, did; it so arms, the hid and panel, the
in been not had servant the if too; livery the and them, observed have
livery." the by him known have should one mourning,

said together," circumstances extraordinary very these all "Putting
of arrangement the be to it consider must "we Wentworth, Captain
cousin." your to introduced be not should you that Providence,

convince to tried quietly Anne attention, Mary's command could she When
on been years, many for not, had Elliot Mr and father their that her
all at introduction an attempting of power the make to as terms such
desirable.

to herself to gratification secret a was it however, time, same the At
was Kellynch of owner future the that know to and cousin, her seen have
not, would She sense. good of air an had and gentleman, a undoubtedly
time; second the him with met having her mention account, any upon
in him by close passed having their to attend much not did Mary luckily
Anne's by ill-used quite felt have would she but walk, earlier their
very his received and passage, the in him against run actually having
that no, all; at him near been never had she while excuses, polite
secret. perfect a remain must interview little cousinly

the Elliot, Mr seeing our mention will "you Mary, said course," "Of
hear to ought certainly father my think I Bath. to write you time next
him." about all mention do it; of

she which circumstance the just was it but reply, direct a avoided Anne
what as but communicated, be to unnecessary merely not as considered
father, her given been had which offence The suppressed. be to ought
she it in share particular Elizabeth's knew; she back, years many
both in irritation produced always idea Elliot's Mr that and suspected;
of toil the all herself; Bath to wrote never Mary doubt. a beyond was
fell Elizabeth with correspondence unsatisfactory and slow a up keeping
Anne. on

and Captain by joined were they when over, long been not had Breakfast
take to appointed had they whom with Benwick; Captain and Harville Mrs
for off setting be to ought They Lyme. about walk last their
and together, all be to were meanwhile the in and one, by Uppercross
could. they as long as doors of out

all were they as soon as her, near getting Benwick Captain found Anne
not did evening preceding the conversation Their street. the in fairly
time, some together walked they and again; her seek to him disincline
as unable as still and Byron, Lord and Scott Mr of before as talking
alike exactly think to readers, two other any as unable as and before,
general almost an occasioned something till either, of merits the of
had she Benwick, Captain of instead and party, their amongst change
side. her by Harville Captain

deed good a done have "you low, rather speaking he, said Elliot," "Miss
such have could he wish I much. so talk fellow poor that making in
is; he as up shut be to know, I him, for bad is It oftener. company
part." cannot We do? we can what but

in but impossible; be to believe easily can I "that Anne, said "No,"
and affliction, of case every in does time what know perhaps--we time,
called be yet may friend your that Harville, Captain remember, must you
understand." I summer, last mourner--only young a

June." "only sigh) deep a (with enough," true "Ay,

soon." so perhaps, him, to known not "And

Cape, the from home came he when August, of week first the till "Not
of hear to dreading Plymouth at was I Grappler. the into made just
for orders under was Grappler the but letters, in sent he him;
it? tell to was who but him, follow must news the There Portsmouth.
could Nobody yard-arm. the to up run been have soon as would I I. not
"The Wentworth.) Captain to (pointing fellow" good that but it, do
being her of danger no before; week the Plymouth into come had Laconia
for up wrote rest; the for chance his stood He again. sea to sent
and night travelled return, the waiting without but absence, of leave
instant, that Grappler the to off rowed Portsmouth, to got he till day
and did, he what That's week. a for fellow poor the left never and
Elliot, Miss think, may You James. poor saved have could else nobody
us!" to dear is he whether

much as said and decision, perfect with question the on think did Anne
to able seemed his as or accomplish, could feeling own her as reply in
he when and subject, the renew to affected much too was he for bear,
different. totally something of was it again, spoke

have would husband her that opinion her as it giving Harville's Mrs
the determined home, reached he time the by enough walking quite
they walk; last their be to was what in party the all of direction
off set and return then and door, their to them accompany would
this; for time just was there calculations their all By themselves.
walk to wish general a such was there Cobb, the near drew they as but
so grew soon Louisa and inclined, so were all more, once it along
found, was it hour, an of quarter a of difference the that determined,
and leave-taking, kind the all with so all; at difference no be would
be may which promises and invitations of interchange kind the all
door, own their at Harville Mrs and Captain from parted they imagined,
them to cling to seemed who Benwick, Captain by accompanied still and
Cobb. the to adieus proper the make to proceeded last, the to

"dark Byron's Lord her. near drawing again Benwick Captain found Anne
present their by forward brought being of fail not could seas" blue
attention as long as attention her all him gave gladly she and view,
way. another perforce drawn, soon was It possible. was

pleasant Cobb new the of part high the make to wind much too was There
and lower, the to steps the down get to agreed they and ladies, the for
flight, steep the down carefully and quietly pass to contented were all
Wentworth. Captain by them down jumped be must she Louisa; excepting
the stiles; the from her jump to had had he walks, their all In
her for pavement the of hardness The her. to delightful was sensation
it, did he occasion; present the upon willing less him made feet,
enjoyment, her show to instantly, and down, safely was She however.
it, against her advised He again. down jumped be to steps the up ran
she vain, in talked and reasoned he no, but great; too jar the thought
she hands; his out put he will:" I determined am "I said, and smiled
the on pavement the on fell she second, a half by precipitate too was
blood, no wound, no was There lifeless! up taken was and Cobb, Lower
face her not, breathed she closed, were eyes her but bruise; visible no
around! stood who all to moment the of horror The death. like was

arms, his in her with knelt up, her caught had who Wentworth, Captain
of agony an in own, her as pallid as face a with her on looking
of hold catching Mary, screamed dead!" is she dead! is "She silence.
him make to horror own his with contributing and husband, her
the under sinking Henrietta, moment, another in and immoveable;
steps, the on fallen have would and too, senses her lost conviction,
between her supported and caught who Anne, and Benwick Captain for but
them.

from burst which words first the were me?" help to one no there "Is
strength own his all if as and despair, of tone a in Wentworth, Captain
gone. were

I him. to go sake heaven's "for Anne, cried him," to go him, to "Go
rub hands, her Rub him. to go and me, Leave myself. her support can
them." take them, take salts; are here temples; her

disengaging moment, same the at Charles and obeyed, Benwick Captain
raised was Louisa and him; with both were they wife, his from himself
that done was everything and them, between firmly more supported and up
staggering Wentworth, Captain while vain; in but prompted, had Anne
agony-- bitterest the in exclaimed support, his for wall the against

mother!" and father her God! "Oh

Anne. said surgeon!" "A

only-- saying and once, at him rouse to seemed it word; the caught He
Anne when away, darting was instant," this surgeon a true, "True,
suggested-- eagerly

knows He Benwick? Captain for better be it not would Benwick, "Captain
found." be to is surgeon a where

a in and idea, the of advantage the felt thinking of capable one Every
resigned had Benwick Captain moments) rapid in done all was (it moment
was and care, brother's the to entirely figure corpse-like poor the
rapidity. utmost the with town the for off

which said be scarcely could it behind, left party wretched the to As
Captain most: suffering was rational, completely were who three, the of
brother, affectionate very a really who, Charles, or Anne, Wentworth,
from eyes his turn only could and grief, of sobs with Louisa over hung
witness to or insensible, as state a in other the see to sister, one
he which help for him on calling wife, his of agitations hysterical the
give. not could

which thought, and zeal, and strength the all with attending Anne,
suggest to intervals, at tried, still Henrietta, to supplied, instinct
to Charles, animate to Mary, quiet to tried others, the to comfort
her to look to seemed Both Wentworth. Captain of feelings the assuage
directions. for

in What, next? done be to is "What Charles, cried Anne," "Anne,
next?" done be to is name, heaven's

her. towards turned also were eyes Wentworth's Captain

her carry sure: am I Yes, inn? the to carried be better she not "Had
inn." the to gently

comparatively Wentworth, Captain repeated inn," the to yes, "Yes,
myself. her carry will "I something. doing be to eager and collected,
others." the of care take Musgrove,

workmen the among spread had accident the of report the time this By
be to them, near collected were many and Cobb, the about boatmen and
lady, young dead a of sight the enjoy to rate, any at wanted, if useful
first the as fine as twice proved it for ladies, young dead two nay,
was Henrietta people good these of best-looking the of some To report.
and helpless; quite was she revived, partially though for, consigned,
his to attending Charles and side, her by walking Anne manner, this in
the unutterable, feelings with back treading forward, set they wife,
they heart, of light so and lately, very so lately, so which ground,
along. passed had

Captain them. met Harvilles the before Cobb, the off not were They
which countenance a with house, their by flying seen been had Benwick
immediately, off set had they and wrong; be to something showed
as Shocked spot. the towards passed, they as directed and informed
be could that nerves and senses brought he was, Harville Captain
was what decided wife his and him between look a and useful; instantly
their to go must all house; their to taken be must She done. be to
to listen not would They there. arrival surgeon's the await and house;
while and roof; his beneath all were they obeyed; was he scruples:
and stairs, up conveyed was direction, Harville's Mrs under Louisa,
restoratives cordials, assistance, bed, own her of possession given
them. needed who all to husband her by supplied were

without again, them closed soon but eyes, her opened once had Louisa
of however, life, of proof a been had This consciousness. apparent
of incapable perfectly though Henrietta, and sister; her to service
hope of agitation the by kept, was Louisa, with room same the in being
was too, Mary, insensibility. own her of return a from fear, and
calmer. growing

They possible. seemed had it before almost them with was surgeon The
The hopeless. not was he but examined; he while horror, with sick were
injuries greater seen had he but contusion, severe a received had head
cheerfully. spoke he hopeless; means no by was he from: recovered

a say not did he that case, desperate a as it regard not did he That
and most; of hope the beyond felt, first at was it, end must hours few
a after silent, and deep rejoicing, the reprieve, a such of ecstasy the
may offered, been had Heaven to gratitude of ejaculations fervent few
conceived. be

Captain by uttered was God!" "Thank which with look, the tone, The
sight the nor her; by forgotten be never could sure was Anne Wentworth,
folded with it over leaning table, a near sat he as afterwards, him of
of feelings various the by overpowered if as concealed, face and arms
them. calm to reflection and prayer by trying and soul, his

head. the to but injury no was There escaped. had limbs Louisa's

be to best was what consider to party the for necessary became now It
to speak to able now were They situation. general their to as done,
however was, she where remain must Louisa That consult. and other each
such in Harvilles the involving be to friends her to distressing
The impossible. was removal Her doubt. a admit not did trouble,
all could, they as much as and, scruples; all silenced Harvilles
the before everything arranged and forward looked had They gratitude.
to room his up give must Benwick Captain reflect. to began others
They settled. was whole the and elsewhere; bed another get and them,
yet and more; no accommodate could house the that concerned only were
swinging or room, maid's the in away children the "putting by perhaps,
room finding not of think to bear hardly could they somewhere," cot a
though, stay; to wish might they supposing besides, three or two for
the be not need there Musgrove, Miss on attendance any to regard with
Mrs entirely. care Harville's Mrs to her leaving in uneasiness least
had who nursery-maid, her and nurse, experienced very a was Harville
such just was everywhere, her with about gone and long, her with lived
by attendance possible no want could she two, these Between another.
of sincerity and truth a with said was this all And night. or day
irresistible. feeling

in three the were Wentworth Captain and Henrietta, Charles,
of interchange an only was it while little a for and consultation,
going one's some of necessity the "Uppercross, terror. and perplexity
Mr to broken be could it how conveyed; be to news the Uppercross; to
gone already hour an morning; the of lateness the Musgrove; Mrs and
in being of impossibility the off; been have to ought they since
the to more nothing of capable were they first, At time." tolerable
Wentworth, Captain while, a after but, exclamations; such than purpose
said-- himself, exerting

Every minute. another of loss the without and decided, be must "We
Uppercross for off being on resolve must one Some valuable. is minute
go." must I or you either Musgrove, instantly.

He away. going not of resolution his declared but agreed, Charles
Harville; Mrs and Captain to possible as incumbrance little as be would
nor ought, neither he state, a such in sister his leaving to as but
the declared first at Henrietta and decided; was it far So would.
The differently. think to persuaded soon was however, She, same.
in remain to able been not had who She staying! her of usefulness
her made which sufferings without her, at look to or room, Louisa's
do could she that acknowledge to forced was She helpless! than worse
the by touched till, away, be to unwilling still was yet good, no
she consented, she up; it gave she mother, and father her of thought
home. at be to anxious was

from down quietly coming Anne, when point, this reached had plan The
door parlour the for followed, what hear but not could room, Louisa's
open. was

you "that Wentworth, Captain cried Musgrove," settled, is it "Then
as rest, the to as But home. sister your of care take I that and stay,
be need it think I Harville, Mrs assist to stays one if others, the to
to back get to wish course, of will, Musgrove Charles Mrs one. only
as capable so proper, so one no stay, will Anne if but children; her
Anne."

so herself hearing of emotion the from recover to moment a paused She
then she and said, he what with agreed warmly two other The of. spoken
appeared.

he, cried her;" nurse and stay will you sure; am I stay, will "You
which gentleness, a yet and glow, a with speaking and her to turning
he and deeply, coloured She past. the restoring almost seemed
most herself expressed She away. moved and himself recollected
thinking been had she what was "It remain. to happy ready, willing,
Louisa's in floor the on bed A do. to allowed be to wishing and of,
so." think but would Harville Mrs if her, for sufficient be would room

rather was it Though arranged. seemed all and more, thing One
some by alarmed previously be should Musgrove Mrs and Mr that desirable
take to horses Uppercross the by required time the yet delay; of share
Captain and suspense; of extension dreadful a be would back, them
much be would it that agreed, Musgrove Charles and proposed, Wentworth
Musgrove's Mr leave and inn, the from chaise a take to him for better
there when early, morning next the home sent be to horses and carriage
night. Louisa's of account an sending of advantage farther the be would

part, his on ready everything get to off hurried now Wentworth Captain
made was plan the When ladies. two the by followed soon be to and
was She it. in peace all of end an was there however, Mary, to known
being in injustice of much so complained vehement, so and wretched so
Louisa, to nothing was who Anne, Anne; of instead away go to expected
Henrietta's in stay to right best the had and sister, her was she while
home go to And Anne? as useful as be to she not was Why stead!
And unkind. too was it No, husband! her without too, Charles, without
as and withstand, long could husband her than more said she short, in
for help no was there way, gave he when oppose could others the of none
inevitable. was Anne for Mary of change the it;

and jealous the to reluctantly more submitted never had Anne
the for off set they and be, must it so but Mary; of claims ill-judging
attending Benwick Captain and sister, his of care taking Charles town,
to along, hurried they as recollection, moment's a gave She her. to
in earlier witnessed had spots same the which circumstances little the
Dr for schemes Henrietta's to listened had she There morning. the
Elliot; Mr seen first had she on, farther Uppercross; leaving Shirley's
or Louisa, but one any to given be now could that all seemed moment a
welfare. her in up wrapt were who those

as united and, her; to attentive considerately most was Benwick Captain
increasing an felt she day, the of distress the by seemed all they
that thinking in even pleasure a and him, towards good-will of degree
acquaintance. their continuing of occasion the be perhaps, might, it

in four and chaise a and them, for watch the on was Wentworth Captain
the of part lowest the in convenience their for stationed waiting,
of substitution the at vexation and surprise evident his but street;
the countenance, his in change the other, the for sister one
Charles which with suppressed, and begun expressions the astonishment,
at must or Anne; of reception mortifying a but made to, listened was
to useful be could she as only valued was she that her convince least
Louisa.

the emulating Without just. be to and composed, be to endeavoured She
on attended have would she Henry, her towards Emma an of feelings
and sake; his for regard, of claims common the above zeal a with Louisa
shrink would she suppose to as unjust so be long not would he hoped she
friend. a of office the from unnecessarily

in, both them handed had He carriage. the in was she meanwhile the In
these under manner, this in and them; between himself placed and
quitted she Anne, to emotion and astonishment of full circumstances,
their affect to was it how pass; would stage long the How Lyme.
not could she intercourse, of sort their be to was what manners;
to devoted was He however. natural, quite all was It foresee.
always all, at spoke he when and her; towards turning always Henrietta;
In spirits. her raising and hopes her supporting of view the with
Henrietta spare To calm. studiously were manner and voice his general,
had she when only, Once principle. governing the seemed agitation from
Cobb, the to walk ill-fated ill-judged, last the over grieving been
as forth, burst he of, thought been had ever it that lamenting bitterly
overcome-- wholly if

had I that God! "Oh cried. he it," of talk don't it, of talk "Don't
But ought! I as done I Had moment! fatal the at her to way given not
Louisa!" sweet Dear, resolute! so and eager so

the question to now, him to occurred ever it whether wondered Anne
and felicity universal the to as opinion previous own his of justness
him strike not might it whether and character; of firmness of advantage
its have should it mind, the of qualities other all like that,
to him escape scarcely could it thought She limits. and proportions
of favour in much as be sometimes might temper persuadable a that feel
character. resolute very a as happiness

and hills same the recognise to astonished was Anne fast. on got They
dread some by heightened speed, actual Their soon. so objects same the
day the on as long as half but appear road the made conclusion, the of
the in were they before however, dusk, quite growing was It before.
among silence total been had there and Uppercross, of neighbourhood
shawl a with corner, the in back leaning Henrietta time, some for them
sleep; to herself cried having her of hope the giving face, her over
at all herself found Anne hill, last their up going were they as when,
he voice, cautious low, a In Wentworth. Captain by addressed once
said:--

at appear not must She do. best had we what considering been have "I
had you whether thinking been have I it. stand not could She first.
it break and in go I while her, with carriage the in remain better not
plan?" good a is this think you Do Musgrove. Mrs and Mr to

of remembrance the But more. no said and satisfied, was he did: She
of and friendship, of proof a as her, to pleasure a remained appeal the
a became it when and pleasure; great a judgement, her for deference
lessen. not did value its proof, parting of sort

had he and over, was Uppercross at communication distressing the When
the and hoped, be could as composed as quite mother and father the seen
intention his announced he them, with being for better the all daughter
were horses the when and Lyme; to carriage same the in returning of
off. was he baited,

one.) volume of (End



13 Chapter


two only comprehending Uppercross, at time Anne's of remainder The
the had she and House; Mansion the at entirely spent was days,
an as both there, useful extremely herself knowing of satisfaction
the for arrangements those all in assisting as and companion, immediate
spirits, of state distressed Musgrove's Mrs and Mr in which, future,
difficulties. been have would

much was Louisa morning. next the Lyme from account early an had They
a came Charles appeared. had before than worse symptoms No same. the
He account. particular more and later a bring to afterwards, hours few
but hoped, be not must cure speedy A cheerful. tolerably was
In admitted. case the of nature the as well as on going was everything
of sense own his satisfy to unable seemed he Harvilles, the of speaking
nurse. a as exertions Harville's Mrs of especially kindness, their
been had Mary and He do. to Mary for nothing left really "She
been had Mary night. last inn their to early go to persuaded
to going was she away, came he When morning. this again hysterical
He good. her do would hoped, he which, Benwick, Captain with out walk
before; day the home come to on prevailed been had she wished almost
do." to anybody for nothing left Harville Mrs that was, truth the but

at had father his and afternoon, same the Lyme to return to was Charles
It consent. not could ladies the but him, with go to mind a half first
his increase and others, the to trouble multiply to only going be would
A upon. acted was and followed scheme better much a and distress; own
far a back conveyed Charles and Crewkherne, from for sent was chaise
who one family, the of nursery-maid old the in person useful more
the last, very the seen and children, the all up brought having
his after school to sent Harry, Master long-petted and lingering
and stockings mend to nursery deserted her in living now was brothers,
who, and her, near get could she bruises and blains the all dress
nurse help and go to allowed being in happy too only was consequently,
occurred had thither, Sarah getting of wishes Vague Louisa. Miss dear
hardly would it Anne, without but Henrietta; and Musgrove Mrs to before
soon. so practicable found and on, resolved been have

minute the all for Hayter, Charles to day, next the indebted, were They
every obtain to essential so was it which Louisa, of knowledge
his and Lyme, to go to business his it made He hours. twenty-four
and sense of intervals The encouraging. still was account
in agreed report Every stronger. be to believed were consciousness
Lyme. in fixed appearing Wentworth's Captain

dreaded. all they which event an morrow, the on them leave to was Anne
for comforters wretched were They her? without do they should "What
she thought Anne that way, this in said was much so And another." one
to inclination general the them among impart than better do not could
She once. at Lyme to go to all them persuaded and privy, was she which
go go; would they that determined soon was it difficulty; little had
it as lodgings, into get or inn, the at themselves fix to-morrow,
be must They moved. be could Louisa dear till remain there and suited,
might they with; was she people good the from trouble some off taking
in and children; own her of care the from Harville Mrs relieve least at
with delighted was Anne that decision, the in happy so were they short,
morning last her spend not could she that felt and done, had she what
sending and preparations, their assisting in than better Uppercross at
range solitary the to left being her though hour, early an at off them
consequence. the was house the of

the was she cottage, the at boys little the excepting last, the was She
animated and filled had that all of one remaining only the last, very
character. cheerful its Uppercross given had that all of houses, both
indeed! change a made had days few A

former than More again. well be all would it recovered, Louisa If
mind her to doubt, a be not could There restored. be would happiness
hence, months few A recovery. her follow would what of none, was there
self, pensive silent, her by but occupied deserted, so now room the and
was that all gay, and happy was that all with again filled be might
Anne unlike most was that all love, prosperous in bright and glowing
Elliot!

dark a on these, as reflections such for leisure complete hour's An
few very the out blotting almost rain thick small a day, November
the make to enough was windows, the from discerned be to ever objects
though yet, and welcome; exceedingly carriage Russell's Lady of sound
an look or House, Mansion the quit not could she gone, be to desirous
veranda, comfortless and dripping black, its with Cottage, the to adieu
of tenements humble last the glasses misty the through notice even or
Uppercross in passed had Scenes heart. saddened a without village, the
of sensations many of record the stood It precious. it made which
relenting of instances some of and softened; now but severe, once pain,
could which reconciliation, and friendship of breathings some feeling,
She dear. be to cease never could which and again, for looked be never
had things such that recollection the but all her, behind all it left
been.

house Russell's Lady quitting her since Kellynch entered never had Anne
its of occasions few the and necessary, been not had It September. in
and evade to contrived had she Hall the to go to her for possible being
modern the in place her resume to was return first Her from. escape
its of eyes the gladden to and Lodge, the of apartments elegant and
mistress.

her. meeting in joy Russell's Lady with mixed anxiety some was There
Anne either happily, But Uppercross. frequenting been had who knew She
so; her fancied Russell Lady or looks, and plumpness in improved was
the had occasion, the on compliments her receiving in Anne, and
cousin, her of admiration silent the with them connecting of amusement
youth of spring second a with blessed be to was she that hoping of and
beauty. and

mental some of sensible soon was she converse, to came they When
leaving on full been had heart her which of subjects The change.
to compelled been and slighted, felt had she which and Kellynch,
interest. secondary of but become now were Musgroves, the among smother
Bath. and sister and father her of even sight lost lately had She
Lady when and Uppercross; of those under sunk been had concerns Their
her spoke and fears, and hopes former their to reverted Russell
and taken, been had which Place, Camden in house the in satisfaction
have would Anne them, with be still should Clay Mrs that regret her
Lyme of thinking was she more much how known it have to ashamed been
more much how there; acquaintance her all and Musgrove, Louisa and
and Harvilles the of friendship the and home the was her to interesting
her or Place, Camden in house father's own her than Benwick, Captain
exert to forced actually was She Clay. Mrs with intimacy sister's own
equal of appearance the like anything with Russell Lady meet to herself
her. on claim first the nature by had which topics on solicitude,

another on discourse their in first at awkwardness little a was There
had Russell Lady Lyme. at accident the of speak must They subject.
of account full a when before, day the minutes five arrived been not
must she of, talked be must it still but her; on burst had whole the
and result, the lament imprudence, the regret must she enquiries, make
conscious was Anne both. by mentioned be must name Wentworth's Captain
name, the speak not could She Russell. Lady as well so it doing not of
adopted had she till eye, Russell's Lady to forward straight look and
attachment the of thought she what briefly her telling of expedient the
no her distressed name his told, was this When Louisa. and him between
longer.

but happy, them wish and composedly, listen to only had Russell Lady
contempt, pleased in pleasure, angry in revelled heart her internally
of somewhat understand to seemed had twenty-three at who man the that
charmed be afterwards, years eight should, Elliot, Anne an of value the
Musgrove. Louisa a by

circumstance no with quietly, most passed days four or three first The
which Lyme, from two or note a of receipt the excepting them mark to
rather a brought and how, tell not could she Anne, to way their found
Russell's Lady period, that of end the At Louisa. of account improving
of self-threatenings fainter the and longer, no repose could politeness
really I Croft; Mrs on call must "I tone, decided a in became past the
pay and me, with go to courage you have Anne, soon. her upon call must
both." us to trial some be will It house? that in visit a

she as felt truly she contrary, the on it; from shrink not did Anne
observing-- in said,

your two; the of most the suffer to likely very are you think "I
in remaining By mine. than change the to reconciled less are feelings
it." to inured become am I neighbourhood, the

an high so fact in had she for subject; the on more said have could She
in fortunate very so father her considered and Crofts, the of opinion
the and example, good a of sure so be to parish the felt tenants, his
ashamed and sorry however that relief, and attention best the of poor
feel conscience in but not could she removal, the of necessity the for
Hall Kellynch that and stay, to not deserved who gone were they that
must convictions These owners'. its than hands better into passed had
they but kind; its was severe and pain, own their have unquestionably
the entering in suffer would Russell Lady which pain that precluded
apartments. well-known the through returning and again, house

rooms "These herself, to saying of power no had Anne moments such In
How destination! their in fallen how Oh, us. to only belong to ought
away! driven so be to family ancient An occupied! unworthily
her of thought she when except No, place!" their filling Strangers
she preside, and sit to used been had she where remembered and mother,
heave. to description that of sigh no had

of pleasure the her gave which kindness a with her met always Croft Mrs
receiving occasion, present the on and favourite, a herself fancying
attention. particular was there house, that in her

on and topic, prevailing the soon was Lyme at accident sad The
each that appeared it invalid, the of accounts latest their comparing
that yestermorn; of hour same the from intelligence her dated lady
since time first (the yesterday Kellynch in been had Wentworth Captain
been not had she which note, last the Anne brought had accident), the
then and hours few a staid had of; steps exact the trace to able
quitting of intention present any without and Lyme, to again returned
had particularly; found, she her, after enquired had He more. any it
her for worse the being not Elliot's Miss of hope his expressed
was This great. as exertions those of spoken had and exertions,
could else anything almost than pleasure more her gave and handsome,
done. have

one in only canvassed be could it itself, catastrophe sad the to As
to had judgements whose women, sensible steady, of couple a by style
had it that decided perfectly was it and events; ascertained on work
that imprudence; much and thoughtlessness much of consequence the been
how think, to frightful was it that and alarming, most were effects its
she liable how and doubtful, be yet might recovery Musgrove's Miss long
The hereafter! concussion the from suffer to remain still would
exclaiming-- by summarily up it wound Admiral

young a for this, way of sort new A indeed. business bad very a "Ay,
it, not is head, mistress's his breaking by love, making be to fellow
truly!" plaster, a giving and head a breaking is This Elliot? Miss

Lady suit to tone the of quite not were manners Croft's Admiral
simplicity and heart of goodness His Anne. delighted they but Russell,
irresistible. were character of

a from rousing suddenly he, said you," for bad very be must this "Now,
not had I here. us finding and coming be "to reverie, little
do now, But bad. very be must it but declare, I before, it recollected
house the in rooms the all over go and up Get ceremony. upon stand not
it." like you if

now." not you, thank I Sir, time, "Another

at shrubbery the from in slip can You you. suits it whenever "Well,
by up hanging umbrellas our keep we find will you there and time; any
"you himself), (checking But," it? not is place good A door. that
the in kept always were yours for place, good a it think not will
be may ways man's One believe. I is, always it so Ay, room. butler's
must you so And best. own our like all we but another's, as good as
the about go to you for better be would it whether yourself, for judge
not." or house

gratefully. very so, did it, decline might she finding Anne,

after Admiral, the continued either," changes few very made have "We
at laundry-door, the about you told We few. "Very moment. a thinking
was, wonder The improvement. great very a been has That Uppercross.
its of inconvenience the with bear could earth upon family any how
have we what Walter Sir tell will You long! so did, it as opening
house the improvement greatest the it thinks Shepherd Mr that and done,
few the that say, to justice the ourselves do must I Indeed, had. ever
My better. the for much very all been have made have we alterations
little very done have I however. them, of credit the have should wife
my from looking-glasses large the of some away sending besides
much very and man, good very A father's. your was which dressing-room,
(looking Elliot," Miss think, should I but sure: am I gentleman the
dressy a rather be must he think should "I reflection), serious with
Lord! oh looking-glasses! of number a Such life. of time his for man
a me lend to Sophy got I So self. one's from away getting no was there
with snug, quite am I now and quarters; their shifted soon we and hand,
I that thing great another and corner, one in glass shaving little my
near." go never

answer, an for distressed rather was herself, of spite in amused Anne,
up took enough, civil been have not might he fearing Admiral, the and
say-- to again, subject the

give pray Elliot, Miss father, good your to write you time next "The
here settled are we that say and Croft's, Mrs and compliments my him
place. the with find to all at fault no have and liking, our to quite
only is it but you, grant I little, a smokes chimney breakfast-room The
three happen not may which hard, blows and north due is wind the when
into been have we that now altogether, it take And winter. a times
we that one not is there judge, can and hereabouts houses the of most
be will He compliments. my with so, say Pray this. than better like
it." hear to glad

but other: each with pleased well very were Croft Mrs and Russell Lady
at far proceed to not fated was began visit this which acquaintance the
to themselves announced Crofts the returned, was it when for present;
north the in connexions their visit to weeks, few a for away going be
Lady before again home at be not might probably and county, the of
Bath. to removing be would Russell

Kellynch at Wentworth Captain meeting of Anne to danger all ended So
safe was Everything friend. her with company in him seeing of or Hall,
on wasted had she feelings anxious many the over smiled she and enough,
subject. the



14 Chapter


and Mr after longer much Lyme at remained had Mary and Charles Though
all at been have could they conceived Anne than going Musgrove's Mrs
and again; home at be to family the of first the yet were they wanted,
to over drove they Uppercross to return their after possible as soon as
head, her but up; sit to beginning Louisa left had They Lodge. the
the to susceptible nerves her and weak, exceedingly was clear, though
be to pronounced be might she though and tenderness; of extreme highest
she when say to impossible still was it well, very doing altogether
who mother, and father her and home; removal the bear to able be might
Christmas the for children younger their receive to time in return must
them. with her bring to allowed being of hope a hardly had holidays,

Mrs got had Musgrove Mrs together. lodgings in all been had They
supply possible every could, she as much as away children Harville's
the to inconvenience the lighten to furnished, been had Uppercross from
dinner to come to them wanting been had Harvilles the while Harvilles,
each on struggle a only been have to seemed it short, in and day; every
hospitable. and disinterested most be should which to as side

her by evident was as whole, the upon but evils; her had had Mary
Charles suffer. to than enjoy to more found had she long, so staying
dined they when and her; suited than oftener Lyme at been had Hayter
at and wait, to maid-servant a only been had there Harvilles the with
then, but precedence; Musgrove Mrs given always had Harville Mrs first
out finding on her from apology an handsome very so received had she
day, every on going much so been had there and was, she daughter whose
Harvilles, the and lodgings their between walks many so been had there
that often, so them changed and library, the from books got had she and
been had She Lyme. of favour in much been certainly had balance the
church, to gone had she and bathed, had she and too, Charmouth to taken
at church the in at look to people more many great a were there and
so being of sense the to joined this, all and Uppercross; at than Lyme
fortnight. agreeable an really made had useful, very

directly. clouded was face Mary's Benwick. Captain after enquired Anne
laughed. Charles

odd very a is he but believe, I well, very is Benwick Captain "Oh!
come to him asked We at. be would he what know not do I man. young
some him give to undertook Charles two: or day a for us with home
it thought I part, my for and, delighted, quite seemed he and shooting,
awkward very a made he night, Tuesday on behold! when settled; all was
misunderstood,' quite 'been had he and shot' never 'he excuse; of sort
it of end the and that, promised had he and this promised had he and
of afraid was he suppose I come. to mean not did he that found, I was,
lively were we thought have should I word my upon but dull; it finding
Benwick." Captain as man heart-broken a such for Cottage the at enough

it how well very know you Mary, "Now said, and again laughed Charles
fancied "He Anne.) to (turning doing," your all was It was. really
fancied he by: close you find should he us, with went he if that
Lady that discovered he when and Uppercross; in living be to everybody
not had he and him, failed heart his off, miles three lived Russell
is." it knows Mary honour. my upon fact, the is That come. to courage

not from whether graciously, very it into give not did Mary But
in be to situation and birth by entitled Benwick Captain considering
greater a Anne believe to wanting not from or Elliot, an with love
guessed. be to left be must herself, than Uppercross to attraction
heard. she what by lessened be to not was however, good-will, Anne's
enquiries. her continued and flattered, herself acknowledged boldly She

Mary terms--" such "in Charles, cried you," of talks he "Oh!
Anne mention him heard never I Charles, declare, "I him. interrupted
you of talks never he Anne, declare, I there. was I time the all twice
all." at

general a in does, ever he that know not do "I Charles, admitted "No,"
you admires he that thing clear very a is it however, but way;
upon reading is he that books some of full is head His exceedingly.
has he them; about you to talk to wants he and recommendation, your
I thinks--oh! he which them of one in other or something out found
fine--I very something was it but it, remember to pretend cannot
Elliot' 'Miss then and it; about all Henrietta telling him overheard
I so, was it declare I Mary, Now terms! highest the in of spoken was
sweetness, 'Elegance, room. other the in were you and myself, it heard
charms." Elliot's Miss of end no was there Oh! beauty.'

his to little very a was "it warmly, Mary, cried sure," am I "And
is heart a Such June. last died only Harville Miss did. he if credit,
will you sure am I Russell? Lady it, is having; worth little very
me." with agree

Russell, Lady said decide," I before Benwick Captain see must "I
smiling.

ma'am," you, tell can I soon, very do to likely very are you that "And
and us, with away coming for nerves not had he "Though Charles. said
make will he here, visit formal a pay to afterwards again off setting
I it. on depend may you himself, by day one Kellynch to over way his
church's the of him told I and road, the and distance the him told
sort those for taste a has he as for seeing; worth well very so being
with listened he and excuse, good a be would that thought I things, of
you that manner his from sure am I and soul; and understanding his all
Russell." Lady notice, you give I So, soon. here calling him have will

Lady was me," to welcome be always will Anne's of acquaintance "Any
answer. kind Russell's

rather is he think "I Mary, said acquaintance," Anne's being to as "Oh!
last this day every him seeing been have I for acquaintance, my
fortnight."

see to happy very be shall I then, acquaintance, joint your as "Well,
Benwick." Captain

ma'am. you, assure I him, in agreeable very anything find not will "You
with walked has He lived. ever that men young dullest the of one is He
a saying without other, the to sands the of end one from sometimes, me,
not will you sure am I man. young well-bred a all at not is He word.
him." like

like would Russell Lady think "I Anne. said Mary," differ, we "There
she that mind, his with pleased much so be would she think I him.
manner." his in deficiency no see soon very would

him. like would Russell Lady sure am "I Charles. said Anne," I, do "So
all read will he and book, a him Give sort. Russell's Lady just is He
long." day

poring sit will "He tauntingly. Mary, exclaimed will!" he that "Yes,
one when or him, to speaks person a when know not and book, his over
Lady think you Do happens. that anything or scissors, one's drops
that?" like would Russell

"I she, said word," my "Upon laughing. help not could Russell Lady
admitted have could one any of opinion my that supposed have not should
may I as fact of matter and steady conjecture, of difference such of
give can who person the see to curiosity a really have I myself. call
induced be may he wish I notions. opposite directly such to occasion
my hearing upon depend may you Mary, does, he when And here. call to
beforehand." him judge to not determined am I but opinion;

it." for answer will I him, like not will "You

with spoke Mary else. something of talking began Russell Lady
so Elliot Mr missing, rather or with, meeting their of animation
extraordinarily.

His see. to wish no have I "whom Russell, Lady said man," a is "He
left has family, his of head the with terms cordial on be to declining
me." with disfavour his in impression strong very a

the in short her stopped and eagerness, Mary's checked decision This
countenance. Elliot the of midst

enquiries, no hazarded Anne though Wentworth, Captain to regard With
been had spirits His sufficient. communication voluntary was there
he improved, Louisa As expected. be might as lately recovering greatly
he what from creature different a quite now was he and improved, had
extremely so was and Louisa; seen not had He week. first the been had
did he that interview, an from her to consequence ill any of fearful
of plan a have to seemed contrary, the on and, all; at it for press not
had He stronger. was head her till days, ten or week a for away going
persuade to wanted and week, a for Plymouth to down going of talked
last, the to maintained Charles as but, him; with go to Benwick Captain
Kellynch. to over ride to disposed more much seemed Benwick Captain

occasionally both were Anne and Russell Lady that doubt no be can There
not could Russell Lady time. this from Benwick, Captain of thinking
nor herald; his be might it that feeling without door-bell the hear
her in indulgence solitary of stroll any from return Anne could
without village, the in charity of visit any or grounds, father's
Benwick Captain him. of hear or him see might she whether wondering
had Charles than it for disposed less either was He however. not, came
indulgence, week's a him giving after and shy; too was he or imagined,
had he which interest the of unworthy be to him determined Russell Lady
excite. to beginning been

from girls and boys happy their receive to back came Musgroves The
improve to children, little Harville's Mrs them with bringing school,
remained Henrietta Lyme. of that lessen and Uppercross, of noise the
usual their in again were family the of rest the all but Louisa; with
quarters.

Anne when once, them to compliments their paid Anne and Russell Lady
again. alive quite already was Uppercross that feel but not could
Captain nor Hayter, Charles nor Louisa, nor Henrietta, neither Though
could as contrast a strong as presented room the there, were Wentworth
in. it seen had she state last the to wished be

whom Harvilles, little the were Musgrove Mrs surrounding Immediately
from children two the of tyranny the from guarding sedulously was she
table a was side one On them. amuse to arrived expressly Cottage, the
and paper; gold and silk up cutting girls, chattering some by occupied
brawn of weight the under bending trays, and tressels were other the on
whole the revel; high holding were boys riotous where pies, cold and
be to determined seemed which fire, Christmas roaring a by completed
also Mary and Charles others. the of noise the all of spite in heard,
of point a made Musgrove Mr and visit, their during course, of in, came
ten for her to close down sat and Russell, Lady to respects his paying
the of clamour the from but voice, raised very a with talking minutes,
family-piece. fine a was It vain. in generally knees, his on children

a such deemed have would temperament, own her from judging Anne,
Louisa's which nerves, the of restorative bad a hurricane domestic
Anne got who Musgrove, Mrs But shaken. greatly so have must illness
for again, and again cordially, most her thank to purpose on her near
what of recapitulation short a concluded them, to attentions her all
the round glance happy a with observing, by herself suffered had she
do to likely so was nothing through, gone had she all after that room,
home. at cheerfulness quiet little a as good her

her of think even could mother Her apace. recovering now was Louisa
sisters and brothers her before home, at party their join to able being
and her with come to promised had Harvilles The again. school to went
gone, was Wentworth Captain returned. she whenever Uppercross, at stay
Shropshire. in brother his see to present, the for

as soon as Russell, Lady said future," in remember, shall I hope "I
the in Uppercross at call to "not carriage, the in reseated were they
holidays." Christmas

and matters; other in as well as noises in taste their has Everybody
rather sort their by distressing, most or innoxious, quite are sounds
was afterwards, long not Russell Lady When quantity. their than
course long the through driving and afternoon, wet a on Bath entering
of dash the amidst Place, Camden to Bridge Old the from streets of
of bawling the drays, and carts of rumble heavy the carriages, other
of clink ceaseless the and milkmen, and muffin-men newspapermen,
belonged which noises were these No, complaint. no made she pattens,
and influence; their under rose spirits her pleasures; winter the to
being after that saying, not though feeling, was she Musgrove, Mrs like
quiet little a as her for good so be could nothing country, the in long
cheerfulness.

determined, very a in persisted She feelings. these share not did Anne
view dim first the caught Bath; for disinclination silent very though
seeing of wish any without rain, in smoking buildings, extensive the of
however be, to streets the through progress their felt better; them
she when her see to glad be would who for rapid; too yet disagreeable,
of bustles the to regret, fond with back, looked And arrived?
Kellynch. of seclusion the and Uppercross

some of news of piece a communicated had letter last Elizabeth's
had Place; Camden in called had He Bath. in was Elliot Mr interest.
If attentive. pointedly been had third; a time, second a called
taking been had themselves, deceive not did father her and Elizabeth
the of value the proclaim and acquaintance, the seek to pains much
was This neglect. shew to pains taken formerly had he as connection,
very of state a in was Russell Lady and true; were it if wonderful very
recanting already Elliot, Mr about perplexity and curiosity agreeable
man "a being his of Mary, to expressed lately so had she sentiment the
he If him. see to wish great a had She see." to wish no had she whom
be must he branch, dutiful a like himself reconcile to sought really
tree. paternal the from himself dismembered having for forgiven

she but circumstance, the by pitch equal an to animated not was Anne
more was which not, than again Elliot Mr see rather would she that felt
Bath. in persons other many for say could she than

her to drove then Russell Lady and Place; Camden in down put was She
Street. Rivers in lodgings, own



15 Chapter


lofty a Place, Camden in house good very a taken had Walter Sir
he both and consequence; of man a becomes as such situation, dignified
satisfaction. their to much there, settled were Elizabeth and

of imprisonment an anticipating heart, sinking a with it entered Anne
leave I shall when "Oh! herself, to saying anxiously and months, many
welcome the in however, cordiality, unexpected of degree A again?" you
see to glad were sister and father Her good. her did received, she
her met and furniture, and house the her shewing of sake the for her,
was dinner, to down sat they when fourth, a making Her kindness. with
advantage. an as noticed

and courtesies her but smiling, very and pleasant, very was Clay Mrs
she that felt always had Anne course. of matter a more were smiles
of complaisance the but arrival, her on proper was what pretend would
spirits, excellent in evidently were They for. unlooked was others the
to inclination no had They causes. the to listen to soon was she and
deeply being of compliments some for out laying After her. to listen
they pay, not could Anne which neighbourhood, old their in regretted
all be must talk the before make, to enquiries faint few a only had
it little: very Kellynch interest, no excited Uppercross own. their
Bath. all was

answered than more Bath that her assuring of pleasure the had They
the undoubtedly was house Their respect. every in expectations their
advantages decided many had drawing-rooms their Place; Camden in best
the and of, heard or seen either had they which others the all over
taste the or fitting-up, the of style the in less not was superiority
after. sought exceedingly was acquaintance Their furniture. the of
many from back drawn had They them. visit to wanting was Everybody
people by left cards having perpetually were still and introductions,
nothing. knew they whom of

and father her that wonder Anne Could enjoyment. of funds were Here
her that sigh must she but wonder, not might She happy? were sister
to nothing see should change, his in degradation no feel should father
should landholder, resident the of dignity and duties the in regret
must she and town; a of littlenesses the in of vain be to much so find
the open threw Elizabeth as too, wonder and smile, and sigh,
the to drawing-room one from exultation with walked and folding-doors
who woman, that of possibility the at space; their of boasting other,
of proud be to extent finding Hall, Kellynch of mistress been had
asunder. feet thirty perhaps walls, two between

Mr had They happy. them make to had they which all not was this But
not was He Elliot. Mr of hear to deal great a had Anne too. Elliot
about Bath in been had He him. with delighted were they pardoned, only
to way his in November, in Bath through passed had (he fortnight; a
had there settled being Walter's Sir of intelligence the when London,
but place, the in hours twenty-four only though him, reached course of
a been now had he but it;) of himself avail to able been not had he
leave to been had arriving, on object first his and Bath, in fortnight
endeavours assiduous such by up it following Place, Camden in card his
conduct, of openness great such by meet, did they when and meet, to
be to solicitude such past, the for apologize to readiness such
was understanding good former their that again, relation a as received
re-established. completely

the all away explained had He him. in find to fault a not had They
in originated had It side. own his on neglect of appearance
himself throwing of idea an had never had He entirely. misapprehension
and why, not knew but off, thrown was he that feared had he off;
spoken having of hint the Upon silent. him kept had delicacy
he honours, family the and family the of carelessly or disrespectfully
and Elliot, an being of boasted ever had who He, indignant. quite was
the suit to strict too only were connection, to as feelings, whose
his but indeed, astonished, was He day. present the of tone unfeudal
Sir refer could He it. refute must conduct general and character
taking been had he pains the certainly, and him; knew who all to Walter
the to restored be to reconciliation, of opportunity first the this, on
his of proof strong a was heir-presumptive, and relation a of footing
subject. the on opinions

much of admit to found were too, marriage, his of circumstances The
but himself; by on entered be to not article an was This extenuation.
respectable highly a Wallis, Colonel a his, of friend intimate very a
Walter Sir man, ill-looking an not (and gentleman, the perfectly man,
and Buildings, Marlborough in style good very in living was who added),
acquaintance their to admitted been request, particular own his at had,
the to relative things two or one mentioned had Elliot, Mr through
it. of discredit the in difference material a made which marriage,

also acquainted well been had long, Elliot Mr known had Wallis Colonel
was She story. whole the understood perfectly had wife, his with
rich, accomplished, educated, well but family, of woman a not certainly
charm. the been had There friend. his with love in excessively and
would money her all not attraction, that Without him. sought had She
her of assured moreover, was, Walter Sir and Elliot, tempted have
the soften to deal great a was Here woman. fine very a been having
him! with love in fortune, large a with woman fine very A business.
Elizabeth though and apology; complete as it admit to seemed Walter Sir
she light, a favourable so quite in circumstance the see not could
extenuation. great a be it allowed

evidently once, them with dined had repeatedly, called had Elliot Mr
dinners no gave they for asked, being of distinction the by delighted
and notice, cousinly of proof every by short, in delighted, general; in
Place. Camden in terms intimate on being in happiness whole his placing

large Allowances, it. understanding quite without but listened, Anne
spoke. who those of ideas the for made be must knew, she allowances,
or extravagant sounded that All embellishment. under all it heard She
origin no have might reconciliation the of progress the in irrational
the had she however, Still, relators. the of language the in but
in appeared, immediately than more something being there of sensation
well be to years, many so of interval an after wishing, Elliot's Mr
being by gain to nothing had he view, worldly a In them. by received
In variance. of state a by risk to nothing Walter; Sir with terms on
Kellynch the and two, the of richer the already was he probability all
man, sensible A title. the as hereafter his be surely as would estate
object an be it should why man, sensible very a like looked had he and
for perhaps, was, it solution; one offer only could She him? to
formerly, liking a been have really might There sake. Elizabeth's
now and way; different a him drawn had accident and convenience though
his pay to mean might he himself, please to afford could he that
with handsome, very certainly was Elizabeth her. to addresses
been have never might character her and manners, elegant well-bred,
young very when and public, in but her knowing Elliot, Mr by penetrated
investigation the bear might understanding and temper her How himself.
a rather and concern another was life of time keener present his of
too be not might he that wish she did earnestly Most one. fearful
Elizabeth that and object; his were Elizabeth if observant too or nice,
was Clay Mrs friend her that and so, herself believe to disposed was
them, between two or glance a by apparent seemed idea, the encouraging
of. talked were visits frequent Elliot's Mr while

without but Lyme, at him of had had she glimpses the mentioned Anne
Elliot. Mr been had it perhaps, yes, "Oh! to. attended much being
listen not could They perhaps." him, be might It know. not did They
Sir themselves; him describing were They him. of description her to
gentlemanlike very his to justice did He especially. Walter
his face, shaped good his fashion, and elegance of air his appearance,
much very being his lament "must time, same the at but, eye; sensible
he could nor increased; have to seemed time which defect a under-hung,
for feature every almost altered not had years ten that say to pretend
was Walter) (Sir he that think to appeared Elliot Mr worse. the
Walter Sir but parted;" last they when done had he as exactly looking
had which entirely, compliment the return to able been "not had
was Elliot Mr however. complain, to mean not did He him. embarrassed
seen being to objection no had he and men, most than at look to better
anywhere." him with

the of talked were Buildings, Marlborough in friends his and Elliot, Mr
introduced be to impatient so been had Wallis "Colonel evening. whole
Mrs a was there and should!" he that anxious so Elliot Mr and them! to
in was she as description, by them to only known present at Wallis,
"a as her of spoke Elliot Mr but confinement; her of expectation daily
and Place," Camden in known being of worthy quite woman, charming most
Walter Sir acquainted. be to were they recovered she as soon as
pretty excessively an be to said was she Wallis; Mrs of much thought
some make might she hoped He her. see to longed "He beautiful. woman,
the in passing continually was he faces plain very many the for amends
did He women. plain its of number the was Bath of worst The streets.
the of number the but women, pretty no were there that say to mean not
he as observed, frequently had He proportion. all of out was plain
or thirty, by followed be would face handsome one that walked,
Bond on shop a in stood had he as once, and frights; five-and-thirty
another, after one by, go women eighty-seven counted had he Street,
frosty a been had It them. among face tolerable a being there without
a in woman one hardly which frost, sharp a sure, be to morning,
a were certainly there still, But of. test the stand could thousand
they men! the for as and Bath; in women ugly of multitude dreadful
of! full were streets the as scarecrows Such worse. infinitely were
anything of sight the to used were women the little how evident was It
He produced. appearance decent of man a which effect the by tolerable,
a was (who Wallis Colonel with arm-in-arm anywhere walked never had
every that observing without sandy-haired) though figure, military fine
Colonel upon be to sure was eye woman's every him; upon was eye woman's
however. escape, to allowed not was He Walter! Sir Modest Wallis."
Wallis's Colonel that hinting in united Clay Mrs and daughter His
certainly and Wallis, Colonel as figure a good as have might companion
sandy-haired. not was

good his of height the in Walter, Sir said looking?" Mary is "How
that hope I but nose, red a had she her saw I time last "The humour.
day." every happen not may

been has she general In accidental. quite been have must that no, "Oh!
Michaelmas." since looks good very and health good very in

grow and winds, sharp in out go to her tempt not would it thought I "If
pelisse." and hat new a her send would I coarse,

gown, a that suggest to venture should she whether considering was Anne
the at knock a when misuse, such any to liable be not would cap, a or
was It late! so and door! the at knock "A everything. suspended door
in dine to was he knew They Elliot? Mr be it Could o'clock. ten
home way his in stop might he that possible was It Crescent. Lansdown
Clay Mrs else. one no of think could They did. they how them ask to
all With right. was Clay Mrs knock." Elliot's Mr it thought decidedly
ushered was Elliot Mr give, could foot-boy and butler a which state the
room. the into

dress. of but difference no with man, same very the same, the was It
and compliments, his received others the while back, little a drew Anne
"he but hour, an unusual so at calling for apologies his sister her
her nor she neither that know to wishing without near so be not could
as all was which &c; &c. before," day the cold taken had friend
must part her but possible, as taken, politely as and done, politely
Elliot "Mr daughter; youngest his of talked Walter Sir then. follow
was (there daughter" youngest his to him present to leave him give must
very blushing, and smiling Anne, and Mary); remembering for occasion no
no by had he which features pretty the Elliot Mr to shewed becomingly
start little his at amusement with saw, instantly and forgotten, means
He was. she who of aware all at been not had he that surprise, of
his pleased; than astonished more not but astonished, completely looked
the welcomed he alacrity perfect most the with and brightened! eyes
an as received be to entreated and past, the to alluded relationship,
appeared had he as good-looking as quite was He already. acquaintance
so were manners his and speaking, by improved countenance his Lyme, at
particularly so easy, so polished, so be, to ought they what exactly
one only to excellence in them compare could she that agreeable,
perhaps, were, they but same, the not were They manners. person's
good. equally

much. very conversation their improved and them, with down sat He
were minutes Ten man. sensible a being his of doubt no be could There
of choice his expressions, his tone, His that. certify to enough
a of operation the all was it stop; to where knowing his subject,
to talk to began he could, he as soon As mind. discerning sensible,
but place, the respecting opinions compare to wanting Lyme, of her
to happening their of circumstance the of speak to wanting especially
route, own his give to time; same the at inn same the in guests be
such lost have should he that regret and hers, of something understand
short a him gave She her. to respects his paying of opportunity an
he as increased regret His Lyme. at business and party her of account
room the in evening solitary whole his spent had He listened.
they thought continually; mirth voices, heard had theirs; adjoining
but them, with be to longed people, of set delightful most a be must
shadow the possessing his of suspicion smallest the without certainly
party the who asked but had he If himself. introduce to right a of
it "Well, enough. him told have would Musgrove of name The were!
a asking never of practice absurd an of him cure to serve would
on man, young a quite when adopted, had he which inn, an at question
curious. be to ungenteel very being its of principal the

to "as he, said twenty," and two or one of man young a of notions "The
more are thing, the quite him make to manners in necessary is what
world. the in beings of set other any of those than believe, I absurd,
the by equalled be to only is employ often they means the of folly The
view." in have they what of folly

knew he alone: Anne to reflections his addressing be not must he But
at only was it and others, the among again diffused soon was he it;
Lyme. to return could he that intervals

she scene the of account an length at produced however, enquiries, His
Having place. the leaving his after soon there, in engaged been had
questioned, he When whole. the hear must he accident," "an to alluded
in difference the but also, question to began Elizabeth and Walter Sir
compare only could She unfelt. be not could it doing of manner their
had what comprehending really of wish the in Russell, Lady to Elliot Mr
in suffered have must she what for concern of degree the in and passed,
it. witnessing

mantel-piece the on clock little elegant The them. with hour an staid He
was watchman the and sounds," silver its with "eleven struck had
Mr before tale, same the telling distance a at heard be to beginning
long. there been had he that feel to seemed them of any or Elliot

in evening first her that possible it supposed have not could Anne
well! so passed have could Place Camden



16 Chapter


have would family, her to returning on Anne, which point one was There
love in being Elliot's Mr than even ascertain to thankful more been
Mrs with love in being not father's her was, which Elizabeth, with
at been had she when it, about easy from far very was she and Clay;
she morning, next the breakfast to down going On hours. few a home
of side lady's the on pretence decent a been just had there found
that said, have to Clay Mrs imagine could She them. leave to meaning
wanted;" all at herself suppose not could she come, was Anne Miss "now
any be not must "That whisper, of sort a in replying was Elizabeth for
me, to nothing is She none. it feel I you assure I indeed. reason,
say, father her hear to time full in was she and you;" with compared
of nothing seen have you yet, As be. not must this madam, dear "My
away run not must You useful. be to only here been have You Bath.
the Wallis, Mrs with acquainted be to stay must You now. us from
of sight the know well I mind, fine your To Wallis. Mrs beautiful
gratification." real a is beauty

to surprised not was Anne that earnest, in much so looked and spoke He
Her herself. and Elizabeth at glance a stealing Clay Mrs see
praise the but watchfulness; some express might perhaps, countenance,
The sister. her in thought a excite to appear not did mind fine the of
stay. to promise and entreaties, joint such to yield but not could lady

be to chancing father her and Anne morning, same the of course the In
he looks; improved her on her compliment to began he together, alone
her skin, her cheeks; her in person, her in thin "less her thought
any using been she Had fresher. clearer, improved; greatly complexion,
supposed. he Gowland," "Merely nothing." "No, particular?" in thing
added, and that;" at surprised was he "Ha! all." at nothing "No,
cannot you are; you as continue to than better do cannot you "certainly
of use constant the Gowland, recommend should I or well; than better be
my at it using been has Clay Mrs months. spring the during Gowland,
it how see You her. for done has it what see you and recommendation,
freckles." her away carried has

might praise personal Such this! heard have but could Elizabeth If
the that Anne to appear not did it as especially her, struck have
chance. its take must everything But lessened. all at were freckles
also were Elizabeth if diminished, much be would marriage a of evil The
Lady with home a command always might she herself, for As marry. to
Russell.

trial some to put were manners polite and mind composed Russell's Lady
Mrs of sight The Place. Camden in intercourse her in point, this on
perpetual a was overlooked, so Anne of and favour, such in Clay
a as away, was she when much as her vexed and there; her to provocation
and publications, new the all gets water, the drinks who Bath in person
vexed. be to time has acquaintance, large very a has

more or charitable, more grew she her, to known became Elliot Mr As
immediate an were manners His others. the towards indifferent,
fully so solid the found she him with conversing on and recommendation;
Anne, told she as first, at was she that superficial, the supporting
not could and Elliot?" Mr be this "Can exclaim, to ready almost
man. estimable or agreeable more a herself to picture seriously
opinions, correct understanding, good him; in united Everything
of feelings strong had He heart. warm a and world, the of knowledge
he weakness; or pride without honour, family and attachment family
he display; without fortune, of man a of liberality the with lived
public defying without essential, everything in himself for judged
observant, steady, was He decorum. worldly of point any in opinion
selfishness, by or spirits by with away run never candid; moderate,
to sensibility a with yet, and feeling; strong itself fancied which
of felicities the all for value a and lovely, and amiable was what
violent and enthusiasm fancied of characters which life, domestic
been not had he that sure was She possess. really seldom agitation
it; saw Russell Lady and it, said Wallis Colonel marriage. in happy
pretty began (she nor mind, his sour to unhappiness no been had it but
Her choice. second a of thinking his prevent to suspect) to soon
Clay. Mrs of plague the all outweighed Elliot Mr in satisfaction

her and she that learn to begun had Anne since years some now was It
not did it and differently; think sometimes could friend excellent
nothing see should Russell Lady that therefore, her, surprise
than motives more require to nothing inconsistent, or suspicious
Lady In reconciliation. a of desire great Elliot's Mr in appeared,
mature a at Elliot, Mr that natural perfectly was it view, Russell's
would what and object, desirable most a it feel should life, of time
good on be to people, sensible all among him recommend generally very
of world the in process simplest the family; his of head the with terms
of heyday the in erring only and clear, naturally head a upon time
to last at and it, about smile to still however, presumed, Anne youth.
only made and looked, and listened, Russell Lady "Elizabeth." mention
explain." will time well; very reply:--"Elizabeth! cautious this

little a after Anne, which future, the to reference a was It
at nothing determine could She to. submit must she felt observation,
the in was she and first; be must Elizabeth house that In present.
any that Elliot," "Miss as observance general such of habit
too, Elliot, Mr impossible. almost seemed attention of particularity
little A months. seven widower a been not had remembered, be must it
never could Anne fact, In excusable. very be might side his on delay
the was she that fearing without hat, his round crape the see
though for imaginations; such him to attributing in one, inexcusable
many so existed had it still happy, very been not had marriage his
the from recovery rapid very a comprehend not could she that years
dissolved. being its of impression awful

pleasantest their question any without was he end, might it However
great a was it and him; to equal nobody saw she Bath: in acquaintance
to seemed he which Lyme, about him to talk to then and now indulgence
herself. as of, more see to and again, see to wish a lively as have
many great a meeting first their of particulars the through went They
some with her at looked had he that understand to her gave He times.
person's another remembered she and well; it knew She earnestness.
also. look

she connexion and rank for value His alike. think always not did They
it complaisance, merely not was It hers. than greater was perceived
her into warmly enter him made which cause, the to liking a be must
unworthy thought she which subject a on solicitudes sister's and father
of arrival the announced morning one paper Bath The them. excite to
Honourable the daughter, her and Dalrymple, Viscountess Dowager the
swept was Place, Camden --, No. of comfort the all and Carteret; Miss
most opinion, Anne's (in Dalrymples the for days; many for away
to how was agony the and Elliots; the of cousins were unfortunately)
properly. themselves introduce

with contact in before sister and father her seen never had Anne
hoped had She disappointed. herself acknowledge must she and nobility,
and life, in situation own their of ideas high their from things better
that wish a foreseen; never had she which wish a form to reduced was
Miss and Dalrymple Lady cousins "our for pride; more had they
day all ears her in sounded Dalrymples," the cousins, "our Carteret;"
long.

had but viscount, late the with company in been once had Walter Sir
the of difficulties the and family; the of rest the of any seen never
by intercourse all of suspension a been having there from arose case
viscount, late said that of death the since ever ceremony, of letters
same the at Walter's Sir of illness dangerous a of consequence in when,
of letter No Kellynch. at omission unlucky an been had there time,
on visited been had neglect The Ireland. to sent been had condolence
no herself, died Elliot Lady poor when for sinner; the of head the
there consequently, and, Kellynch, at received was condolence of letter
the considered Dalrymples the that apprehend to reason much too but was
to set business anxious this have to How closed. as relationship
was it and question: the was again, cousins as admitted be and rights,
nor Russell Lady neither manner, rational more a in which, question a
worth always were connexions "Family unimportant. thought Elliot Mr
taken had Dalrymple Lady seeking; worth always company good preserving,
in living be would and Place, Laura in months, three for house, a
had Russell Lady and before, year the Bath at been had She style.
that desirable very was It woman. charming a as of spoken her heard
any without done, be could it if renewed, be should connexion the
Elliots." the of side the on propriety of compromise

a wrote last at and means, own his choose would however, Walter, Sir
his to entreaty, and regret, explanation, ample of letter fine very
could Elliot Mr nor Russell Lady Neither cousin. honourable right
three bringing in wanted, was that all did it but letter; the admire
much very was "She Viscountess. Dowager the from scrawl of lines
the of toils The acquaintance." their in happy be should and honoured,
Place, Laura in visited They began. sweets the over, were business
Honourable the and Dalrymple, Viscountess Dowager of cards the had they
and visible: most be might they wherever arranged be to Carteret, Miss
Miss and Dalrymple Lady cousin, Place,"--"Our Laura in cousins "Our
everybody. to of talked were Carteret,"

very been even daughter her and Dalrymple Lady Had ashamed. was Anne
they agitation the of ashamed been have still would she agreeable,
manner, of superiority no was There nothing. were they but created,
name the acquired had Dalrymple Lady understanding. or accomplishment,
for answer civil a and smile a had she because woman," charming "a of
so and plain so was say, to less still with Carteret, Miss everybody.
but Place Camden in tolerated been have never would she that awkward,
birth. her for

"it yet but better; something expected had she confessed Russell Lady
her speak to ventured Anne when and having;" worth acquaintance an was
in nothing being their to agreed he Elliot, Mr to them of opinion
good as connexion, family a as that, maintained still but themselves,
had they them, around company good collect would who those as company,
said, and smiled Anne value. their

clever, of company the is Elliot, Mr company, good of idea "My
is that conversation; of deal great a have who people, well-informed
company." good call I what

is that company; good not is "that gently, he said mistaken," are "You
manners, and education, birth, only requires company Good best. the
manners good and Birth nice. very not is education to regard with and
thing dangerous a means no by is learning little a but essential; are
Anne cousin My well. very do will it contrary, the on company; good in
dear My fastidious. is She satisfied. not is She head. her shakes
be to right better a have "you her), by down (sitting cousin"
answer? it will but know; I woman other any almost than fastidious
of society the accept to wiser be not it Will happy? you make it Will
the of advantages the all enjoy and Place, Laura in ladies good those
will they that it, upon depend may You possible? as far as connexion
your rank, is rank as and winter, this Bath in set first the in move
your fixing in use its have will them to related be to known being
we which consideration of degree that in say) me let family (our family
for." wish all must

them!" to related be to known be indeed, shall, "we Anne, sighed "Yes,"
added, she answered, be to wishing not and herself, recollecting then
to taken trouble much too far by been has there think do certainly "I
than pride more have "I (smiling) suppose" I acquaintance. the procure
so be should we that me, vex does it confess I but you; of any
very be may we which acknowledged, relationship the have to solicitous
them." to indifference perfect of matter a is sure

London, In claims. own your in unjust are you cousin, dear me, "Pardon
say: you as be might it living, of style quiet present your in perhaps,
worth be always will family his and Elliot Walter Sir Bath; in but
acquaintance." as acceptable always knowing:

welcome a enjoy to proud too proud, am certainly "I Anne, said "Well,"
place." upon entirely so depends which

you here But natural. very is "it he; said indignation," your love "I
the all with here established be to is object the and Bath, in are
You Elliot. Walter Sir to belong to ought which dignity and credit
to wish not shall I and know, I proud, called am I proud; being of talk
have would investigated, if pride, our for otherwise; myself believe
little a seem may kind the though doubt, no have I object, same the
continued, (he cousin," dear my sure, am I point, one In different.
one "in room) the in else one no was there though lower, speaking
addition every that feel must We alike. feel must we sure, am I point,
use of be may superiors, or equals his among society, father's your to
him." beneath are who those from thoughts his diverting in

lately been had Clay Mrs which seat the to spoke, he as looked, He
and meant; particularly he what of explanation sufficient a occupying:
pride, of sort same the having their in believe not could Anne though
conscience her and Clay; Mrs liking not for him with pleased was she
great getting father's her promote to wishing his that admitted
her. defeating of view the in excusable than more was acquaintance



17 Chapter


good their pushing assiduously were Elizabeth and Walter Sir While
very a of acquaintance an renewing was Anne Place, Laura in fortune
description. different

there of her from heard had and governess, former her on called had She
on claims strong two the had who Bath, in school-fellow old an being
Hamilton, Miss suffering. present and kindness past of attention her
her of periods those of one in kindness her shewn had Smith, Mrs now
school, to unhappy gone had Anne valuable. most been had it when life
feeling loved, dearly had she whom mother a of loss the for grieving
of fourteen, of girl a as suffering and home, from separation her
time; a such at suffer must spirits, high not and sensibility strong
the from still but herself, than older years three Hamilton, Miss and
at year another remaining home, settled a and relations near of want
considerably had which way a in her to good and useful been had school,
indifference. with remembered be never could and misery, her lessened

was afterwards, long not married had school, left had Hamilton Miss
had Anne that all was this and fortune, of man a married have to said
her brought account governess's their that now till her, of known
form. different very but decided more a in forward situation

his at and extravagant; been had husband Her poor. and widow a was She
dreadfully affairs his left had before, years two about death,
and with, contend to sort every of difficulties had had She involved.
severe a with afflicted been had distresses these to addition in
for her made had legs, her in settling finally which, fever, rheumatic
was and account, that on Bath to come had She cripple. a present the
unable way, humble very a in living baths, hot the near lodgings in now
almost course of and servant, a of comfort the herself afford to even
society. from excluded

from visit a which satisfaction the for answered friend mutual Their
in time no lost therefore Anne and Smith, Mrs give would Elliot Miss
she what or heard, had she what of nothing mentioned She going.
only She there. interest proper no excite would It home. at intended,
and sentiments, her into thoroughly entered who Russell, Lady consulted
in lodgings Smith's Mrs to near as her convey to happy most was
taken. be to chose Anne as Buildings, Westgate

interest their re-established, acquaintance their paid, was visit The
its had minutes ten first The re-kindled. than more other each in
had they since gone were years Twelve emotion. its and awkwardness
the what from person different somewhat a presented each and parted,
blooming, the from Anne changed had years Twelve imagined. had other
of woman little elegant the to fifteen, of girl unformed silent,
as manners with and bloom, except beauty every with seven-and-twenty,
had years twelve and gentle; invariably were they as right consciously
glow the all in Hamilton, Miss well-grown fine-looking, the transformed
helpless infirm, poor, a into superiority, of confidence and health of
all but favour; a as protegee former her of visit the receiving widow,
left and away, passed soon had meeting the in uncomfortable was that
and partialities former remembering of charm interesting the only
times. old over talking

she which manners agreeable and sense good the Smith Mrs in found Anne
be and converse to disposition a and on, depend to ventured almost had
the of dissipations the Neither expectation. her beyond cheerful
of restrictions the world--nor the in much very lived had she past--and
her closed have to seemed sorrow nor sickness neither present, the
spirits. her ruined or heart

and openness, great with talked she visit second a of course the In
more a imagine scarcely could She increased. astonishment Anne's
fond very been had She Smith's. Mrs than itself in situation cheerless
affluence: to used been had She him. buried had she husband: her of
happiness and life with her connect to child no had She gone. was it
affairs, perplexed of arrangement the in assist to relations no again,
were accommodations Her supportable. rest the all make to health no
no with behind, bedroom dark a and parlour, noisy a to limited
which assistance, without other the to one from moving of possibility
never she and afford, to house the in servant one only was there
spite in Yet, bath. warm the into conveyed be to but house the quitted
of only moments had she that believe to reason had Anne this, all of
How enjoyment. and occupation of hours to depression, and languor
determined finally and reflected, observed, watched, She be? it could
A only. resignation of or fortitude of case a not was this that
supply would understanding strong a patient, be might spirit submissive
of elasticity that was here more; something was here but resolution,
readily turning of power that comforted, be to disposition that mind,
of out her carried which employment finding of and good, to evil from
of gift choicest the was It alone. nature from was which herself,
which, in instances those of one as friend her viewed Anne and Heaven;
almost counterbalance to designed seems it appointment, merciful a by
want. other every

nearly had spirits her when her, told Smith Mrs time, a been had There
her with compared now, invalid an herself call not could She failed.
pitiable a been indeed, had, she Then Bath. reaching first on state
taken hardly had and journey, the on cold caught had she for object;
and bed her to confined again was she before lodgings her of possession
strangers, among this all and pain; constant and severe under suffering
at finances and nurse, regular a having of necessity absolute the with
She expense. extraordinary any meet to unfit particularly moment that
her done had it that say truly could and however, it, weathered had
be to herself feel her making by comforts her increased had It good.
or sudden expect to world, the of much too seen had She hands. good in
her to proved had illness her but anywhere, attachment disinterested
her use not would and preserve, to character a had landlady her that
sister a as nurse, her in fortunate particularly been had she and ill;
in home a always had who and profession, by nurse a landlady, her of
to time in just liberty at be to chanced unemployed, when house that
most me nursing "besides Smith, Mrs said she," "And her. attend
I as soon As acquaintance. invaluable an proved really has admirably,
great a been has which knit, to me taught she hands my use could
little these making of way the in me put she and amusement;
so me find always you which card-racks, and pin-cushions thread-cases,
good little a doing of means the with me supply which and about, busy
a had She neighbourhood. this in families poor very two or one to
can who those among professionally, course of acquaintance, large
takes always She merchandise. my of disposes she and buy, to afford
when know, you open, is heart Everybody's applying. for time right the
the recovering are or pain, severe from escaped recently have they
to when understands thoroughly Rooke Nurse and health, of blessing
line a is Hers woman. sensible intelligent, shrewd, a is She speak.
and sense good of fund a has she and nature; human seeing for
to superior infinitely her make companion, a as which, observation,
the in education best 'the received only having who those of thousands
will, you if gossip, it Call to. attending worth nothing know world,'
is she me, on bestow to leisure hour's an half has Rooke Nurse when but
profitable: and entertaining is that relate to something have to sure
hear to likes One better. species one's know one makes that something
being of modes newest the to as fait au be to on, going is what
I conversation, her alone, much so live who me, To silly. and trifling
treat." a is you, assure

easily can "I replied, pleasure, the at cavil to wishing from far Anne,
they if and opportunities, great have class that of Women it. believe
of varieties Such to. listening worth well be may intelligent are
not is it And witnessing! of habit the in are they as nature human
it see they for read; well are they that follies, its in merely
or interesting most be can that circumstance every under occasionally
ardent, of them before pass must instances What affecting.
fortitude, heroism, of attachment, self-denying disinterested,
sacrifices the all and conflicts the all of resignation: patience,
of worth the furnish often may chamber sick A most. us ennoble that
volumes."

fear I though may, it "sometimes doubtingly, more Smith Mrs said "Yes,"
and Here describe. you style elevated the in often not are lessons its
generally but trial; of times in great be may nature human there,
a in appears that strength its not and weakness its is it speaking,
generosity than rather impatience and selfishness is it chamber: sick
friendship real little so is There of. hears one that fortitude, and
"there tremulously) and low (speaking unfortunately" and world! the in
late." too almost is it till seriously think to forget who many so are

he what been not had husband The feelings. such of misery the saw Anne
made which mankind of part that among led been had wife the and ought,
a but was It deserved. it hoped she than world the of worse think her
soon and off, it shook she Smith; Mrs with however emotion passing
tone-- different a in added

present, at in is Rooke Mrs friend my situation the suppose not do "I
nursing only is She me. edify or interest to either much furnish will
expensive, silly, pretty, mere a Buildings; Marlborough of Wallis Mrs
report to nothing have will course of and believe; I woman, fashionable
Wallis, Mrs of profit my make to mean I finery. and lace of but
the all buy shall she intend I and money, of plenty has She however.
now." hand in have I things high-priced

of existence the before friend, her on times several called had Anne
necessary became it last, At Place. Camden in known was person a such
one returned Clay, Mrs and Elizabeth Walter, Sir her. of speak to
Dalrymple Lady from invitation sudden a with Place, Laura from morning
that spend to engaged, already was Anne and evening, same the for
They excuse. the for sorry not was She Buildings. Westgate in evening
at kept being Dalrymple Lady because sure, was she asked, only were
had which relationship the of use make to glad was cold, bad a by home
great with account own her on declined she and her; on pressed so been
old an with evening the spend to engaged was alacrity--"She
to relative anything in interested much not were They schoolfellow."
it make to asked, enough questions were there still but Anne;
was Elizabeth and was; schoolfellow old this what understood
severe. Walter Sir and disdainful,

be to Elliot Anne Miss is who "and he, said Buildings!" "Westgate
and Smith; Mrs widow A Smith. Mrs A Buildings? Westgate in visiting
to are names whose Smiths Mr thousand five of One husband? her was who
old is she That attraction? her is what And everywhere. with met be
most the have you Elliot, Anne Miss word, my Upon sickly. and
low people, other revolts that Everything taste! extraordinary
inviting are associations disgusting air, foul rooms, paltry company,
she to-morrow: till lady old this off put may you surely But you. to
another see to hope may she that but presume, I end, her near so not is
Forty?" age? her is What day.

off put can I think not do I but one-and-thirty; not is she sir, "No,
will which time some for evening only the is it because engagement, my
to-morrow, bath warm the into goes She myself. and her suit once at
engaged." are we know, you week, the of rest the for and

asked acquaintance?" this of think Russell Lady does what "But
Elizabeth.

she contrary, the "on Anne; replied it," in blame to nothing sees "She
Mrs on called have I when me taken generally has and it, approves
Smith."

appearance the by surprised rather been have must Buildings "Westgate
"Sir Walter. Sir observed pavement," its near up drawn carriage a of
arms, her distinguish to honours no has indeed, widow, Russell's Henry
to known well is doubt no and equipage, handsome a is it still but
Buildings! Westgate in lodging Smith Mrs widow A Elliot. Miss a convey
Mrs mere a forty; and thirty between live, to able barely widow poor A
the in names all and people all of Smith, Mrs every-day an Smith,
preferred be to and Elliot, Anne Miss of friend chosen the be to world,
and England of nobility the among connections family own her to her by
name!" a Such Smith! Mrs Ireland!

it thought now passed, this all while present been had who Clay, Mrs
did and much, said have could Anne and room, the leave to advisable
dissimilar very not friend's her of defence in little a say to long
father her to respect personal of sense her but theirs, to claims
to himself to it left She reply. no made She her. prevented
thirty between Bath in widow only the not was Smith Mrs that recollect,
dignity. of surname no and on, live to little with forty, and

she course of and theirs, kept others the appointment; her kept Anne
had She evening. delightful a had had they that morning next the heard
had Elizabeth and Walter Sir for absent, set the of one only the been
had but themselves, service ladyship's her at quite been only not
had and others, collecting in her by employed be to happy been actually
Mr and Elliot; Mr and Russell Lady both inviting of trouble the at been
Lady and early, Wallis Colonel leaving of point a made had Elliot
wait to order in engagements evening her all arranged fresh had Russell
could evening an such that all of history whole the had Anne her. on
in be, must interest greatest its her, To Russell. Lady from supply
in Elliot; Mr and friend her between of talked much very been having
for honoured time same the at and regretted, for, wished been having
this to visits compassionate kind, Her cause. a such in away staying
Mr delighted quite have to seemed reduced, and sick schoolfellow, old
her in woman; young extraordinary most a her thought He Elliot.
meet could He excellence. female of model a mind, manners, temper,
be not could Anne and merits; her of discussion a in Russell Lady even
be to herself know not could friend, her by much so understand to given
agreeable those of many without man, sensible a by rated highly so
create. to meant friend her which sensations

Elliot. Mr of opinion her in decided perfectly now was Russell Lady
his of as time in Anne gain to meaning his of convinced much as was She
which weeks of number the calculate to beginning was and her, deserving
and widowhood, of restraints remaining the all from him free would
She pleasing. of powers open most his exert to liberty at him leave
the on felt she certainty the half with Anne to speak not would
be might what of hints than more little on venture would she subject,
desirableness the of side, his on attachment possible a of hereafter,
returned. and real be to attachment such supposing alliance, the of
smiled, only she exclamations; violent no made and her, heard Anne
head. her shook gently and blushed,

much "being Russell, Lady said know," well you as match-maker, no am "I
calculations. and events human all of uncertainty the of aware well too
addresses his pay hence time some should Elliot Mr if that mean only I
there think I him, accept to disposed be should you if and you, to
most A together. happy being your of possibility every be would
be might it think I but it, consider must everybody connection suitable
one." happy very a

I respects many in and man, agreeable exceedingly an is Elliot "Mr
suit." not should we "but Anne; said him," of highly think

to that own "I rejoinder, in said only and pass, this let Russell Lady
future the Kellynch, of mistress future the as you regard to able be
mother's dear your occupying you see and forward look to Elliot, Lady
as well as popularity, her all and rights, her all to succeeding place,
me. to gratification possible highest the be would virtues, her all to
I if and disposition; and countenance in self mother's your are You
name, and situation in was, she as such you fancy to allowed be might
to superior only and spot, same the in blessing and presiding home, and
me give would it Anne, dearest My valued! highly more being in her
life!" of time my at felt often is than delight more

table, distant a to walk to rise, to away, turn to obliged was Anne
feelings the subdue to try employment, pretended in there leaning and,
heart her and imagination her moments few a For excited. picture this
of been; had mother her what becoming of idea The bewitched. were
of herself; in revived first Elliot" "Lady of name precious the having
for home her again, home her it calling Kellynch, to restored being
Russell Lady resist. immediately not could she which charm a was ever,
own its to matter the leave to willing word, another not said
with moment that at Elliot Mr could that, believing and operation;
Anne what short, in believed, himself!--she for spoken have propriety
himself for speaking Elliot Mr of image same The believe. not did
"Lady of and Kellynch of charm The again. composure to Anne brought
not was it And him. accept could never She away. faded all Elliot"
her one; save man any to adverse still were feelings her that only
a such of possibilities the of consideration serious a on judgement,
Elliot. Mr against was case

satisfied be not could she month, a acquainted been now had they Though
an man, sensible a was he That character. his knew really she that
to seemed opinions, good professed well, talked he that man, agreeable
enough. clear all was this principle, of man a as and properly judge
article one any on fix she could nor right, was what knew certainly He
been have would she yet but transgressed; evidently duty moral of
the not if past, the distrusted She conduct. his for answer to afraid
the associates, former of dropt occasionally which names The present.
not suspicions suggested pursuits, and practices former to allusions
bad been had there that saw She been. had he what of favourable
had there that thing; common a been had travelling Sunday that habits;
had he when one) short a not probably (and life his of period a been
might he though and, matters; serious all in careless least, at been,
of sentiments true the for answer could who differently, very think now
fair a appreciate to enough old grown man, cautious clever, a
truly was mind his that ascertained be ever it could How character?
cleansed?

There open. not was he but polished, discreet, rational, was Elliot Mr
delight, or indignation of warmth any feeling, of burst any never was
decided a was Anne, to This, others. of good or evil the at
the prized She incurable. were impressions early Her imperfection.
Warmth others. all beyond character eager the open-hearted, the frank,
so could she that felt She still. her captivate did enthusiasm and
or looked sometimes who those of sincerity the upon depend more much
mind of presence whose those of than thing, hasty a or careless a said
slipped. never tongue whose varied, never

in tempers the were as Various agreeable. generally too was Elliot Mr
stood well, too endured He all. them pleased he house, father's her
of degree some with her to spoken had He body. every with well too
was Clay Mrs what see to completely appeared had Clay; Mrs of openness
as him found Clay Mrs yet and contempt; in her hold to and about,
body. any as agreeable

saw she for friend, young her than more or less either saw Russell Lady
exactly more man a imagine not could She distrust. excite to nothing
sweeter a enjoy ever she did nor Elliot; Mr than be to ought he what
beloved her of hand the receive him seeing of hope the than feeling
autumn. following the of course the in church, Kellynch in Anne



18 Chapter


in month a been having Anne, and February; of beginning the was It
She Lyme. and Uppercross from news for eager very growing was Bath,
three was It communicated. had Mary than more much hear to wanted
at was Henrietta that knew only She all. at heard had she since weeks
fast, recovering be to considered though Louisa, that and again; home
one intently very all them of thinking was she and Lyme; in still was
to delivered was Mary from usual than letter thicker a when evening,
Mrs and Admiral with surprise, and pleasure the quicken to and, her;
compliments. Croft's

were They her. interest to circumstance A Bath! in be must Crofts The
naturally. very to turned heart her whom people

Bath? in arrived have Crofts "The Walter. Sir cried this?" is "What
you?" brought they have What Kellynch? rent who Crofts The

Sir." Cottage, Uppercross from letter "A

an secure They passports. convenient are letters those "Oh!
any at however, Croft, Admiral visited have should I introduction.
tenant." my to due is what know I rate.

poor the how told have even not could she longer; no listen could Anne
been had It her. engrossed letter her escaped; complexion Admiral's
back. days several begun


1st. "February

how know I because silence, my for apology no make Anne,--I dear "My
a be must You Bath. as place a such in letters of think people little
know, well you as which, Uppercross, for care to happy too deal great
Mr Christmas; dull very a had have We about. write to little affords
do I holidays. the all party dinner one had not have Musgrove Mrs and
at over are however, holidays, The anybody. as Hayters the reckon not
had I sure am I ones. long such had ever children no believe I last:
Harvilles; little the of except yesterday, cleared was house The not.
Mrs home. gone never have they hear to surprised be will you but
not do I long. so them with part to mother odd an be must Harville
but opinion; my in children, nice all at not are They it. understand
her than better, not if well, as quite them like to seems Musgrove Mrs
felt be not may It had! have we weather dreadful What grandchildren.
some of is it country the in but pavements; nice your with Bath, in
second the since me on call creature a had not have I consequence.
much calling been had who Hayter, Charles except January, in week
pity great a it think I ourselves, Between welcome. was than oftener
kept have would it Louisa; as long as Lyme at remain not did Henrietta
bring to to-day, gone is carriage The way. his of out little a her
with dine to asked not are We to-morrow. Harvilles the and Louisa
her of afraid so is Musgrove Mrs after, day the till however, them,
considering likely, very not is which journey, the by fatigued being
more much be would it and her; of taken be will that care the
Elliot Mr find you glad am I to-morrow. there dine to me to convenient
have I but too; him with acquainted be could I wish and agreeable, so
is desirable thing any when way the of out always am I luck: usual my
immense an What noticed. be to family my of last the always on; going
to mean never she Does Elizabeth! with staying been has Clay Mrs time
might we vacant, room the leave to were she if perhaps But away? go
expect not do I this. of think you what know me Let invited. be not
House Great the at them leave can I know. you asked, be to children my
the that heard moment this have I weeks. six or month a for well, very
Admiral the think they immediately; almost Bath to going are Crofts
the had not have they chance; by quite it heard Charles gouty.
do I anything. take to offering of or notice, any me give to civility
them, of nothing see We neighbours. as all at improve they think not
me joins Charles inattention. gross of instance an really is this and
affectionately, Yours proper. everything and love, in

M---. "Mary

just has Jemima and well; from far very am I that say to sorry am "I
much very sore-throat bad a is there says butcher the that me told
are know, you sore-throats, my and it; catch shall I say dare I about.
anybody's." than worse always


an into put afterwards been had which part, first the ended So
more. much as nearly containing envelope,


her bore Louisa how word you send might I that open, letter my kept "I
add. to deal great a having did, I glad extremely am I now and journey,
to offering yesterday, Croft Mrs from note a had I place, first the In
to addressed indeed, note friendly kind, very a you; to anything convey
as letter my make to able be therefore shall I ought; it as just me,
sincerely I and ill, very seem not does Admiral The like. I as long
to glad truly be shall I wants. he good the all him do will Bath hope
pleasant a such spare cannot neighbourhood Our again. back them have
will that communicate to something have I Louisa. for now But family.
very Tuesday on came Harvilles the and She little. a not you astonish
were we when did, she how her ask to went we evening the in and safely,
had he for party, the of Benwick Captain find to not surprised rather
the was think you do what and Harvilles; the as well as invited been
and Louisa, with love in being his than less nor more Neither reason?
Mr from answer an had had he till Uppercross to venture to choosing not
came she before her and him between settled all was it for Musgrove;
upon True, Harville. Captain by father her to written had he and away,
if least at surprised be shall I astonished? you not Are honour! my
protests Musgrove Mrs did. never I for it, of hint a received ever you
well very all are We matter. the of nothing knew she that solemnly
Captain marrying her to equal not is it though for however, pleased,
Musgrove Mr and Hayter; Charles than better infinitely is it Wentworth,
Mrs to-day. expected is Benwick Captain and consent, his written has
sister's poor his on deal good a feels husband her says Harville
Indeed, both. with favourite great a is Louisa however, but, account;
having for better the her love we that agree quite I and Harville Mrs
if but say; will Wentworth Captain what wonders Charles her. nursed
see could never I Louisa; to attached him thought never I remember, you
Benwick's Captain of see, you end, the is this And it. of anything
such take could Charles How yours. of admirer an be to supposed being
he hope I me. to incomprehensible always was head his into thing a
Louisa for match great a not Certainly now. agreeable more be will
Hayters." the among marrying than better times million a but Musgrove,


for prepared degree any in being sister's her feared have not need Mary
Captain astonished. more been life her in never had She news. the
belief, for wonderful too almost was It Musgrove! Louisa and Benwick
room, the in remain could she that effort greatest the with was it and
the of questions common the answer and calmness, of air an preserve
to wanted Walter Sir many. not were they her, for Happily moment.
they whether and horses, four with travelled Crofts the whether know
Miss suit might it as Bath of part a such in situated be to likely were
beyond. curiosity little had but in; visit to himself and Elliot

"And answer, an for waiting without and Elizabeth; said Mary?" is "How
Bath?" to Crofts the brings what pray

gouty." be to thought is He account. Admiral's the on come "They

gentleman." old "Poor Walter. Sir said decrepitude!" and "Gout

Elizabeth. asked here?" acquaintance any they "Have

time Croft's Admiral at that, suppose hardly can I but know; not do "I
in acquaintance many have not should he profession, his in and life, of
this." as place a such

best be will Croft Admiral "that coolly, Walter Sir said suspect," "I
we may Elizabeth, Hall. Kellynch of renter the as Bath in known
Place?" Laura in wife his and him present to venture

cousins, Dalrymple, Lady with are we as Situated not. think I no! "Oh,
she acquaintance with her embarrass to not careful very be to ought we
but signify; not would it related, not were we If approve. not might
We ours. of proposal any to as scrupulous feel would she cousins, as
several are There level. own their find to Crofts the leave better had
The sailors. are told, am I who, here, about walking men odd-looking
them." with associate will Crofts

letter; the in interest of share Elizabeth's and Walter Sir was This
an in attention, decent more of tribute her paid had Clay Mrs when
was Anne boys, little fine her and Musgrove, Charles Mrs after enquiry
liberty. at

wonder Charles might Well it. comprehend to tried she room, own her In
field, the quitted had he Perhaps feel! would Wentworth Captain how
her. love not did he found had love, to ceased had up, Louisa given had
akin anything or levity, or treachery of idea the endure not could She
that endure not could She friend. his and him between usage ill to
unfairly. severed be should theirs as friendship a such

joyous-talking high-spirited, The Musgrove! Louisa and Benwick Captain
Captain reading, feeling, thinking, dejected, the and Musgrove, Louisa
other. the suit not would that everything them of each seemed Benwick,
attraction? the been have could Where dissimilar! most minds Their
had They situation. in been had It itself. presented soon answer The
same the in living been had they weeks; several together thrown been
been have must they away, coming Henrietta's since party: family small
recovering just Louisa, and other, each on entirely almost depending
was Benwick Captain and state, interesting an in been had illness, from
to able been not had Anne which point a was That inconsolable. not
as conclusion same the drawing of instead and before; suspecting avoid
confirm to only served they events, of course present the from Mary,
herself. toward tenderness of dawning some felt having his of idea the
her gratify to it from more much derive to however, mean, not did She
any that persuaded was She allowed. have might Mary than vanity,
for feel to seemed and listened had who woman young pleasing tolerably
affectionate an had He compliment. same the received have would him
somebody. love must He heart.

naval fine had Louisa happy. being their against reason no saw She
would He alike. more grow soon would they and with, begin to fervour
Scott for enthusiast an be to learn would she and cheerfulness, gain
they course of already; learnt probably was that nay, Byron; Lord and
turned Musgrove Louisa of idea The poetry. over love in fallen had
was reflection sentimental and taste, literary of person a into
the Lyme, at day The so. being its of doubt no had she but amusing,
her nerves, her health, her influence might Cobb, the from fall
it as thoroughly as life, her of end the to character her courage,
fate. her influenced have to appeared

been had who woman the if that was, whole the of conclusion The
prefer to allowed be could merits Wentworth's Captain of sensible
lasting excite to engagement the in nothing was there man, another
certainly it, by friend no lost Wentworth Captain if and wonder;
heart Anne's made which regret not was it No, regretted. be to nothing
when cheeks her into colour the brought and herself, of spite in beat
some had She free. and unshackled Wentworth Captain of thought she
like much too were They investigate. to ashamed was she which feelings
joy! senseless joy,

was it place, took meeting the when but Crofts; the see to longed She
of visit The them. reached yet had news the of rumour no that evident
and mentioned, was Musgrove Louisa and returned; and paid was ceremony
smile. a half even without too, Benwick, Captain

perfectly Street, Gay in lodgings in themselves placed had Crofts The
the of ashamed all at not was He satisfaction. Walter's Sir to
about more deal great a talk and think fact, in did, and acquaintance,
him. about talked or thought ever Admiral the than Admiral, the

and for, wished they as Bath in people many as quite knew Crofts The
form, of matter mere a as Elliots the with intercourse their considered
brought They pleasure. any them afford to likely least the in not and
was He together. always almost being of habit country their them with
shares go to seemed Croft Mrs and gout, the off keep to walk to ordered
Anne good. him do to life her for walk to and everything, in him with
carriage her in out her took Russell Lady went. she wherever them saw
never and them, of think to failed never she and morning, every almost
most a was it did, she as feelings their Knowing them. see to failed
as them watched always She her. to happiness of picture attractive
be might they what understood she fancy to delighted could, she as long
equally or independence, happy in along walked they as of, talking
he when hand the of shake hearty Admiral's the see to delighted
conversation of eagerness their observe and friend, old an encountered
Croft Mrs navy, the of knot little a into forming occasionally when
her. around officers the of any as keen and intelligent as looking

walking often be to Russell Lady with engaged much too was Anne
days ten or week a about morning, one that happened so it but herself;
or friend, her leave to best her suited it arrival, Croft's the after
alone return and town, the of part lower the in carriage, friend's her
good the had she Street Milsom up walking in and Place, Camden to
a at himself by standing was He Admiral. the with meet to fortune
contemplation earnest in him, behind hands his with window, printshop
was but unseen, him passed have might only not she and print, some of
his catch could she before him address as well as touch to obliged
done was it however, her, acknowledge and perceive did he When notice.
Thank you? it is "Ha! humour. good and frankness usual his all with
you am, I Here friend. a like me treating is This you. thank you,
without shop this by get never can I picture. a at staring see,
it. at look Do boat! a of way by is, here thing a what But stopping.
must painters fine your fellows queer What like? the see ever you Did
shapeless a such in lives their venture would anybody that think to be,
it in up stuck gentlemen two are here yet And that? as cockleshell old
and rocks the at them about looking and ease, their at mightily
they which moment, next the upset be to not were they if as mountains,
(laughing built!" was boat that where wonder I be. must certainly
Well," it. in horsepond a over venture not would "I heartily);
you, for anywhere go I Can bound? you are where "now, away), (turning
use?" any of be I Can you? with or

your of pleasure the me give will you unless you, thank I "None,
home." going am I together. lies road our way little the company


will we yes Yes, too. farther, and heart, my all with will, I "That
go we as you tell to something have I and together, walk snug a have
if comfortable feel not do I right; that's arm; my take There, along.
look last a taking is!" it boat a what Lord! there. woman a not have I
motion. in be to began they as picture, the at

sir?" me, tell to something had you that say you "Did

I Brigden; Captain friend, a comes here But presently. have, I "Yes,
stop. not shall I however. pass, we as do?' d'ye 'How say, only shall
wife. my but me with anybody see to stares Brigden do?' d'ye 'How
her of one on blister a has She leg. the by tied is soul, poor She,
the across look you If piece. three-shilling a as large as heels,
Shabby brother. his and down coming Brand Admiral see will you street,
way. the of side this on not are they glad am I them! of both fellows,
away got once: trick pitiful a me played They them. bear cannot Sophy
another story whole the you tell will I men. best my of some with
he Look, grandson. his and Drew Archibald Sir old comes There time.
the Ah! wife. my for you takes he you; to hand his kisses he us; sees
How Archibald! Sir old Poor younker. that for soon too come has peace
always are We well. very us suits It Elliot? Miss Bath, like you do
every them of full streets the other; or friend old some with meeting
them from away get we then and chat; of plenty have to sure morning;
and chairs, our in draw and lodgings, our in ourselves shut and all,
at even be to used we as or ay, Kellynch, at were we if as snug as are
I worse, the here lodgings our like not do We Deal. and Yarmouth North
North at had first we those of mind in us putting for you, tell can
same the in just cupboards the of one through blows wind The Yarmouth.
way."

for again press to ventured Anne farther, little a got were they When
to Street Milsom of clear when hoped She communicate. to had he what
for wait, to obliged still was she but gratified; curiosity her have
the gained had they till begin to not mind his up made had Admiral the
Mrs really not was she as and Belmont; of quiet and space greater
fairly were they as soon As way. own his have him let must she Croft,
began-- he Belmont, ascending

first But you. surprise will that something hear shall you now "Well,
talk to going am I lady young the of name the me tell must you all, of
concerned so been all have we that know, you lady, young That about.
Her to. happening been has this all that Musgrove, Miss The for.
name." Christian her forget always I name: Christian

really she as soon so comprehend to appear to ashamed been had Anne
"Louisa." of name the suggest safely could she now but did;

ladies young wish I name. the is that Musgrove, Louisa Miss ay, "Ay,
out be never should I names. Christian fine of number a such not had
Miss this Well, sort. that of something or Sophys, all were they if
was He Frederick. marry to was know, you thought, all we Louisa,
be could they what was, wonder only The week. after week her courting
clear was it indeed, then, came; Lyme at business the till for, waiting
even But right. to set was brain her till wait must they that enough
of Instead on. going of way their in odd something was there then
see to off went he then and Plymouth, to off went he Lyme, at staying
Edward's, to down gone was he Minehead from back came we When Edward.
since him of nothing seen have We since. ever been has he there and
has matter the now, But it. understand not could Sophy Even November.
Miss same the lady, young this for all; of turn strangest the taken
James marry to is Frederick, marry to being of instead Musgrove,
Benwick." James know You Benwick.

Benwick." Captain with acquainted little a am I little. "A

already, married are they likely most Nay, him. marry to is she "Well,
for." wait should they what know not do I for

"and Anne, said man," young pleasing very a Benwick Captain thought "I
character." excellent an bears he that understand I

Benwick. James against said be to word a not is there yes, yes, "Oh!
bad are these and summer, last made true, is it commander, a only is He
An of. know I that fault another not has he but on, getting for times
zealous active, very a you; assure I fellow, good-hearted excellent,
that for perhaps, for, think would you than more is which too, officer
justice." him do not does manner of sort soft

of want augur never should I sir; there, mistaken are you "Indeed
particularly them thought I manners. Benwick's Captain from spirit
please." generally would they it, for answer will I and pleasing,

rather is Benwick James but judges; best the are ladies well, "Well,
partiality, our all is it likely very though and me; for piano too
his. than better manners Frederick's thinking help cannot I and Sophy
taste." our to more Frederick about something is There

of idea common too the oppose to meant only had She caught. was Anne
to all at not other, each with incompatible being gentleness and spirit
could that best very the as manners Benwick's Captain represent
say, to beginning was she hesitation, little a after and, be; possibly
the but friends," two the of comparison any into entering not was "I
with-- her interrupted Admiral

We gossip. of bit mere a not is It true. certainly is thing the "And
him from letter a had sister His himself. Frederick from it have
a in it had just had he and it, of us tells he which in yesterday,
fancy I Uppercross. from spot, the upon written Harville, from letter
Uppercross." at all are they

said, she resist; not could Anne which opportunity an was This
of style the in nothing is there hope I Admiral, hope, "I therefore,
particularly Croft Mrs and you make to letter Wentworth's Captain
attachment an were there if as autumn, last seem, did It uneasy.
to understood be may it hope I but Musgrove; Louisa and him between
his hope I violence. without and equally, side each on out worn have
man." ill-used an of spirit the breathe not does letter

from murmur a or oath an not is there all; at not all, at "Not
end." to beginning

smile. her hide to down looked Anne

much too has he complain; and whine to man a not is Frederick no; "No,
fit very is it better, man another likes girl the If that. for spirit
him." have should she

in nothing is there hope I that is, mean I what But "Certainly.
thinks he suppose you make to writing of manner Wentworth's Captain
without know, you appear, might which friend, his by ill-used himself
a such that sorry very be should I said. absolutely being its
be should Benwick Captain and him between subsisted has as friendship
sort." this of circumstance a by wounded, even or destroyed,

that of all at nothing is there But you. understand I yes, "Yes,
Benwick; at fling least the give not does He letter. the in nature
for own my of reason a have I it, at wonder 'I say, as much so not does
writing, of way his from guess, not would you No, it.' at wondering
himself. for name?) her (what's Miss this of thought ever had he that
is there and together; happy be will they hopes handsomely very He
think." I that, in unforgiving very nothing

to meant Admiral the which conviction perfect the receive not did Anne
farther. enquiry the press to useless been have would it but convey,
quiet or remarks common-place with herself satisfied therefore She
way. own his all it had Admiral the and attention,

again over all begin must he "Now last. at he said Frederick!" "Poor
must Sophy Bath. to him get must we think I else. somebody with
am I enough, girls pretty are Here Bath. to come to him beg and write,
other that for again, Uppercross to go to use no of be would It sure.
Do parson. young the cousin, her by bespoke is find, I Musgrove, Miss
Bath?" to him get to try better had we Elliot, Miss think, you not



19 Chapter


his expressing and Anne, with walk this taking was Croft Admiral While
was Wentworth Captain Bath, to Wentworth Captain getting of wish
was he written, had Croft Mrs Before thither. way his on already
him. saw she out, walked Anne time next very the and arrived,

in were They Clay. Mrs and cousins two his attending was Elliot Mr
shelter make to enough but much, not rain, to began It Street. Milsom
for desirable very it make to enough quite and women, for desirable
Lady in home conveyed being of advantage the have to Elliot Miss
she, distance; little a at waiting seen was which carriage, Dalrymple's
Elliot Mr while Molland's, into turned therefore, Clay, Mrs and Anne,
joined soon He assistance. her request to Dalrymple, Lady to stepped
happy most be would Dalrymple Lady course; of successful, again, them
minutes. few a in them for call would and home, them take to

four than more hold not did and barouche, a was carriage ladyship's Her
it consequently mother; her with was Carteret Miss comfort. any with
Camden three the all for accommodation expect to reasonable not was
Whoever Elliot. Miss to as doubt no be could There ladies. Place
little a occupied it but none, suffer must she inconvenience, suffered
rain The two. other the between civility of point the settle to time
with walk a preferring in sincere most was Anne and trifle, mere a was
would she Clay; Mrs to trifle mere a also was rain the But Elliot. Mr
much thick! so were boots her and all, at drop to even it allow hardly
her rendered civility her short, in and, Anne's; Miss than thicker
be, could Anne as Elliot Mr with walk to left be to anxious as quite
so and polite so generosity a with them between discussed was it and
Miss them; for it settle to obliged were others the that determined,
Mr and already, cold little a had Clay Mrs that maintaining Elliot
the rather were boots Anne's cousin his that appeal, on deciding Elliot
thickest.

the in party the of be should Clay Mrs that accordingly, fixed was It
sat she as Anne, when point, this reached just had they and carriage;
Captain distinctly, and decidedly most descried, window, the near
street. the down walking Wentworth

that felt instantly she but herself; to only perceptible was start Her
and unaccountable most the world, the in simpleton greatest the was she
all was it her; before nothing saw she minutes few a For absurd!
she senses, her back scolded had she when and lost, was She confusion.
(always Elliot Mr and carriage, the for waiting still others the found
Mrs of commission a on Street Union for off setting just obliging)
Clay's.

to wanted she door; outer the to go to inclination great a felt now She
motive? another of herself suspect to she was Why rained. it if see
would she seat, her left She sight. of out be must Wentworth Captain
other the than wiser much so always be not should her of half one go;
She was. it than worse being of other the suspecting always or half,
the by moment a in however, back, sent was She rained. it if see would
and gentlemen of party a among himself, Wentworth Captain of entrance
a joined have must he whom and acquaintance, his evidently ladies,
confused and struck obviously more was He Street. Milsom below little
quite looked he before; observed ever had she than her of sight the by
felt she acquaintance, renewed their since time, first the For red.
the had She two. the of sensibility least the betraying was she that
the All moments. few last the of preparation the in him of advantage
surprise strong of effects first bewildering, blinding, overpowering,
was It feel! to enough had she however, Still, her. with over were
misery. and delight between something a pleasure, pain, agitation,

was manner his of character The away. turned then and her, to spoke He
friendly, or cold either it called have not could She embarrassment.
embarrassed. as certainly so anything or

again. spoke and her, towards came he however, interval, short a After
probably, them, of neither passed: subjects common on enquiries Mutual
sensible fully continuing Anne and heard, they what for wiser the much
so being of dint by had They formerly. than ease at less being his of
considerable a with other each to speak to got together, much very
it do not could he but calmness; and indifference apparent of portion
was There him. changed had Louisa or him, changed had Time now.
he if as not well, very looked He other. or sort some of consciousness
Uppercross, of talked he and spirits, or health in suffering been had
of look momentary a even had and Louisa, of even nay, Musgroves, the of
Captain was it yet but her; named he as significance arch own his
was. he that feign to able not easy, not comfortable, not Wentworth

Elizabeth that observe to Anne grieved it but surprise, not did It
saw Elizabeth that Elizabeth, saw he that saw She him. know not would
was she side; each on recognition internal complete was there that him,
acquaintance, an as acknowledged be to ready was he that convinced
with away turn sister her seeing of pain the had she and it, expecting
coldness. unalterable

very growing was Elliot Miss which for carriage, Dalrymple's Lady
was It it. announce to in came servant the up; drew now impatient,
a and delay, a was there altogether and again, rain to beginning
shop the in crowd little the all make must which talking, a and bustle,
At Elliot. Miss convey to calling was Dalrymple Lady that understand
(for servant, the by but unattended friend, her and Elliot Miss last
Wentworth, Captain and off; walking were returned), cousin no was there
words, than rather manner, by and Anne, to again turned them, watching
her. to services his offering was

with going not am I "but answer, her was you," to obliged much am "I
prefer I walk: I many. so accommodate not would carriage The them.
walking."

rains." it "But

regard." I that Nothing little, very "Oh!

have I yesterday, only came I "Though said: he pause moment's a After
new a to (pointing see," you already, Bath for properly myself equipped
to determined are you if it, of use make would you wish "I umbrella);
a you get me let to prudent more be would it think I though walk;
chair."

her repeating all, it declined but him, to obliged much very was She
adding, and present, at nothing to come would rain the that conviction,
am I moment, a in here be will He Elliot. Mr for waiting only am "I
sure."

Captain in. walked Elliot Mr when words the spoken hardly had She
between difference no was There perfectly. him recollected Wentworth
as Anne admiring Lyme, at steps the on stood had who man the and him
privileged the of manner and look and air the in except passed, she
and see to appeared eagerness, with in came He friend. and relation
kept have to grieved was stay, his for apologised her, of only think
time of loss further without away her get to anxious and waiting, her
off walked they moment another in and increased; rain the before and
a and glance, embarrassed and gentle a his, under arm her together,
passed she as for, time had she that all being you!" to morning "Good
away.

Wentworth's Captain of ladies the sight, of out were they as soon As
them. of talking began party

fancy?" I cousin, his dislike not does Elliot "Mr

there. happen will what guess can One enough. clear is that no, "Oh!
a What believe. I family, the in lives half them; with always is He
man!" good-looking very

says Wallises, the at once him with dined who Atkinson, Miss and "Yes,
with." company in was ever she man agreeable most the is he

to comes one when pretty, very Elliot; Anne think; I pretty, is "She
admire I confess I but so, say to fashion the not is It her. at look
sister." her than more her

I." do so "Oh!

Miss after wild all are men the But comparison. No I. do so "And
them." for delicate too is Anne Elliot.

would he if cousin, her to obliged particularly been have would Anne
a saying without Place, Camden to way the all side her by walked have
though him, to listen to difficult so it found never had She word.
subjects his though and care, and solicitude his exceed could nothing
praise, interesting: always be to wont were as such principally were
insinuations and Russell, Lady of discriminating, and just, warm,
of only think could she now just But Clay. Mrs against rational highly
feelings, present his understand not could She Wentworth. Captain
and not; or disappointment from much suffering really were he whether
herself. quite be not could she settled, were point that till

must she alas! alas! but time; in reasonable and wise be to hoped She
yet. wise not was she that herself to confess

he long how was know, to her for essential very circumstance Another
not could she or it, mentioned not had he Bath; in be to meant
more was it But through. passing only be might He it. recollect
as liable so case, that In stay. to come be should he that probable
all in would Russell Lady Bath, in body every meet to was body every
it would How him? recollect she Would somewhere. him see likelihood
be? all

Musgrove Louisa that Russell Lady tell to obliged been already had She
encounter to something her cost had It Benwick. Captain marry to was
be to chance any by were she if now, and surprise; Russell's Lady
of knowledge imperfect her Wentworth, Captain with company into thrown
him. against prejudice of shade another add might matter the

first the for and friend, her with out was Anne morning following The
at but vain; in him for watch of sort fearful and incessant an in hour,
the on him distinguished she Street, Pulteney down returning in last,
the view in him have to as distance a such at pavement hand right
many him, about men other many were There street. the of part greater
She him. mistaking no was there but way, same the walking groups
her of idea mad any from not but Russell; Lady at instinctively looked
be to not was it No, herself. did she as soon so him recognising
nearly were they till him perceive would Russell Lady that supposed
and anxiously; time, to time from however, her at looked She opposite.
daring not though out, him point must which approached moment the when
seen), be to unfit was knew she countenance own her (for again look to
turned being eyes Russell's Lady of conscious perfectly yet was she
intently short, in being, her him--of for direction the in exactly
fascination of sort the comprehend thoroughly could She him. observing
for be must it difficulty the mind, Russell's Lady over possess must he
that feeling be must she astonishment the eyes, her withdraw to her
climes foreign in and him, over passed have should years nine or eight
grace! personal one of him robbing without too, service active in and

of speak she would how "Now, head. her back drew Russell Lady last, At
him?"

but long; so eye my fixing been has "what she, said wonder," will "You
Mrs and Alicia Lady which window-curtains, some after looking was I
the described They night. last of me telling were Frankland
the of side this on houses the of one of window-curtains drawing-room
hung best and handsomest the being as street, the of part this and way,
have I and number, exact the recollect not could but Bath, in any of
no see can I confess I but be; could it which out find to trying been
description." their answer that hereabouts curtains

her at either disdain, and pity in smiled, and blushed and sighed Anne
all in that was most, her provoked which part The herself. or friend
right the lost have should she caution, and foresight of waste this
them. saw he whether seeing for moment

the or theatre The anything. producing without passed two or day A
for enough fashionable not were be, to likely most was he where rooms,
elegant the in solely were amusements evening whose Elliots, the
more and more getting were they which in parties, private of stupidity
of sick stagnation, of state a such of wearied Anne, and engaged;
was strength her because stronger herself fancying and nothing, knowing
a was It evening. concert the for impatient quite was tried, not
Of Dalrymple. Lady by patronised person a of benefit the for concert
and one, good a be to expected really was It attend. must they course
few a have only could she If music. of fond very was Wentworth Captain
be should she fancied she again, him with conversation minutes
over all felt she him, addressing of power the to as and satisfied;
him, from turned had Elizabeth occurred. opportunity the if courage
these by strengthened were nerves her him; overlooked Russell Lady
attention. him owed she that felt she circumstances;

her; with evening the spend to Smith Mrs promised partly once had She
with off, it put and herself excused she call hurried short a in but
Smith Mrs morrow. the on visit longer a of promise decided more the
acquiescence. good-humoured most a gave

come. do you when it, about all me tell "only she; said means," all "By
party?" your is Who

leaving was she when but reply; no made Smith Mrs all. them named Anne
I "Well, arch, half serious, half expression an with and said, her
if to-morrow me fail not do and answer; may concert your wish heartily
many have not may I that foreboding a have to begin I for come; can you
you." from visits more

moment's a in standing after but confused; and startled was Anne
away. hurry to obliged, be to sorry not and obliged, was suspense,



20 Chapter


all of earliest the were Clay, Mrs and daughters, two his Walter, Sir
be must Dalrymple Lady as and evening; the in rooms the at party their
Octagon the in fires the of one by station their took they for, waited
and again, opened door the when settled, so they were hardly But Room.
and him, to nearest the was Anne alone. in walked Wentworth Captain
preparing was He spoke. instantly she advance, little a yet making
him brought do?" you do "How gentle her but on, pass and bow to only
in enquiries make and her, near stand to line straight the of out
back the in sister and father formidable the of spite in return,
knew she Anne; to support a was ground back the in being Their ground.
believed she which everything to equal felt and looks, their of nothing
done. be to right

Elizabeth and father her between whispering a speaking, were they While
the guess must she but distinguish, not could She ear. her caught
she bow, distant a making Wentworth's Captain on and subject;
that him give to as well so judged had father her that comprehended
a by time in just was she and acquaintance, of acknowledgement simple
This, herself. Elizabeth from curtsey slight a see to glance side
than better yet was ungracious, and reluctant, and late, though
improved. spirits her and nothing,

concert, the and Bath, and weather, the of however, talking, After
that last, at said was little so and flag, to began conversation their
in seemed he not; did he but moment, every go to him expecting was she
little a with spirit, renewed with presently and her; leave to hurry no
said-- he glow, little a smile,

must you afraid am I Lyme. at day our since you seen hardly have "I
overpowering not its from more the and shock, the from suffered have
time." the at you

not. had she that him assured She

passed he and day!" frightful "a he, said hour," frightful a was "It
painful, too still were remembrance the if as eyes, his across hand his
some produced has day "The added, again, smiling half moment, a in but
as considered be must which consequences some had has however; effects
to mind of presence the had you When frightful. of reverse very the
surgeon, a fetch to person properest the be would Benwick that suggest
most those of one eventually being his of idea little have could you
recovery." her in concerned

would it hope should appears--I it But none. have could I "Certainly
and principles good sides both on are There match. happy very a be
temper." good

ends think, I there, "but forward; exactly not looking he, said "Yes,"
over rejoice and happy, them wish I soul my all With resemblance. the
to difficulties no have They it. of favour in circumstance every
The delays. no caprice, no opposition, no home, at with contend
kindly, and honourably most themselves, like behaving are Musgroves
daughter's their promote to hearts parental true with anxious only
happiness; their of favour in much very much, is this All comfort.
perhaps--" than more

him give to and occur, to seemed recollection sudden A stopped. He
fixing and cheeks Anne's reddening was which emotion that of taste some
he however, throat, his clearing After ground. the on eyes her
thus-- proceeded

disparity, a great too disparity, a is there think do I that confess "I
Musgrove Louisa regard I mind. than essential less no point a in and
in deficient not and girl, sweet-tempered amiable, very a as
a man, clever a is He more. something is Benwick but understanding,
to himself attaching his consider do I that confess, I and man; reading
he had gratitude, of effect the been it Had surprise. some with her
it him, preferring be to her believed he because her, love to learnt
so. it suppose to reason no have I But thing. another been have would
spontaneous, perfectly a been have to contrary, the on seems, It
him, like man A me. surprises this and side, his on feeling untaught
Fanny broken! almost wounded, pierced, heart a with situation! his in
was her to attachment his and creature, superior very a was Harville
the of devotion a such from recover not does man A attachment. indeed
not." does he not; ought He woman. a such to heart

recovered, had friend his that however, consciousness, the from Either
spite in who, Anne and farther; no went he consciousness, other from or
in and uttered, been had part latter the which in voice agitated the of
slam ceaseless almost the room, the of noises various the all of spite
had through, walking persons of buzz ceaseless and door, the of
and confused, gratified, struck, was word, every distinguished
a in things hundred an feel and quick, very breathe to beginning
yet, and subject; a such on enter to her for impossible was It moment.
the not having and speaking, of necessity the feeling pause, a after
say-- to as far so deviated only she change, total a for wish smallest

think?" I Lyme, at while good a were "You

was well doing Louisa's till it leave not could I fortnight. a "About
to mischief the in concerned deeply too been had I ascertained. quite
not would She mine. solely doing, my been had It peace. at soon be
is Lyme round country The weak. been not had I if obstinate been have
the saw, I more the and deal; great a rode and walked I fine. very
admire." to found I more

Anne. said again," Lyme see to like much very should "I

anything found have could you that supposed have not should I "Indeed!
were you distress and horror The feeling. a such inspire to Lyme in
have should I spirits! of wear the mind, of stretch the in, involved
disgust." strong been have must Lyme of impressions last your thought

when "but Anne; replied painful," very certainly were hours last "The
does One pleasure. a becomes often it of remembrance the over, is pain
been has it unless it, in suffered having for less the place a love not
at case the means no by was which suffering, but nothing suffering, all
hours, two last the during distress and anxiety in only were We Lyme.
much So enjoyment. of deal great a been had there previously and
place fresh every that little, so travelled have I beauty! and novelty
in and Lyme; at beauty real is there but me; to interesting be would
my "altogether recollections), some at blush faint a (with short"
agreeable." very are place the of impressions

party very the and again, opened door entrance the ceased, she As
Dalrymple," Lady Dalrymple, "Lady waiting. were they whom for appeared
with compatible eagerness the all with and sound; rejoicing the was
meet to forward stepped ladies two his and Walter Sir elegance, anxious
and Elliot Mr by escorted Carteret, Miss and Dalrymple Lady her.
instant, same the at nearly arrive to happened had who Wallis, Colonel
in group a was it and them, joined others The room. the into advanced
divided was She included. necessarily also herself found Anne which
interesting too almost interesting, Their Wentworth. Captain from
penance the was slight but time, a for up broken be must conversation
in learnt, had She on! it brought which happiness the with compared
all of more Louisa, towards feelings his of more minutes, ten last the
the to up herself gave she and of; think to dared she than feelings his
with moment, the of civilities needful the to party, the of demands
with humour good in was She sensations. agitated though exquisite,
and courteous be to her disposed which ideas received had She all.
herself. than happy less being as one, every pity to and all, to kind

back stepping on when subdued, little a were emotions delightful The
that saw she Wentworth, Captain by again joined be to group, the from
Concert the into turn him see to time in just was She gone. was he
regret. moment's a felt she disappeared, had he gone; was He Room.
her find would he her, for look would He again. meet should "they But
as was it perhaps, present, at and over, were evening the before out
for interval little a of need in was She asunder. be to well
recollection."

was party whole the afterwards, soon appearance Russell's Lady Upon
proceed and themselves, marshal to was remained that all and collected,
power, their in consequence the all of be and Room; Concert the into
people many as disturb and whispers, many as excite eyes, many as draw
could. they as

in. walked they as Elliot Anne and Elizabeth both were happy very Very,
back broad the on looking and Carteret, Miss with arm in arm Elizabeth
wish to nothing had her, before Dalrymple Viscountess dowager the of
an be would it Anne--but and reach; her within seem not did which for
between comparison any draw to felicity, Anne's of nature the to insult
other the of vanity, selfish all one of origin the sister's; her and it
attachment. generous all

Her room. the of brilliancy the of nothing thought nothing, saw Anne
glowed; cheeks her and bright were eyes Her within. from was happiness
half last the of only thinking was She it. about nothing knew she but
range hasty a took mind her seats, their to passed they as and hour,
his more still and expressions, his subjects, of choice His it. over
His light. one only in see could she as such been had look, and manner
had he which opinion an inferiority, Musgrove's Louisa of opinion
feelings his Benwick, Captain at wonder his give, to solicitous seemed
not could he which begun sentences attachment; strong first, a to as
glance, expressive half than more and eyes averted half his finish,
that least; at her to returning heart a had he that declared all all,
were they that and more; no were avoidance, resentment, anger,
tenderness the by but regard, and friendship by merely not succeeded,
could She past. the of tenderness the of share some Yes, past. the of
her. love must He less. implying as change the contemplate not

and occupied which visions, attendant their with thoughts, were These
she and observation; of power any her leave to much too her flurried
even without him, of glimpse a having without room the along passed
they and on, determined were places their When him. discern to trying
happen should he if see to round looked she arranged, properly all were
not could eye her not; was he but room, the of part same the in be to
a for consent must she opening, just being concert the and him; reach
way. humbler a in happy be to time

Anne benches: contiguous two on of disposed and divided was party The
well, so manoeuvred had Elliot Mr and foremost, the on those among was
by seat a have to as Wallis, Colonel friend his of assistance the with
object principal the and cousins, her by surrounded Elliot, Miss her.
contented. quite was gallantry, Wallis's Colonel of

the of entertainment the for state favourable most a in was mind Anne's
the for feelings had she enough: occupation just was it evening;
patience and scientific, the for attention gay, the for spirits tender,
least at better, concert a liked never had and wearisome; the for
interval the in it, of close the Towards act. first the during
Mr to song the of words the explained she song, Italian an succeeding
them. between bill concert a had They Elliot.

the of meaning the rather or sense, the nearly "is she, said "This,"
be not must love-song Italian an of sense the certainly for words,
not do I for give; can I as meaning the nearly as is it but of, talked
scholar." Italian poor very a am I language. the understand to pretend

You matter. the of nothing know you see I are. you see I yes, "Yes,
these sight at translate to language the of enough knowledge only have
clear, into lines, Italian curtailed transposed, inverted,
of more anything say not need You English. elegant comprehensible,
proof." complete is Here ignorance. your

be to sorry be should I but politeness; kind such oppose not will "I
proficient." real a by examined

long," so Place Camden in visiting of pleasure the had not have "I
do I and Elliot; Anne Miss of something knowing "without he, replied
be to general in world the for modest too is who one as her regard
for accomplished highly too and accomplishments, her half of aware
woman." other any in natural be to modesty

are we what forget I flattery. much too is this shame! for shame! "For
bill. the to turning next," have to

longer a had have "I low, speaking Elliot, Mr said "Perhaps,"
of." aware are you than character your with acquaintance

I since only it with acquainted been have can You so? How "Indeed!
my in of spoken previously me hear might you as excepting Bath, to came
family." own

you heard had I Bath. to came you before long report by you knew "I
acquainted been have I intimately. you knew who those by described
disposition, your person, Your years. many character by you with
me." to present all were they manner; accomplishments,

No raise. to hoped he interest the in disappointed not was Elliot Mr
described been have To mystery. a such of charm the withstand can one
irresistible; is people, nameless by acquaintance, recent a to ago long
eagerly; him questioned and wondered, She curiosity. all was Anne and
tell. not would he but asked, being in delighted He vain. in but

no mention would He now. not but perhaps, other, or time some no, "No,
had He fact. the been had her, assure could he such, but now; names
had as Elliot Anne Miss of description a such received ago years many
the excited and merit, her of idea highest the with him inspired
her." know to curiosity warmest

of partiality with spoken have to likely so one no of think could Anne
Wentworth's Captain Monkford, of Wentworth Mr the as ago years many her
not had she but company, Elliot's Mr in been have might He brother.
question. the ask to courage

sound interesting an had long "has he, said Elliot," Anne of name "The
I if and, fancy; my over charm a possessed it has long Very me. to
change." never might name the that wishes my breathe would I dared,

their received she had scarcely but words; his were believed, she Such,
behind immediately sounds other by caught was attention her than sound,
Lady and father Her trivial. else thing every rendered which her,
speaking. were Dalrymple

man." well-looking very "a Walter, Sir said man," well-looking "A

than air "More Dalrymple. Lady said indeed!" man young fine very "A
say." dare I Irish, Bath. in sees often one

Captain Wentworth; acquaintance. bowing A name. his know just I "No,
Somersetshire, in tenant my married sister His navy. the of Wentworth
Kellynch." rents who Croft, the

the caught had eyes Anne's point, this reached had Walter Sir Before
a among standing Wentworth Captain distinguished and direction, right
his him, on fell eyes her As distance. little a at men of cluster
as seemed It appearance. that had It her. from withdrawn be to seemed
observe, dared she as long as and late; too moment one been had she if
she and recommencing, was performance the but again: look not did he
look and orchestra the to attention her restore to seem to forced was
forward. straight

not could He away. moved had he glance, another give could she When
in: shut and surrounded so was she would; he if her to nearer come have
eye. his caught have rather would she but

any longer no had She her. distressed too, speech, Elliot's Mr
her. near so not him wished She him. to talk to inclination

and, change; beneficial some for hoped she Now over. was act first The
did them of some party, the amongst nothing-saying of period a after
not did who few the of one was Anne tea. of quest in going on decide
but Russell; Lady did so and seat, her in remained She move. to choose
mean, not did she and Elliot; Mr of rid getting of pleasure the had she
from shrink to account, Russell's Lady on feel might she whatever
opportunity. the her gave he if Wentworth, Captain with conversation
him. seen had she that countenance Russell's Lady by persuaded was She

a at him discerned she fancied sometimes Anne however. come not did He
away wore interval anxious The came. never he but distance,
benches again, filled room the returned, others The unproductively.
of or pleasure of hour another and repossessed, and reclaimed were
or delight give to was music of hour another out, sat be to was penance
it Anne, To prevailed. it for taste affected or real as gapes, the
quit not could She agitation. of hour an of prospect the wore chiefly
without more, once Wentworth Captain seeing without peace in room that
look. friendly one of interchange the

of result the changes, many now were there themselves re-settling In
down sitting declined Wallis Colonel her. for favourable was which
a in Carteret, Miss and Elizabeth by invited was Elliot Mr and again,
other some by and them; between sit to refused, be to not manner
place to enabled was Anne own, her of scheming little a and removals,
much before, been had she than bench the of end the nearer much herself
without so, do not could She passer-by. a of reach within more
but Larolles; Miss inimitable the Larolles, Miss with herself comparing
what by though effect; happier much with not and it, did she still
next her in abdication early an of shape the in prosperity seemed
the before bench the of end very the at herself found she neighbours,
closed. concert

Captain when hand, at space vacant a with situation, her was Such
her saw He off. far not him saw She sight. in again was Wentworth
slow very by only and irresolute, seemed and grave, looked he yet too;
that felt She her. to speak to enough near last at came degrees
The indubitable. was change The matter. the be must something
Octagon the in been had it what and air present his between difference
of father, her of thought She it? was Why great. strikingly was Room
began He glances? unpleasant any been have there Could Russell. Lady
of Wentworth Captain the like more gravely, concert the of speaking by
in and singing; expected had disappointed, himself owned Uppercross;
Anne over. was it when sorry be not should he that confess must short,
in yet and well, so performance the of defence in spoke and replied,
countenance his that pleasantly, so feelings his for allowance
a for talked They smile. a almost with again replied he and improved,
the towards down looked even he held; improvement the more; minutes few
that at when occupying; worth well it on place a saw he if as bench,
came It round. turn to Anne obliged shoulder her on touch a moment
to to, applied be must she but pardon, her begged He Elliot. Mr from
a have to anxious very was Carteret Miss again. Italian explain
but refuse; not could Anne sung. be to next was what of idea general
spirit. suffering more a with politeness to sacrificed she had never

and consumed; inevitably were possible, as few as though minutes, few A
done had she as look and turn to able when again, mistress own her when
reserved a in Wentworth, Captain by accosted herself found she before,
was he night; good her wish must "He farewell. of sort hurried yet
could." he as fast as home get should he going;

an by struck suddenly Anne, said for?" staying worth song this not "Is
encouraging. be to anxious more yet her made which idea

for;" staying my worth nothing is "there impressively, replied he "No!"
directly. gone was he and

Captain motive. intelligible only the was It Elliot! Mr of Jealousy
week a it believed have she Could affection! her of jealous Wentworth
exquisite. was gratification the moment a For ago! hours three ago;
such was How succeed. to thoughts different very were there alas! But,
all in How, him? reach to truth the was How quieted? be to jealousy
he would situations, respective their of disadvantages peculiar the
Mr of think to misery was It sentiments? real her of learn ever
incalculable. was evil Their attentions. Elliot's



21 Chapter


to going of promise her morning next the pleasure with recollected Anne
when time the at home from her engage should it that meaning Smith, Mrs
was Elliot Mr avoid to for call; to likely most be would Elliot Mr
object. first a almost

the of spite In him. towards good-will of deal great a felt She
perhaps regard, and gratitude him owed she attentions, his of mischief
extraordinary the of much thinking help not could She compassion.
he which right the of acquaintance, their attending circumstances
own his by situation, in everything by her, interest to have to seemed
very altogether was It prepossession. early his by sentiments,
How regret. to much was There painful. but flattering, extraordinary;
case, the in Wentworth Captain no been there had felt have might she
the be and Wentworth; Captain a was there for enquiry; worth not was
be would affection her bad, or good suspense present the of conclusion
more her divide not could believed, she union, Their ever. for his
separation. final their than men, other from

could constancy, eternal and love high-wrought of musings Prettier
sporting was Anne than Bath, of streets the along passed have never
to enough almost was It Buildings. Westgate to Place Camden from with
way. the all perfume and purification spread

this seemed friend her and reception; pleasant a of sure was She
have to hardly seemed coming, for her to obliged particularly morning
appointment. an been had it though her, expected

Anne's and claimed; immediately was concert the of account An
her animate to enough happy quite were concert the of recollections
tell could she that All it. of talk to rejoice her make and features
been had who one for little was all the but gladly, most told she
had who Smith, Mrs as enquirer an such for unsatisfactory and there,
waiter, a and laundress a of cut short the through heard, already
Anne than evening the of produce and success general the of more rather
the of particulars several for vain in asked now who and relate, could
well was Bath in notoriety or consequence any of Everybody company.
Smith. Mrs to name by know

their "with she, said conclude," I there, were Durands little "The
be to ready sparrows unfledged like music, the catch to open mouths
concert." a miss never They fed.

in were they say Elliot Mr heard I but myself, them see not did I "Yes;
room." the

the with beauties, new two the and there? they were Ibbotsons, "The
them." of one for of talked is who officer, Irish tall

were." they think not do I know. not do "I

I misses, never She her. after ask not need I Maclean? Mary Lady "Old
own your in been have must She her. seen have must you and know;
of seats the in were you Dalrymple, Lady with went you as for circle;
course." of orchestra, the round grandeur,

me to unpleasant very been have would It dreaded. I what was that "No,
be to chooses always Dalrymple Lady happily But respect. every in
hearing; for is, that placed, well exceedingly were we and off; farther
little." very seen have to appear I because seeing, for say not must I

There understand. can I amusement. own your for enough saw you "Oh!
this and crowd, a in even known be to enjoyment domestic of sort a is
nothing wanted you and yourselves, in party large a were You had. you
beyond."

while conscious Anne, said more," me about looked have to ought I "But
that about, looking of want no been fact in had there that spoke she
deficient. been had only object the

a had you that me tell not need You employed. better were you no; "No,
hours the how see perfectly I eye. your in it see I evening. pleasant
the In to. listen to agreeable something always had you that passed:
conversation." was it concert the of intervals

eye?" my in that see you "Do said, and smiled half Anne

in were you that me informs perfectly countenance Your do. I "Yes,
in agreeable most the think you whom person the with night last company
than more time present this at you interests who person the world, the
together." put world the of rest the all

nothing. say could She cheeks. Anne's overspread blush A

"I pause, short a after Smith, Mrs continued case," the being such "And
to coming in kindness your value to how know do I that believe you hope
with sit and come to you of good very really is It morning. this me
time." your upon demands pleasanter many so have must you when me,

and astonishment the in still was She this. of nothing heard Anne
how imagine to unable penetration, friend's her by excited confusion
another After her. reached have could Wentworth Captain of report any
silence-- short

with acquaintance your of aware Elliot Mr "is Smith, Mrs said "Pray,"
Bath?" in am I that know he Does me?

moment's A surprised. up looking Anne, repeated Elliot!" "Mr
it caught She under. been had she mistake the her shewed reflection
safety, of feeling the with courage her recovering and instantaneously;
Elliot?" Mr with acquainted you "Are composedly, more added, soon

Smith, Mrs replied him," with acquainted deal good a been have "I
met." we since while great a is It now. out worn seems it "but gravely,

I Had before. it mentioned never You this. of aware all at not was "I
you." about him to talking of pleasure the had have would I it, known

of air usual her assuming Smith, Mrs said truth," the confess "To
want I have. to you want I pleasure the exactly is "that cheerfulness,
He him. with interest your want I Elliot. Mr to me about talk to you
goodness, the have would you if and me; to service essential of be can
is it course of yourself, to object an it make to Elliot, Miss dear my
done."

to willingness my doubt cannot you hope I happy; extremely be should "I
that suspect I "but Anne; replied you," to use slightest the even of be
greater a Elliot, Mr on claim higher a having as me considering are you
have, you sure am I case. the really is than him, influence to right
as only me consider must You notion. a such imbibed other, or somehow
you which anything is there light that in If relation. Elliot's Mr
not would you beg I him, of ask fairly might cousin his suppose
me." employ to hesitate

said-- smiling, then, and glance, penetrating a her gave Smith Mrs

I pardon. your beg I perceive; I premature, little a been have "I
Miss dear my now, But information. official for waited have to ought
speak. may I when to as hint a me give do friend, old an as Elliot,
all it think to allowed be may I week next by sure be To week? Next
fortune." good Elliot's Mr on schemes selfish own my build and settled,

you assure I next. nor next, nor week, next "nor Anne, replied "No,"
week. any settled be will of thinking are you sort the of nothing that
you why know to like should I Elliot. Mr marry to going not am I
am?" I imagine

her shook smiled, earnestly, looked again, her at looked Smith Mrs
exclaimed-- and head,

you what knew I wish do I How you! understood I wish do I how "Now,
when cruel, be to design not do you that idea great a have I at! were
never women we know, you come, does it Till occurs. moment right the
man every that us, among course of thing a is It anybody. have to mean
plead me Let cruel? be you should why But offers. he till refused, is
friend. former my for but him, call cannot I friend my--present for
a expect you could Where match? suitable more a for look you can Where
am I Elliot. Mr recommend me Let man? agreeable gentlemanlike, more
can who and Wallis; Colonel from him of good but nothing hear you sure
Wallis?" Colonel than better him know

half above much dead been not has wife Elliot's Mr Smith, Mrs dear "My
any to addresses his paying be to supposed be to not ought He year. a
one."

"Mr archly, Smith, Mrs cried objections," only your are these if "Oh!
Do him. about trouble more no myself give shall I and safe, is Elliot
be to me know him Let all. that's married, are you when me forget not
trouble the of little think will he then and yours, of friend a
affairs many so with now, him for natural very is it which required,
very can; he as of rid get and avoid to own, his of engagements and
Of same. the do would hundred a of out Ninety-nine perhaps. natural,
Miss dear my Well, me. to importance the of aware be cannot he course,
sense has Elliot Mr happy. very be will you trust and hope I Elliot,
be not will peace Your woman. a such of value the understand to
and matters, worldly all in safe are You been. has mine as shipwrecked
be not will he astray; led be not will He character. his in safe
ruin." his to others by misled

He cousin. my of that all believe readily can "I Anne, said "No,"
dangerous to open all at not temper, decided calm a have to seems
reason, no have I respect. great with him consider I impressions.
otherwise. do to observation, my within fallen has that thing any from
be to think, I man, a not is he and long; him known not have I But
Mrs him, of speaking of manner this not Will soon. intimately known
calm be must this Surely me? to nothing is he that you convince Smith,
ever he Should me. to nothing is he word, my upon And, enough.
any has he imagine to reason little very have I (which me to propose
not. shall I you assure I him. accept not shall I doing), of thought
been have you which share the not had Elliot Mr you, assure I
afford: might night last of concert the pleasure whatever in supposing,
that--" Elliot Mr not is it Elliot; Mr not

much; so implied had she that blush deep a with regretting stopped, She
hardly would Smith Mrs sufficient. been have hardly would less but
perception the from but failure, Elliot's Mr in soon so believed have
submitted, instantly she was, it As else. somebody a being there of
to eager Anne, and beyond; nothing seeing of semblance the all with and
have should Smith Mrs why know to impatient was notice, farther escape
the received have could she where Elliot; Mr marry to was she fancied
it. heard have could she whom from or idea,

head." your into came first it how me tell "Do

much how finding "upon Smith, Mrs replied head," my into came first "It
the in thing probable most the be to it feeling and together, were you
you and you; of either to belonging everybody by for wished be to world
in you of disposed have acquaintance your all that it upon depend may
ago." days two till of spoken it heard never I But way. same the

of?" spoken been indeed it has "And

called you when you to door the opened who woman the observe you "Did
yesterday?"

one no observed I maid? the or usual, as Speed, Mrs it not Was "No.
particular." in

great a had by-the-bye, who, Rooke; Nurse Rooke; Mrs friend my was "It
in. you let to way the in be to delighted was and you, see to curiosity
was it she and Sunday; on only Buildings Marlborough from away came She
Mrs from it had had She Elliot. Mr marry to were you me told who
with hour an sat She authority. bad seem not did which herself, Wallis
whole "The history." whole the me gave and evening, Monday on me
long very a make not could "She laughing. Anne, repeated history,"
news." unfounded of article little such one of think, I history,

nothing. said Smith Mrs

my in truth no is there "though presently, Anne, continued "But,"
of be to happy extremely be should I Elliot, Mr on claim this having
being your him to mention I Shall could. I that way any in you to use
message?" any take I Shall Bath? in

and moment, the of warmth the In not. certainly no, you: thank I "No,
to endeavoured have perhaps, might, I impression, mistaken a under
I you, thank I No, now. not but circumstances; some in you interest
with." you trouble to nothing have

years?" many Elliot Mr known having of spoke you think "I

did." "I

suppose?" I married, was he before "Not

first." him knew I when married not was he "Yes;

acquainted?" much you "And--were

"Intimately."

a have I life. of time that at was he what me tell do Then "Indeed!
he Was man. young very a as was Elliot Mr what know to curiosity great
now?" appears he as such all at

answer, Smith's Mrs was years," three these Elliot Mr seen not have "I
farther; subject the pursue to impossible was it that gravely so given
curiosity. of increase an but nothing gained had she that felt Anne and
last-- At thoughtful. very Smith Mrs silent: both were They

natural her in cried, she Elliot," Miss dear my pardon, your beg "I
have I answers short the for pardon your beg "I cordiality, of tone
have I do. to ought I what uncertain been have I but you, giving been
There you. tell to ought I what to as considering and doubting been
be to hates One account. the into taken be to things many were
the Even mischief. making impressions, bad giving be to officious,
may there though preserving, worth seems family-union of surface smooth
am I think I determined; have I However, beneath. durable nothing be
real Elliot's Mr with acquainted made be to ought you think I right;
the not have you present, at that, believe fully I Though character.
may what saying no is there him, accepting of intention smallest
towards affected differently be other, or time some might, You happen.
Mr unprejudiced. are you while now, therefore, truth, the Hear him.
wary, designing, a conscience; or heart without man a is Elliot
own his for whom himself; of only thinks who being, cold-blooded
treachery, any or cruelty, any of guilty be would ease, or interest
He character. general his of risk without perpetrated be could that
of cause chief the been has he whom Those others. for feeling no has
smallest the without desert and neglect can he ruin, into leading
of sentiment any of reach the beyond totally is He compunction.
black!" and hollow heart, at black is he Oh! compassion. or justice

and pause, her made wonder, of exclamation and air, astonished Anne's
added, she manner, calmer a in

angry injured, an for allow must You you. startle expressions "My
I him. abuse not will I myself. command to try will I But woman.
was He speak. shall Facts him. found have I what you tell only will
and him, loved and trusted who husband, dear my of friend intimate the
before formed been had intimacy The himself. as good as him thought
became too, I, and friends; intimate most them found I marriage. our
opinion highest the entertained and Elliot, Mr with pleased excessively
but seriously; very think not does one know, you nineteen, At him. of
more much and others, as good as quite me to appeared Elliot Mr
We together. always almost were we and others, most than agreeable
the then was He style. good very in living town, in principally were
in chambers had he one; poor the then was he circumstances; in inferior
appearance the support to do could he as much as was it and Temple, the
he it; chose he whenever us with home a always had He gentleman. a of
had who Charles, poor My brother. a like was he welcome; always was
his divided have would world, the in spirit generous most finest, the
I him; to open was purse his that know I and him; with farthing last
him." assisted often he that know

said life," Elliot's Mr of period very that about been have must "This
have must It curiosity. particular my excited always has "which Anne,
sister. and father my to known became he that time same the about been
something a was there but him; of heard only I myself; him knew never I
and sister, and father my to regard with then, conduct his in
could never I which marriage, his of circumstances the in afterwards
different a announce to seemed It times. present with reconcile quite
man." of sort

been had "He Smith. Mrs cried all," it know I all, it know "I
with acquainted was I before sister your and Walter Sir to introduced
and invited was he know I ever. for them of speak him heard I but him,
you, satisfy can I go. to choose not did he know I and encouraged,
his to as and expect; little would you which points on perhaps,
fors the all to privy was I time. the at it about all knew I marriage,
plans; and hopes his confided he whom to friend the was I againsts; and
situation inferior her previously, wife his know not did I though and
her all her knew I yet impossible, that rendered indeed, society, in
her of years two last the within till least at or afterwards, life
put." to wish may you question any answer can and life,

I her. about make to enquiry particular no have "I Anne, said "Nay,"
like should I But couple. happy a not were they understood always have
father's my slight should he life, his of time that at why, know to
very take to disposed certainly was father My did. he as acquaintance
back?" draw Elliot Mr did Why him. of notice proper and kind

one had life, his of period that "at Smith, Mrs replied Elliot," "Mr
process quicker rather a by and fortune, his make to view: in object
was He marriage. by it make to determined was He law. the than
I and marriage; imprudent an by it mar to not least, at determined,
cannot I course of not, or justly (whether belief his was it know
and civilities their in sister, and father your that decide),
young the and heir the between match a designing were invitations,
his answered have should match a such that impossible was it and lady,
drawing for motive his was That independence. and wealth of ideas
no had He story. whole the me told He you. assure can I back,
behind you left just having that curious, was It me. with concealments
be should marrying on acquaintance principal and first my Bath, in me
of hearing continually be should I him, through that, and cousin; your
thought I and Elliot, Miss one described He sister. and father your
other." the of affectionately very

of spoke sometimes "you idea, sudden a by struck Anne, cried "Perhaps,"
Elliot?" Mr to me

Elliot, Anne own my of boast to used I often. very did; I sure be "To
from--" creature different very a being your for vouch and

time. in just herself checked She

cried night," last said Elliot Mr which something for accounts "This
I me. of hear to used been had he found I it. explains "This Anne.
dear where forms one imaginations wild What how. comprehend not could
I pardon; your beg I But mistaken! be to sure How concerned! is self
money? for completely then married Elliot Mr you. interrupted have
his to eyes your opened first which probably, circumstances, The
character."

common. too are things those "Oh! here. little a hesitated Smith Mrs
too is money for marrying woman's or man a world, the in lives one When
associated and young, very was I ought. it as one strike to common
any without set, gay thoughtless, a were we and young, the with only
differently think I enjoyment. for lived We conduct. of rules strict
at but notions; other me given have sorrow and sickness and time now;
Elliot Mr what in reprehensible nothing saw I own must I period that
duty." a as passed himself,' for best the do 'To doing. was

woman?" low very a she not was "But

was money, Money, regard. not would he but to, objected I which "Yes;
been had grandfather her grazier, a was father Her wanted. he that all
a had had woman, fine a was She nothing. all was that but butcher, a
chance by thrown cousins, some by forward brought was education, decent
a not and him; with love in fell and company, Elliot's Mr into
her to respect with side, his on there was scruple a or difficulty
amount real the of secured being in spent was caution his All birth.
whatever it, upon Depend himself. committed he before fortune, her of
young a as now, life in situation own his for have may Elliot Mr esteem
Kellynch the for chance His it. for value smallest the not had he man
cheap as held he family the of honour the all but something, was estate
were baronetcies if that declare, him heard often have I dirt. as
motto, and arms pounds, fifty for his have should anybody saleable,
I that half repeat to pretend not will I but included; livery and name
yet and fair; be not would It subject. that on say him hear to used
you and assertion, but this all is what for proof, have to ought you
proof." have shall

have "You Anne. cried none," want I Smith, Mrs dear my "Indeed,
some be to appeared Elliot Mr what to contradictory nothing asserted
to used we what of rather, confirmation, in all is This ago. years
so be should he why know to curious more am I believe. and hear
now." different

for ring to goodness the have will you if satisfaction, my for "But
of goodness greater still the have will you sure am I stay: Mary;
box inlaid small the me bringing and bedroom, my into yourself going
closet." the of shelf upper the on find will you which

was she as did it, on bent earnestly be to friend her seeing Anne,
Smith, Mrs and her, before placed and brought was box The desired.
said-- it, unlocked she as it over sighing

small a husband; my to him, to belonging papers of full is "This
I letter The him. lost I when over look to had I what of only portion
marriage, our before him to Elliot Mr by written one was for looking am
was he But imagine. hardly can one why, saved; be to happened and
when and things; those about men, other like immethodical, and careless
more still others with it found I papers, his examine to came I
many while there, and here scattered people different from trivial,
it Here destroyed. been had importance real of memorandums and letters
satisfied little very then even being because it, burn not would I is;
former of document every preserve to determined was I Elliot, Mr with
produce can I that glad being for motive another now have I intimacy.
it."

Wells," Tunbridge Esq. Smith, "Charles to directed letter, the was This
1803:-- July, as back far as London, from dated and

overpowers almost kindness Your yours. received have Smith,--I "Dear
I but common, more yours as hearts such made had nature wish I me.
like none seen have and world, the in years three-and-twenty lived have
in being services, your of need no have I me, believe present, At it.
They Miss. and Walter Sir of rid got have I joy: me Give again. cash
this them visit to swear me made almost and Kellynch, to back gone are
tell to surveyor, a with be will Kellynch to visit first my but summer;
baronet, The hammer. the to advantage best with it bring to how me
enough. fool quite is he again; marry to unlikely not is nevertheless,
decent a be may which peace, in me leave will they however, does, he If
year. last than worse is He reversion. the for equivalent

of name The it. of sick am I Elliot. but name any had I wish "I
me insult never will you desire I and God! thank drop, can I Walter
only be to life, my of rest the for meaning, again, W. second my with
Elliot." truly,--Wm. yours

Mrs and glow; a in Anne putting without read be not could letter a Such
said-- face, her in colour high the observing Smith,

forgot have I Though disrespectful. highly is know, I language, "The
meaning. general the of impression perfect a have I terms, exact the
husband. poor my to professions his Mark man. the you shows it But
stronger?" be thing any Can

of mortification and shock the over get immediately not could Anne
recollect to obliged was She father. her to applied words such finding
that honour, of laws the of violation a was letter the seeing her that
no that testimonies, such by known be to or judged be to ought one no
could she before others, of eye the bear could correspondence private
been had she which letter the return to enough calmness recover
say-- and over, meditating

you thing every of proof undoubtedly; proof full is This you. "Thank
now?" us with acquainted be why But saying. were

smiling. Smith, Mrs cried too," this explain can "I

really?" you "Can

I and ago, years dozen a was he as Elliot Mr you shewn have I "Yes.
but again, proof written produce cannot I now. is he as him shew will
is he what of desire, can you as testimony oral authentic as give can I
He now. hypocrite no is He doing. now is he what and wanting, now
are family your to attentions present His you. marry to wants truly
his authority: my you give will I heart. the from quite sincere: very
Wallis." Colonel friend

him?" with acquainted are you Wallis! "Colonel

it that; as line a direct so quite in me to come not does It "No.
good as is stream The consequence. of nothing but two, or bend a takes
easily is turnings the in collects it rubbish little the first; at as
his of Wallis Colonel to unreservedly talks Elliot Mr away. moved
a himself, in be, to imagine I Wallis, Colonel said which you, on views
has Wallis Colonel but character; of sort discerning careful, sensible,
better had he which things tells he whom to wife, silly pretty very a
of spirits overflowing the in She her. to all it repeats he and not,
my knowing nurse the and nurse; her to all it repeats recovery, her
Monday On me. to all it brings naturally very you, with acquaintance
of secrets the into much thus me let Rooke Mrs friend good my evening,
therefore, history, whole a of talked I When Buildings. Marlborough
supposed." you as much so romancing not was I see you

Mr do. not will This deficient. is authority your Smith, Mrs dear "My
the for account least the in not will me on views any having Elliot's
all was That father. my with reconciliation a towards made he efforts
terms friendly most the on them found I Bath. to coming my to prior
arrived." I when

but--" perfectly, all it know I did; you know "I

such in information real get to expect not must we Smith, Mrs "Indeed,
so of hands the through pass to are which opinions or Facts line. a
can another, in ignorance and one, in folly by misconceived be to many,
left." truth much have hardly

general the of judge to able be soon will You hearing. a me give "Only
yourself can you which particulars some to listening by due, credit
his were you that supposes Nobody confirm. or contradict immediately
and Bath, to came he before indeed, you seen had He inducement. first
historian, my says So you. be to it knowing without but you, admired
autumn, or summer last you see he Did true? this Is least. at
it knowing without words, own her use to west,' the in down 'somewhere
you?" be to

be to happened I Lyme. At true. very is it far So did. certainly "He
Lyme." at

credit the friend my "grant triumphantly, Smith, Mrs continued "Well,"
then you saw He asserted. point first the of establishment the to due
meet to pleased exceedingly be to as well so you liked and Lyme, at
that from and Elliot, Anne Miss as Place, Camden in again you with
But there. visits his in motive double a had doubt, no have I moment,
there If explain. now will I which earlier, an and another, was there
or false either be to know you which story my in anything is
the friend, sister's your that states, account My me. stop improbable,
Bath to came mention, you heard have I whom you, with staying now lady
when short (in September as ago long as Walter Sir and Elliot Miss with
since; ever there staying been has and themselves), came first they
plausible, and poor woman, handsome insinuating, clever, a is she that
idea, general a give to as manner, and situation in such altogether and
and Elliot, Lady be to meaning her of acquaintance, Walter's Sir among
to blind apparently, be should Elliot Miss that surprise a general as
danger." the

she and say, to word a not had Anne but moment; a paused Smith Mrs Here
continued--

family, the knew who those to appeared it which in light the was "This
upon eye his had Wallis Colonel and it; to returned you before long
visit then not did he though it, of sensible be to enough father your
in interest an him gave Elliot Mr for regard his but Place; Camden in
Bath to came Elliot Mr when and there, on going was that all watching
Christmas, before little a do to happened he as two, or day a for
and things, of appearance the with acquainted him made Wallis Colonel
time that understand, to are you Now prevail. to beginning reports the
the to as opinions Elliot's Mr in change material very a worked had
a is he connexion and blood of points all Upon baronetcy. a of value
could he as money much as had long Having man. altered completely
has he indulgence, or avarice of side the on for wish to nothing spend,
is he consequence the upon happiness his pin to learning gradually been
it but ceased, acquaintance our before on coming it thought I to. heir
Sir being not of idea the bear cannot He feeling. confirmed a now is
his from heard he news the that therefore, guess, may You William.
produced; it what guess may you and agreeable, very be not could friend
of and possible, as soon as Bath to back coming of resolution the
former his renewing of view the with time, a for here himself fixing
give might as family the in footing a such recovering and acquaintance,
of and danger, his of degree the ascertaining of means the him
upon agreed was This material. it found he if lady the circumventing
Colonel and done; be to thing only the as friends two the between
be to was He could. he that way every in assist to was Wallis
to was everybody and introduced, be to was Wallis Mrs and introduced,
was application on and accordingly; back came Elliot Mr introduced. be
it there and family; the into re-admitted and know, you as forgiven,
added arrival your (till object only his and object, constant his was
no omitted He Clay. Mrs and Walter Sir watch to motive), another
at called way, their in himself threw them, with being of opportunity
can You subject. this on particular be not need I but hours; all
may perhaps, guide, this with and do; would man artful an what imagine
do." him seen have you what recollect

what with accord not does which nothing me tell "you Anne, said "Yes,"
in offensive something always is There imagine. could or known, have I
duplicity and selfishness of manoeuvres The cunning. of details the
surprises really which nothing heard have I but revolting, be ever must
Mr of representation a such by shocked be would who those know I me.
never have I but it; believing in difficulty have would who Elliot,
conduct his for motive other some wanted always have I satisfied. been
the to as opinion, present his know to like should I appeared. than
considers he whether of; dread in been has he event the of probability
not." or lessening be to danger the

Clay Mrs thinks "He Smith. Mrs replied understand," I "Lessening,
to daring not and her, through sees he that aware him, of afraid
absent be must he since But absence. his in do might she as proceed
while secure be ever can he how perceive not do I other, or time some
as idea, amusing an has Wallis Mrs influence. present her holds she
when articles marriage the into put be to is it that me, tells nurse
A Clay. Mrs marry to not is father your that marry, Elliot Mr and you
my but accounts; all by understanding, Wallis's Mrs of worthy scheme,
sure, be to 'Why, it. of absurdity the sees Rooke nurse sensible
else.' anybody marrying his prevent not would 'it she, said ma'am,'
a is heart, her in nurse, think not do I truth, the own to indeed, And,
must She match. second a making Walter's Sir of opposer strenuous very
self (since and know; you matrimony, of favourer a be to allowed be
of visions flying some have not may she that say can who intrude) will
recommendation?" Wallis's Mrs through Elliot, Lady next the attending

little a after Anne, said this," all know to glad very am "I
be to respects some in me to painful more be will "It thoughtfulness.
of line My do. to what better know shall I but him, with company in
disingenuous, a evidently is Elliot Mr direct. more be will conduct
to principle better any had never has who man, worldly artificial,
selfishness." than him guide

from away carried been had Smith Mrs with. done not was Elliot Mr But
own her of interest the in forgotten, had Anne and direction, first her
but him; against implied originally been had much how concerns, family
hints, first those of explanation the to called now was attention her
justify perfectly not did it if which, recital a to listened she and
very been have to him proved Smith, Mrs of bitterness unqualified the
justice in both deficient very her; towards conduct his in unfeeling
compassion. and

Mr by unimpaired continuing them between intimacy (the that learned She
Mr and together, always before as been had they marriage) Elliot's
Mrs fortune. his beyond much expenses into friend his led had Elliot
of tender most was and herself, to blame take to want not did Smith
income their that collect could Anne but husband; her on any throwing
first the from that and living, of style their to equal been never had
From extravagance. joint and general of deal great a been had there
man a been have to Smith Mr discern could she him of account wife's his
strong not and habits, careless temper, easy feelings, warm of
him, unlike very and friend, his than amiable more much understanding,
his by raised Elliot, Mr him. by despised probably and him, by led
of gratification every to disposed and affluence, great to marriage
himself, involving without commanded be could which vanity and pleasure
and man), prudent a become had he self-indulgence his all with (for
to himself found have to ought friend his as just rich, be to beginning
friend's that for all at concern no had have to seemed poor, be
and prompting been had contrary, the on but, finances, probable
Smiths the and ruin; in only end could which expenses encouraging
ruined. been had accordingly

of knowledge full the spared be to time in just died had husband The
the try to enough embarrassments known previously had They it.
better had Elliot's Mr that prove to and friends, their of friendship
of state wretched the that death his till not was it but tried; be not
regard, Elliot's Mr in confidence a With known. fully was affairs his
had Smith Mr judgement, his than feelings his to creditable more
act, not would Elliot Mr but will; his of executor the him appointed
her, on heaped had refusal this which distress and difficulties the and
been had situation, her of sufferings inevitable the to addition in
to listened or spirit, of anguish without related be not could as such
indignation. corresponding without

urgent to answers occasion, the on his of letters some shewn was Anne
stern same the breathed all which Smith, Mrs from applications
cold a under and, trouble, fruitless a in engaging not of resolution
it evils the of any to indifference hard-hearted same the civility,
and ingratitude of picture dreadful a was It her. on bring might
crime open flagrant no that moments, some at felt, Anne and inhumanity;
the all to; listen to deal great a had She worse. been have could
upon distress of minutiae the all scenes, sad past of particulars
were at, hinted merely been had conversations former in which distress,
perfectly could Anne indulgence. natural a with now on dwelt
to inclined more the only was and relief, exquisite the comprehend
mind. of state usual friend's her of composure the at wonder

of grievances her of history the in circumstance one was There
some that believe to reason good had She irritation. particular
many for been had which Indies, West the in husband her of property
own its of payment the for sequestration of sort a under years
this and measures; proper by recoverable be might incumbrances,
comparatively her make to enough be would large, not though property,
nothing, do would Elliot Mr it. in stir to nobody was there But rich.
personal from disabled equally herself, nothing do could she and
by others employing from and weakness, bodily of state her by exertion
even her assist to connexions natural no had She money. of want her
assistance the purchase to afford not could she and counsel, their with
means. straitened actually of aggravation cruel a was This law. the of
little a that circumstances, better in be to ought she that feel To
be might delay that fear to and it, do might place right the in trouble
bear. to hard was claims, her weakening even

offices good Anne's engage to hoped had she that point this on was It
their of anticipation the in previously, had She Elliot. Mr with
on but it; by friend her losing of apprehensive very been marriage,
since nature, that of attempt no made have could he that assured being
that occurred, immediately it Bath, in be to her know even not did he
he woman the of influence the by favour her in done be might something
feelings, Anne's interest to preparing hastily been had she and loved,
allow, would character Elliot's Mr to due observances the as far as
of face the changed engagement supposed the of refutation Anne's when
of hope new-formed the her from took it while and everything;
the least at her left anxiety, first her of object the in succeeding
way. own her story whole the telling of comfort

not could Anne Elliot, Mr of description full this to listening After
so him of spoken having Smith's Mrs at surprise some express but
to seemed had "She conversation. their of beginning the in favourably
him!" praise and recommend

done. be to else nothing was "there reply, Smith's Mrs was dear," "My
have yet not might he though certain, as him marrying your considered I
he if than him, of truth the speak more no could I and offer, the made
of talked I as you, for bled heart My husband. your been had
a such with and agreeable, is he sensible, is he yet and happiness;
to unkind very was He hopeless. absolutely not was it you, as woman
ignorant too was she But together. wretched were They wife. first his
to willing was I her. loved never had he and respect, for giddy and
better." fare must you that hope

having of possibility a such herself within acknowledge just could Anne
the of idea the at shudder her made as him, marry to induced been
might she that possible just was It followed. have must which misery
supposition, a such under And Russell! Lady by persuaded been have
too all, disclosed had time when miserable, most been have would which
late?

deceived; longer no be should Russell Lady that desirable very was It
conference, important this of arrangements concluding the of one and
that was, morning, the of part greater the through them carried which
relative everything friend her to communicate to liberty full had Anne
involved. was conduct his which in Smith, Mrs to



22 Chapter


her point, one In heard. had she that all over think to home went Anne
no was There Elliot. Mr of knowledge this by relieved were feelings
to opposed as stood He him. to due tenderness of anything longer
evil the and obtrusiveness; unwelcome own his all in Wentworth, Captain
have might he mischief irremediable the night, last attentions his of
Pity unperplexed. unqualified, sensations with considered was done,
every In relief. of point only the was this But over. all was him for
saw she forward, penetrating or her, around looking in respect, other
the for concerned was She apprehend. to and distrust to more
the for feeling; be would Russell Lady pain and disappointment
and sister, and father her over hanging be must which mortifications
to how knowing without evils, many foreseeing of distress the all had
of knowledge own her for thankful most was She them. of one any avert
not for reward to entitled as herself considered never had She him.
indeed reward a was here but Smith, Mrs like friend old an slighting
one no what her tell to able been had Smith Mrs it! from springing
through extended been have knowledge the Could done. have could else
Russell, Lady to talk must She idea. vain a was this But family? her
event the wait best, her done having and her, with consult her, tell
of want greatest her all, after and possible; as composure much as with
be not could which mind the of quarter that in be would composure
must which fears and anxieties of flow that in Russell; Lady to opened
herself. to all be


escaped intended, she as had, she that home, reaching on found, She
morning long a them paid and called had he that Elliot; Mr seeing
when safe, felt and herself, congratulated she had hardly but visit;
evening. the in again coming was he that heard she

with Elizabeth, said him," asking of intention smallest the not had "I
at says, Clay Mrs so hints; many so gave he "but carelessness, affected
least."

for harder spell life my in anybody saw never I it. say do I "Indeed,
your for him; for pain in really was I man! Poor invitation. an
cruelty." on bent seems Anne, Miss sister, hard-hearted

to game the to used much too rather been have "I Elizabeth, cried "Oh!"
how found I when However, hints. gentleman's a by overcome soon be
this father my miss should he that regretting was he excessively
an omit really never would I for immediately, way gave I morning,
so to appear They together. Walter Sir and him bringing of opportunity
so behaving Each other. each with company in advantage much
respect." much so with up looking Elliot Mr pleasantly.

her turn to however, daring, not Clay, Mrs cried delightful!" "Quite
Elliot, Miss Dear son! and father like "Exactly Anne. towards eyes
son?" and father say not I may

such have will you If words. body's any on embargo no lay I "Oh!
attentions his of sensible scarcely am I word, my upon But, ideas!
men." other of those beyond being

eyes, and hands her lifting Clay, Mrs exclaimed Elliot!" Miss dear "My
silence. convenient a in astonishment her of rest the all sinking and

did I him. about alarmed so be not need you Penelope, dear my "Well,
he found I When smiles. with away him sent I know. you him, invite
day whole the for Park Thornberry at friends his to going really was
him." on compassion had I to-morrow,

such shew to able being in friend, the of acting good the admired Anne
of arrival actual the in and expectation the in did, she as pleasure
her with interfering be really must presence whose person very the
sight the hate must Clay Mrs that but impossible was It object. prime
look, placid obliging, most a assume could she yet and Elliot; Mr of
devoting of license curtailed the with satisfied quite appear and
done have would she as Walter Sir to much as half only herself
otherwise.

the enter Elliot Mr see to distressing most was it herself Anne To
had She her. to speak and approach him have to painful quite and room;
but sincere, quite always be not could he that feel to before used been
her to deference attentive His everything. in insincerity saw she now
she when and odious; was language, former his with contrasted father,
bear hardly could she Smith, Mrs towards conduct cruel his of thought
his of sound the or mildness, and smiles present his of sight the
sentiments. good artificial

a provoke might as manners of alteration such any avoid to meant She
all escape to her to object great a was It side. his on remonstrance
to cool decidedly as be to intention her was it but eclat; or enquiry
as retrace, to and relationship; their with compatible be might as him
had she intimacy unnecessary of steps few the could, she as quietly
more and guarded, more accordingly was She along. led gradually been
before. night the been had she than cool,

could he where and how to as again curiosity her animate to wanted He
by gratified be to much very wanted praised; formerly her heard have
and heat the that found he broken: was charm the but solicitation; more
cousin's modest his kindle to necessary was room public a of animation
of any by now, done be to not was it that least, at found, he vanity;
of claims too-commanding the among hazard could he which attempts those
now acting subject a was it that surmised little He others. the
all thoughts her to immediately bringing interest, his against exactly
excusable. least were which conduct his of parts those

of out going really was he that finding in satisfaction some had She
the gone be would he that and early, going morning, next the Bath
the Place Camden to again invited was He days. two of part greater
his evening Saturday to Thursday from but return; his of evening very
be should Clay Mrs a that enough bad was It certain. was absence
their to added be should hypocrite deeper a that but her; before always
It comfort. and peace like everything of destruction the seemed party,
on practised deception constant the on reflect to humiliating so was
of sources various the consider to Elizabeth; and father her
so not was selfishness Clay's Mrs them! for preparing mortification
for compounded have would Anne and his; as revolting so nor complicate
Elliot's Mr of clear be to evils, its all with once, at marriage the
it. prevent to endeavouring in subtleties

and Russell, Lady to early very go to meant she morning Friday On
gone have would she and communication; necessary the accomplish
some on out going also was Clay Mrs that but breakfast, after directly
to her determined which trouble, sister her saving of purpose obliging
Clay Mrs saw She companion. a such from safe be might she till wait
morning the spending of talk to began she before therefore, off, fairly
Street. Rivers in

Oh! love. my but send to nothing have "I Elizabeth, said well," "Very
and me, lend would she book tiresome that back take well as may you
for myself plaguing be cannot really I through. it read have I pretend
out. come that nation the of states and poems new the all with ever
not need You publications. new her with one bores quite Russell Lady
used I night. other the hideous dress her thought I but so, her tell
the at her of ashamed was I but dress, in taste some had she think to
so sits she and air! her in _arrangé_ and formal so Something concert.
course." of love, best My upright!

that say, may you And regards. "Kindest Walter. Sir added mine," "And
only shall I but message; civil a Make soon. her upon call to mean I
of time her at women by fair never are visits Morning card. my leave
rouge wear only would she If little. so up themselves make who life,
I called, I time last but seen; being of afraid be not would she
immediately." down let were blinds the observed

it could Who door. the at knock a was there spoke, father her While
Mr of hours, all at visits, preconcerted the remembering Anne, be?
seven engagement known his for but him, expected have would Elliot,
of sounds usual the suspense, of period usual the After off. miles
ushered were Musgrove" Charles Mrs and "Mr and heard, were approach
room. the into

Anne but appearance; their by raised emotion strongest the was Surprise
that but sorry so not were others the and them; see to glad really was
became it as soon as and welcome; of air decent a on put could they
any with arrived not were relations, nearest their these, that clear
were Elizabeth and Walter Sir house, that in accommodation of views
They well. very it of honours the do and cordiality, in rise to able
the at were and Musgrove, Mrs with days few a for Bath to come were
Walter Sir till but understood; soon pretty was much So Hart. White
and drawing-room, other the into Mary walking were Elizabeth and
upon draw not could Anne admiration, her with themselves regaling
an or coming, their of history regular a for brain Charles's
had which business, particular of hints smiling some of explanation
apparent some of as well as Mary, by dropped ostentatiously been
of. consisted party their whom to as confusion

and Henrietta, Musgrove, Mrs of consisted it that found then She
plain, very a her gave He selves. two their beside Harville, Captain
great a saw she which in narration a whole; the of account intelligible
its received had scheme The proceeding. characteristic most of deal
on Bath to come to wanting Harville's Captain by impulse first
doing of way by and ago; week a it of talk to begun had He business.
him, with coming proposed had Charles over, was shooting as something,
an as much, very it of idea the like to seemed had Harville Mrs and
had and left, be to bear not could Mary but husband; her to advantage
everything two or day a for that it, about unhappy so herself made
up taken been had it then, But end. an at or suspense, in be to seemed
whom Bath in friends old some had mother His mother. and father his by
to Henrietta for opportunity good a thought was it see; to wanted she
short, in and, sister; her and herself for wedding-clothes buy and come
be might everything that party, mother's his being in ended it
included were Mary and he and Harville; Captain to easy and comfortable
night the late arrived had They convenience. general of way by it in
with remained Benwick, Captain and children, her Harville, Mrs before.
Uppercross. at Louisa and Musgrove Mr

enough forwardness in be should affairs that was, surprise only Anne's
such imagined had She of. talked be to wedding-clothes Henrietta's for
marriage the prevent must as there exist to fortune of difficulties
very that, Charles from learned she but hand; at near being from
had Hayter Charles herself), to letter last Mary's (since recently,
not could who youth a for living a hold to friend a by to applied been
his of strength the on that and years; many under it claim possibly
permanent more something of certainty a almost with income, present
the to consented had families two the question, in term the before long
place take to likely was marriage their that and wishes, people's young
it living good very a "And Louisa's. as soon as quite months, few a in
and Uppercross, from miles five-and-twenty "only added: Charles was,"
of centre the In Dorsetshire. of part fine country: fine very a in
great three by surrounded kingdom, the in preserves best the of some
two to and other; the than jealous and careful more each proprietors,
special a get might Hayter Charles least, at three the of
observed, he ought," he as it value will he that Not recommendation.
him." of worst the That's sporting. about cool too is "Charles

this that glad "particularly Anne, cried indeed," glad, extremely am "I
well, equally deserve both who sisters, two of that and happen; should
of prospect pleasant the friends, good such been always have who and
so be should they other--that the of those dimming be not should one
mother and father your hope I comfort. and prosperity their in equal
both." to regard with happy quite are

were gentlemen the if pleased well be would father My yes. "Oh!
coming know, you Money, find. to fault other no has he but richer,
agreeable very a be cannot once--it at daughters money--two with down
not do I However, things. many to as him streightens it and operation,
should they fit very is It it. to right a not have they say to mean
kind, very a been always has he sure am I and shares; daughters' have
match. Henrietta's like half above not does Mary me. to father liberal
think nor justice, him do not does she But know. you did, never She
the of value the to attend her make cannot I Winthrop. about enough
liked have I and go; times as match, fair very a is It property.
now." off leave not shall I and life, my all Hayter Charles

Anne, exclaimed Musgrove," Mrs and Mr as parents excellent "Such
to everything do They marriages. children's their in happy be "should
in be to people young to blessing a What sure. am I happiness, confer
those all from free totally so seem mother and father Your hands! such
misery, and misconduct much so to led have which feelings ambitious
recovered perfectly Louisa think you hope I old. and young in both
now?"

much very do; I believe I "Yes, hesitatingly, rather answered He
no about, jumping or running no is there altered; is she but recovered;
to only happens one If different. quite is it dancing; or laughing
young a like wriggles and starts she hard, little a door the shut
verses, reading elbow, her at sits Benwick and water; the in dab-chick
long." day all her, to whispering or

I taste, your to much be cannot "That laughing. help not could Anne
man." young excellent an be to him believe do I "but she; said know,"

am I think not do you hope I and it; doubts Nobody is. he sure be "To
and objects same the have to man every want to as illiberal so
one when and Benwick; for value great a have I myself. as pleasures
done has reading His say. to plenty has he talk, to him get but can
fellow. brave a is He read. as well as fought has he for harm, no him
We before. did I ever than Monday last him with acquainted more got I
great father's my in morning the all rat-hunting at set-to famous a had
better the him liked have I that well so part his played he and barns;
since." ever

Charles's of necessity absolute the by interrupted were they Here
heard had Anne but china; and mirrors admire to others the following
in rejoice and Uppercross, of state present the understand to enough
none had sigh her rejoiced, she as sighed she though and happiness; its
their to risen have certainly would She it. in envy of ill-will the of
theirs. lessen to want not did she but could, she if blessings

in was Mary humour. good high in altogether off passed visit The
well so and change, the and gaiety the enjoying spirits, excellent
four with carriage mother-in-law's her in journey the with satisfied
that Place, Camden of independence complete own her with and horses,
and ought, she as everything admire to temper a in exactly was she
they as house, the of superiorities the all into readily most enter
and sister, or father her on demands no had She her. to detailed were
handsome their by increased enough just was consequence her
drawing-rooms.

that felt She deal. good a suffering time, short a for was, Elizabeth
but them; with dine to asked be to ought party her all and Musgrove Mrs
of reduction the style, of difference the have to bear not could she
been had who those by witnessed betray, must dinner a which servants,
struggle a was It Kellynch. of Elliots the to inferior so always
then and better, the got vanity but vanity; and propriety between
"Old persuasions: internal her were These again. happy was Elizabeth
give to profess not do we hospitality; country notions; fashioned
even not did does; never Alicia Lady do; Bath in people few dinners;
dare I and month: a here were they though family, sister's own her ask
of out quite her put Musgrove; Mrs to inconvenient very be would it say
easy feel cannot she come; not rather would she sure am I way. her
better; much be will that evening; an for all them ask will I us. with
such two seen not have They treat. a and novelty a be will that
to-morrow come to delighted be will They before. rooms drawing
And elegant." most but small, party, regular a be shall It evening.
two the to given was invitation the when and Elizabeth: satisfied this
satisfied. completely as was Mary absent, the for promised and present,
Lady to introduced be and Elliot, Mr meet to asked particularly was She
to engaged already fortunately were who Carteret, Miss and Dalrymple
attention. gratifying more a received have not could she and come;
the in Musgrove Mrs on calling of honour the have to was Elliot Miss
go to Mary, and Charles with off walked Anne and morning; the of course
directly. Henrietta and her see and

present. the for way give must Russell Lady with sitting of plan Her
but minutes; of couple a for Street Rivers in called three all They
communication intended the of delay day's a that herself convinced Anne
to Hart, White the to forward hastened and consequence, no of be could
an with autumn, last the of companions and friends the again see
form. to contributed associations many which good-will of eagerness

and themselves, by and within, daughter her and Musgrove Mrs found They
that in exactly was Henrietta each. from welcome kindest the had Anne
made which happiness, fresh-formed of views, recently-improved of state
before liked ever had she everybody for interest and regard of full her
her by won been had affection real Musgrove's Mrs and all; at
a and heartiness, a was It distress. in were they when usefulness
sad the from more, the in delighted Anne which sincerity a and warmth,
much as them give to entreated was She home. at blessings such of want
or long, day all and day every for invited possible, as time her of
naturally she return, in and, family; the of part as claimed rather
on and assistance, and attention of ways wonted her all into fell
Musgrove's Mrs to listening was together, them leaving Charles's
on opinions giving herself, of Henrietta's to and Louisa, of history
help every of intervals with shops; to recommendations and business,
accounts; her settling to ribbon her altering from required, Mary which
to trying to trinkets, her assorting and keys, her finding from
well Mary, which anybody; by ill-used not was she that her convince
the overlooking window a at station her in was, generally she as amused
imagining. of moments her have but not could Room, Pump the to entrance

in party large A expected. be to was confusion thorough of morning A
minutes five One scene. unsettled quick-changing, a ensured hotel an
an half there been not had Anne and parcel; a next the note, a brought
half than more seemed was, it as spacious dining-room, their when hour,
Musgrove, Mrs around seated were friends old steady of party a filled:
The Wentworth. and Harville Captains with back came Charles and
the of surprise the than more be not could latter the of appearance
this that feel to forgotten have to her for impossible was It moment.
together them bringing soon be must friends common their of arrival
his opening in important most been had meeting last Their again.
she but conviction; delightful a it from derived had she feelings;
had which persuasion, unfortunate same the that looks, his from feared
not did He governed. still Room, Concert the from away him hastened
conversation. for enough near be to want to seem

tried and course, their take to things leave and calm, be to tried She
if dependence:--"Surely, rational of argument this on much dwell to
understand must hearts our side, each on attachment constant be there
captiously be to girl, and boy not are We long. ere other each
playing wantonly and inadvertence, moment's every by misled irritable,
felt she afterwards, minutes few a yet, And happiness." own our with
present their under other, each with company in being their if as
and inadvertencies to them exposing be only could circumstances,
kind. mischievous most the of misconstructions

sure, am I Clay, Mrs is "there window, her at still Mary, cried "Anne,"
them saw I her. with gentleman a and colonnade, the under standing
talk. in deep seemed They now. just Street Bath from corner the turn
Mr is It recollect. I heavens! Good me. tell and Come, it? is Who
himself." Elliot

He you. assure I Elliot, Mr be cannot "it quickly, Anne, cried "No,"
till back come not does and morning, this nine at Bath leave to was
to-morrow."

the her, at looking was Wentworth Captain that felt she spoke, she As
regret her made and her, embarrassed and vexed which of consciousness
was. it as simple much, so said had she that

cousin, own her know to not supposed be should she that resenting Mary,
protesting and features, family the about warmly very talking began
to Anne upon again calling Elliot, Mr was it that positively more still
to tried and stir, to mean not did Anne but herself, for look and come
perceiving on however, returned, distress Her unconcerned. and cool be
lady the of three or two between pass glances intelligent and smiles
was It secret. the in quite themselves believed they if as visitors,
pause short a and spread, had her concerning report the that evident
farther. spread now would it that ensure to seemed which succeeded,

too be will You yourself. look and "come Mary, cried Anne," come, "Do
shaking are they parting; are They haste. make not do you if late
to seem You indeed! Elliot, Mr know Not away. turning is He hands.
Lyme." about all forgot have

move did Anne embarrassment, own her screen perhaps and Mary, pacify To
it that ascertain to time in just was She window. the to quietly
he before believed, never had she which Elliot, Mr was really
other; the on off quickly walked Clay Mrs as side, one on disappeared
an such at feel but not could she which surprise the checking and
totally of persons two between conference friendly of appearance
certainly. Elliot, Mr is it "Yes, said, calmly she interest, opposite
be may I or all, is that suppose, I going, of hour his changed has He
chair, her to back walked and attend;" not might I mistaken,
herself acquitted having of hope comfortable the with and recomposed,
well.

them seen civilly having Charles, and leave; their took visitors The
began coming, for them abused and them, at face a made then and off,
with--

I like. will you that you for something done have I mother, "Well,
A'n't night. to-morrow for box a secured and theatre, the to been have
all. us for room is there and play; a love you know I boy? good a I
be not will Anne Wentworth. Captain engaged have I nine. holds It
done I not Have play. a like all We sure. am I us, join to sorry
mother?" well,

perfect her express to beginning humouredly good was Musgrove Mrs
when it, liked others the all and Henrietta if play, the for readiness
exclaiming-- by her interrupted eagerly Mary

box a Take thing? a such of think you can how Charles! heavens, "Good
Camden to engaged are we that forgot you Have night! to-morrow for
meet to asked particularly most were we that and night? to-morrow Place
principal the all and Elliot, Mr and daughter, her and Dalrymple Lady
be you can How them? to introduced be to purpose on connexions, family
forgetful?" so

worth Never party? evening an "what's Charles, replied phoo!" "Phoo!
he if think, I dinner, to us asked have might father Your remembering.
the to go shall I but like, you as do may You us. see to wanted had
play."

you when do, you if abominable too be will it declare I Charles, "Oh!
go." to promised

word the said and bowed, and smirked only I promise. not did I "No,
promise." no was There 'happy.'

were We fail. to unpardonable be would It Charles. go, must you "But
great a such always was There introduced. be to purpose on asked
happened ever Nothing ourselves. and Dalrymples the between connexion
near quite are We immediately. announced not was that side either on
particularly so ought you whom too, Elliot Mr and know; you relations,
Consider, Elliot. Mr to due is attention Every with! acquainted be to
family." the of representative future the heir: father's my

"I Charles. cried representatives," and heirs about me to talk "Don't
rising the to bow to power reigning the neglect who those of one not am
it think should I father, your of sake the for go not would I If sun.
me?" to Elliot Mr is What heir. his of sake the for go to scandalous
Captain that saw who Anne, to life was expression careless The
soul; whole his with listening and looking attention, all was Wentworth
to Charles from eyes enquiring his brought words last the that and
herself.

serious half he, style; same the in on talked still Mary and Charles
she, and play, the for scheme the maintaining jesting, half and
make to omitting not and it, opposing warmly most serious, invariably
she herself, Place Camden to go to determined however that, known it
play the to went they if used, well very herself think not should
interposed. Musgrove Mrs her. without

and back go better much had you Charles, off. it put better had "We
we and divided, be to pity a be would It Tuesday. for box the change
father's; her at party a is there if too, Anne, Miss losing be should
play, the for all at care should I nor Henrietta neither sure am I and
us." with be not could Anne Miss if

so much as quite and kindness; such for her to obliged truly felt Anne
saying-- decidedly of her gave it opportunity the for

home at party the ma'am, inclination, my on only depended it "If
I impediment. smallest the be not would account) Mary's on (excepting
to happy too be should and meeting, of sort the in pleasure no have
be not better had it But, you. with and play, a for it change
was it when trembled she but it; spoken had She perhaps." attempted,
to even not daring and to, listened were words her that conscious done,
effect. their observe to try

Charles day; the be should Tuesday that agreed generally soon was It
persisting by wife, his teasing still of advantage the reserving only
would. else nobody if to-morrow play the to go would he that

probably fire-place; the to walked and seat, his left Wentworth Captain
a taking and afterwards, soon it from away walking of sake the for
Anne. by design, bare-faced less with station,

evening the enjoy "to he, said Bath," in enough long been not have "You
place." the of parties

no am I me. for nothing has them of character usual The no. "Oh!
card-player."

but cards; like to use not did You know. I formerly, not were "You
changes." many makes time

she fearing stopped, and Anne, cried changed," much so yet not am "I
said, he moments few a waiting After misconstruction. what knew hardly
period, a is "It feeling, immediate of result the were it if as and
period." a is half a and years Eight indeed!

imagination Anne's to left was farther proceeded have would he Whether
he sounds the hearing still while for hour; calmer a in over ponder to
to eager Henrietta, by subjects other to startled was she uttered, had
her on calling and out, getting for leisure present the of use make
in. come should else somebody lest time, no lose to companions

and ready, perfectly being of talked Anne move. to obliged were They
the known have Henrietta could that felt she but it; look to tried
preparing in chair, that quitting in heart her of reluctance and regret
for sensations own her all in found, have would she room, the quit to
pity to wherewith affection, his of security very the in cousin, her
her.

were sounds Alarming short. stopped were however, preparations, Their
Sir for open thrown was door the and approached, visitors other heard;
chill. general a give to seemed entrance whose Elliot, Miss and Walter
symptoms saw looked she wherever and oppression, instant an felt Anne
was room the of gaiety the freedom, the comfort, The same. the of
talk, insipid or silence, determined composure, cold into hushed over,
How sister. and father her of elegance heartless the meet to
so! was it that feel to mortifying

was Wentworth Captain particular. one in satisfied was eye jealous Her
before. than graciously more Elizabeth by each, by again acknowledged
once. than more him at looked and once, him addressed even She
sequel The measure. great a revolving fact, in was, Elizabeth
proper the saying in minutes few a of waste the After it. explained
all comprise to was which invitation the give to began she nothings,
few a meet to evening, "To-morrow Musgroves. the of dues remaining the
the and gracefully, very said all was It party." formal no friends:
home," at Elliot "Miss the herself, provided had she which with cards
all, to smile comprehensive courteous, a with table, the on laid were
The Wentworth. Captain for decidedly more card one and smile one and
understand to Bath in enough long been had Elizabeth that was, truth
past The his. as appearance and air an such of man a of importance the
about move would Wentworth Captain that was present The nothing. was
Walter Sir and given, pointedly was card The drawing-room. her in well
disappeared. and arose Elizabeth and

animation and ease and severe, though short, been had interruption The
not but out, them shut door the as left they those of most to returned
such with had she invitation the of only think could She Anne. to
been had it which in manner the of and witnessed, astonishment
than rather surprise of meaning, doubtful of manner a received;
She acceptance. than rather acknowledgement polite of gratification,
believe to venture not could and eye, his in disdain saw she him; knew
for atonement an as offering, an such accept to determined had he that
in card the held He sank. spirits Her past. the of insolence the all
it. considering deeply if as gone, were they after hand his

very Mary whispered everybody!" including Elizabeth's of think "Only
he see You delighted! is Wentworth Captain wonder not do "I audibly.
hand." his of out card the put cannot

itself form mouth his and glow, cheeks his saw eye, his caught Anne
she that away, turned and contempt, of expression momentary a into
her. vex to more hear nor see neither might

ladies the pursuits, own their had gentlemen The separated. party The
Anne while more no met they and business, own their on proceeded
and dine, and return to begged earnestly was She them. to belonged
long so been had spirits her but day, the of rest the all them give
for only fit and more, to unequal felt she present at that exerted
chose. she as silent as being of sure be might she where home,

morning, following the of whole the them with be to Promising
to walk toilsome a by present the of fatigues the closed she therefore,
the to listening in chiefly evening the spend to there Place, Camden
the party, morrow's the for Clay Mrs and Elizabeth of arrangements busy
continually the and invited, persons the of enumeration frequent
the it make to were which embellishments the all of detail improving
herself harassing while Bath, in kind its of elegant completely most
come would Wentworth Captain whether of question, never-ending the with
a was it her with but certain, as him reckoning were They not? or
She together. minutes five for appeased never solicitude gnawing
he thought generally she because come, would he thought generally
positive any into shape so not could she which case a was it but ought;
of suggestions the defy to inevitably as discretion, or duty of act
feelings. opposite very

agitation, restless this of broodings the from herself roused only She
hours three Elliot Mr with seen been had she that know Clay Mrs let to
vain in watched having for Bath, of out be to supposed being his after
she herself, lady the from interview the of intimation some for
Mrs in guilt was there her to seemed it and it, mention to determined
an in away cleared transient: was It listened. she as face Clay's
of consciousness the there read she imagine could Anne but instant;
overbearing some or trick, mutual of complication some by having,
to hour) an half for (perhaps attend to obliged been his, of authority
She Walter. Sir on designs her on restrictions and lectures his
nature:-- of imitation tolerable very a with however, exclaimed,

I surprise great my to Elliot, Miss think, Only true. very dear! "Oh!
He astonished. more never was I Street. Bath in Elliot Mr with met
prevented been had He Yard. Pump the to me with walked and back turned
a in was I for what; by forget really I but Thornberry, for off setting
being his for answer only can I and attend, much not could and hurry,
how know to wanted He return. his in delayed be to not determined
and 'to-morrow,' of full was He to-morrow. admitted be might he early
I since ever too, it of full been have I that evident very is it
that all and plan your of extension the learnt and house, the entered
of out entirely so gone have never could him seeing my or happened, had
head." my



23 Chapter


a but Smith; Mrs with conversation Anne's since passed had only day One
Mr by touched little so now was she and succeeded, had interest keener
became it that quarter, one in effects its by except conduct, Elliot's
explanatory her defer to still morning, next the course of matter a
from Musgroves the with be to promised had She Street. Rivers in visit
Elliot's Mr and plighted, was faith Her dinner. to breakfast
another live must head, Scheherazade's Sultaness the like character,
day.

was weather the however; punctually, appointment her keep not could She
friends' her on rain the over grieved had she and unfavourable,
to able was she before own, her on much very it felt and account,
to way her made and Hart, White the reached she When walk. the attempt
time, in quite arriving neither herself found she apartment, proper the
Musgrove, Mrs were, her before party The arrive. to first the nor
and Wentworth; Captain to Harville Captain and Croft, Mrs to talking
wait, to impatient too Henrietta, and Mary that heard immediately she
soon, again back be would but cleared, had it moment the out gone had
to Musgrove Mrs with left been had injunctions strictest the that and
down, sit submit, to only had She returned. they till there her keep
the all in once at plunged herself feel and composed, outwardly be
little a tasting of account her laid merely had she which agitations
She time. of waste no delay, no was There closed. morning the before
such of misery the or misery, such of happiness the in deep was
Captain room, the entering her after minutes Two instantly. happiness,
said-- Wentworth

you if now, Harville, of, talking were we letter the write will "We
materials." me give will

nearly and it, to went he table; separate a on hand, at were Materials
writing. by engrossed was all, them to back his turning

daughter's eldest her of history the Croft Mrs giving was Musgrove Mrs
was which voice of tone inconvenient that in just and engagement,
that felt Anne whisper. a be to pretended it while audible perfectly
Harville Captain as yet, and conversation, the to belong not did she
hearing avoid not could she talk, to disposed not and thoughtful seemed
brother my and Musgrove Mr "how as, such particulars; undesirable many
Hayter brother my what over; it talk to again and again met had Hayter
what and next, the proposed had Musgrove Mr what and day, one said had
wished, had people young the what and Hayter, sister my to occurred had
afterwards was but to, consent could never I first at said I what and
same the in deal great a and well," very do might think to persuaded
every with even which, minutiae communication: open-hearted of style
not could Musgrove Mrs good which delicacy, and taste of advantage
Croft Mrs principals. the to only interesting properly be could give,
it all, at spoke she whenever and good-humour, great with attending was
much too be each might gentlemen the hoped Anne sensibly. very was
hear. to self-occupied

her in Musgrove, Mrs said considered," thing these all ma'am, so, "And
yet, different, it wished have could we "though whisper, powerful
for longer, any out stand to fair it think not did we altogether,
near pretty was Henrietta and it, about wild quite was Hayter Charles
the make and once, at marry better had they thought we so and bad; as
I, said rate, any At them. before done have others many as it, of best
engagement." long a than better be will it

"I Croft. Mrs cried observe," to going was I what precisely is "That
and once, at income small a on settle people young have rather would
in involved be than together, difficulties few a with struggle to have
mutual--" no that think always I engagement. long a

her finish her let to unable Musgrove, Mrs cried Croft," Mrs dear "Oh!
long a as people young for abominate so I nothing is "there speech,
It children. my for against protested always I what is It engagement.
if engaged, be to people young for say, to used I well, very all is
or months, six in marry to able being their of certainty a is there
engagement--" long a but twelve; in even

an engagement, uncertain an "or Croft, Mrs said ma'am," dear "Yes,
a such at that knowing without begin To long. be may which engagement
and unsafe very be to hold I marrying, of means the be will there time
can." they as far as prevent should parents all think I what and unwise,

to application its felt She here. interest unexpected an found Anne
same the at and her; over all thrill nervous a in it felt herself,
table, distant the towards glanced instinctively eyes her that moment
pausing, raised, was head his move, to ceased pen Wentworth's Captain
one look, a give to instant next the round turned he and listening,
her. at look conscious quick,

truths, admitted same the re-urge to talk, to continued ladies two The
contrary a of effect ill the of examples such with them enforce and
nothing heard Anne but observation, their within fallen had as practice
in was mind her ear, her in words of buzz a only was it distinctly;
confusion.

left now it, of none hearing been truth in had who Harville, Captain
though him, watch to seeming Anne and window, a to moved and seat, his
he that sensible gradually became mind, of absence thorough from was it
a with her at looked He stood. he where him join to her inviting was
I me, to "Come expressed, which head, the of motion little a and smile,
manner of kindness easy unaffected, the and say;" to something have
was, really he than acquaintance older an of feelings the denoted which
him. to went and herself roused She invitation. the enforced strongly
from room the of end other the at was stood he which at window The
Captain to nearer though and sitting, were ladies two the where
Captain him, joined she As near. very not table, Wentworth's
expression thoughtful serious, the re-assumed countenance Harville's
character. natural its seemed which

a displaying and hand, his in parcel a unfolding he, said here," "Look
is?" that who know you "do painting, miniature small

Benwick." Captain "Certainly:

was "it tone,) deep a (in But," for. is it who guess may you and "Yes,
at together walking our remember you do Elliot, Miss her. for done not
matter. no then--but thought little I him? for grieving and Lyme,
artist German young clever a with met He Cape. the at drawn was This
to sat sister, poor my to promise a with compliance in and Cape, the at
of charge the now have I and her; for home it bringing was and him,
But me! to commission a was It another! for set properly it getting
not am I him. for allow can I hope I employ? to there was else who
(looking it;" undertakes He another. to over it make to indeed, sorry,
a with And now." it about writing is "he Wentworth,) Captain towards
would she Fanny! "Poor adding, by whole the up wound he lip quivering
soon!" so him forgotten have not

easily can I "That voice. feeling low, a in Anne, replied "No,"
believe."

him." on doted She nature. her in not was "It

loved." truly who woman any of nature the be not would "It

your for that claim you "Do say, to as much as smiled, Harville Captain
certainly We "Yes. also, smiling question, the answered she and sex?"
fate our perhaps, is, It us. forget you as soon as you forget not do
home, at live We ourselves. help cannot We merit. our than rather
on forced are You us. upon prey feelings our and confined, quiet,
some of business pursuits, profession, a always have You exertion.
and immediately, world the into back you take to other, or sort
impressions." weaken soon change and occupation continual

men for soon so this all does world the that assertion your "Granting
to apply not does it grant), shall I think not do I however, (which,
turned peace The exertion. any upon forced been not has He Benwick.
our in us, with living been has he and moment, very the at shore on him
since." ever circle, family little

we shall what but recollect; not did I true; "very Anne, said "True,"
outward from not be change the If Harville? Captain now, say
nature, man's nature, be must it within; from be must it circumstances,
Benwick." Captain for business the done has which

man's more be to it allow not will I nature. man's not is it no, "No,
or love, do they those forget and inconstant be to woman's than nature
analogy true a in believe I reverse. the believe I loved. have
are bodies our as that and mental; our and frames bodily our between
rough most bearing of capable feelings; our are so strongest, the
weather." heaviest the out riding and usage,

same the "but Anne, replied strongest," the be may feelings "Your
most the are ours that assert to me authorise will analogy of spirit
lived; longer not is he but woman, than robust more is Man tender.
attachments. their of nature the of view my explains exactly which
have You otherwise. were it if you, upon hard too be would it Nay,
You with. struggle to enough dangers and privations, and difficulties,
hardship. and risk every to exposed toiling, and labouring always are
health, nor time, Neither quitted. all friends, country, home, Your
a (with indeed" hard, be would It own. your called be to life, nor
this." all to added be to were feelings woman's "if voice), faltering

was Harville Captain question," this upon agree never shall "We
Captain to attention their called noise slight a when say, to beginning
was It room. the of division quiet perfectly hitherto Wentworth's
startled was Anne but down; fallen had pen his that than more nothing
to inclined half and supposed, had she than nearer him finding at
by occupied been had he because fallen only had pen the that suspect
could he think not did she yet which sounds, catch to striving them,
caught. have

Harville. Captain said letter?" your finished you "Have

minutes." five in done have shall I more. lines few a quite, "Not

am I are. you whenever ready only am I side. my on hurry no is "There
and supplied, "well Anne,) at (smiling here," anchorage good very in
Elliot," Miss Well, all. at signal a for hurry No nothing. for want
suppose, I agree, never shall we saying was I "as voice,) his (lowering
me let But probably. would, woman, and man No point. this upon
and prose stories, you--all against are histories all that observe
fifty you bring could I Benwick, as memory a such had I If verse.
I think not do I and argument, the side my on moment a in quotations
upon say to something not had which life my in book a opened ever
woman's of talk all proverbs, and Songs inconstancy. woman's
men." by written all were these say, will you perhaps But fickleness.

in examples to reference no please, you if yes, Yes, shall. I "Perhaps
story. own their telling in us of advantage every had have Men books.
been has pen the degree; a higher much so in theirs been has Education
anything." prove to books allow not will I hands. their in

anything?" prove we shall how "But

a such upon thing any prove to expect can never We shall. never "We
proof. of admit not does which opinion of difference a is It point.
and sex; own our towards bias little a with probably, begin, each We
has which it of favour in circumstance every build bias that upon
(perhaps circumstances which of many circle; own our within occurred
as such precisely be may most) the us strike which cases very those
some in or confidence, a betraying without forward brought be cannot
said." be not should what saying respect

could I "if feeling, strong of tone a in Harville, Captain cried "Ah!"
at look last a takes he when suffers man a what comprehend you make but
off them sent has he that boat the watches and children, and wife his
knows 'God says, and away turns then and sight, in is it as long as in,
the you to convey could I if then, And again!' meet ever we whether
a after back coming when, again; them see does he when soul his of glow
port, another into put to obliged and perhaps, absence, twelvemonth's
to pretending there, them get to possible be it soon how calculates he
but day,' a such till here be cannot 'They saying, and himself, deceive
them seeing and sooner, hours twelve them for hoping while the all
sooner hours many by wings, them given had Heaven if as last, at arrive
bear can man a that all and this, all you to explain could I If still!
his of treasures these of sake the for do, to glories and do, and
hearts!" have as men such of only know, you speak, I existence!
emotion. with own his pressing

by felt is that all to justice do I hope "I eagerly, Anne cried "Oh!"
should I that forbid God you. resemble who those by and you,
my of any of feelings faithful and warm the undervalue
to dared I if contempt utter deserve should I fellow-creatures!
woman. by only known were constancy and attachment true that suppose
married your in good and great everything of capable you believe I No,
every to and exertion, important every to equal you believe I lives.
the allowed be may I as--if long so forbearance, domestic
you woman the meanwhile I object. an have you as long expression--so
own my for claim I privilege the All you. for lives and lives, love
of that is it), covet not need you one; enviable very a not is (it sex
gone." is hope when or existence when longest, loving

was heart her sentence; another uttered have immediately not could She
oppressed. much too breath her full, too

her on hand his putting Harville, Captain cried soul," good a are "You
And you. with quarrelling no is "There affectionately. quite arm,
tied." is tongue my Benwick, of think I when

taking was Croft Mrs others. the towards called was attention Their
leave.

am "I she. said believe," I company, part I and you Frederick, "Here,
we To-night friend. your with engagement an have you and home, going
to (turning party," your at again meeting all of pleasure the have may
understood I and yesterday, card sister's your had "We Anne.)
are you and it; see not did I though too, card a had Frederick
ourselves?" as well as not, you are Frederick, disengaged,

either and haste, great in letter a up folding was Wentworth Captain
fully. answer not would or not could

shall I and Harville but separate, we here true; "very he, said "Yes,"
a half in am I ready, are you if Harville, is, that you; after be soon
your at be shall I off. be to sorry be not will you know I minute.
minute." a half in service

letter his sealed having Wentworth, Captain and them, left Croft Mrs
agitated hurried, a even had and ready, indeed was rapidity, great with
to how not knew Anne gone. be to impatience shewed which air,
from you!" bless God morning, "Good kindest the had She it. understand
passed had He look! a nor word, a not him from but Harville, Captain
look! a without room the of out

had he where table the to closer move to however, time, only had She
it opened, door the returning; heard were footsteps when writing, been
gloves, his forgotten had he but pardon, their begged He himself. was
a out drew he table, writing the to room the crossing instantly and
eyes with Anne before it placed paper, scattered the under from letter
his collecting hastily and time, a for her on fixed entreaty glowing of
aware was Musgrove Mrs before almost room, the of out again was gloves,
instant! an of work the it: in being his of

beyond almost was Anne, in made had instant one which revolution The
A. "Miss to legible, hardly direction a with letter, The expression.
hastily. so folding been had he which one the evidently was E.--,"
also been had he Benwick, Captain to only writing be to supposed While
this which all depended letter that of contents the On her! addressing
be might anything possible, was Anything her. for do could world
of arrangements little had Musgrove Mrs suspense. than rather defied
and trust, must she protection their to table; own her at own her
very the to succeeding occupied, had he which chair the into sinking
following the devoured eyes her written, and leaned had he where spot
words:


means such by you to speak must I silence. in longer no listen can "I
half agony, half am I soul. my pierce You reach. my within are as
are feelings precious such that late, too am I that not me Tell hope.
your more even heart a with again you to myself offer I ever. for gone
Dare ago. half a and years eight it, broke almost you when than own
an has love his that woman, than sooner forgets man that say not
been, have may I Unjust you. but none loved have I death. earlier
have alone You inconstant. never but been, have I resentful and weak
not you Have plan. and think I alone, you For Bath. to me brought
not had I wishes? my understood have to fail you Can this? seen
think I as feelings, your read have I could days, ten these even waited
instant every am I write. hardly can I mine. penetrated have must you
can I but voice, your sink You me. overpowers which something hearing
others. on lost be would they when voice that of tones the distinguish
do You indeed. justice, us do You creature! excellent too good, Too
Believe men. among constancy and attachment true is there that believe
W. F. in undeviating, most fervent, most be to it

follow or hither, return shall I but fate; my of uncertain go, must "I
to enough be will look, a word, A possible. as soon as party, your
never." or evening this house father's your enter I whether decide


hour's an Half from. recovered soon be to not was letter a Such
ten the but her; tranquillized have might reflection and solitude
the all with interrupted, was she before passed now which only minutes
tranquillity. towards nothing do could situation, her of restraints
overpowering was It agitation. fresh brought rather moment Every
full of stage first the beyond was she before And happiness.
in. came all Henrietta and Mary, Charles, sensation,

an then produced herself like seeming of necessity absolute The
began She more. no do could she while a after but struggle; immediate
plead to obliged was and said, they word a understand to not
looked she that see then could They herself. excuse and indisposition
her without stir not would and concerned, and shocked were ill, very
and away, gone have only they Would dreadful. was This world. the for
her been have would it room that of possession quiet the in her left
was her around waiting or standing all them have to but cure;
home. go would she said she desperation, in and distracting,

and directly, home "go Musgrove, Mrs cried dear," my means, all "By
wish I evening. the for fit be may you that yourself, of care take
ring Charles, myself. doctor no am I but you, doctor to here was Sarah
walk." not must She chair. a order and

possibility the lose To all! than Worse do. never would chair the But
quiet, her of course the in Wentworth Captain to words two speaking of
meeting of certain almost felt she (and town the up progress solitary
against, protested earnestly was chair The borne. be not could him)
having illness, of sort one of only thought who Musgrove, Mrs and
the in fall no been had there that anxiety, some with herself assured
blow a got and down, slipped lately time any at not had Anne that case;
fall; no had having of convinced perfectly was she that head; her on
at better her finding on depend and cheerfully, her with part could
night.

said-- and struggled, Anne precaution, possible no omit to Anxious

so be Pray understood. perfectly not is it that ma'am, afraid, am "I
your see to hope we that gentlemen other the to mention to as good
and mistake; some been had there afraid am I evening. this party whole
Captain and Harville Captain assure to particularly you wish I
both." them see to hope we that Wentworth,

Captain word. my you give I understood, quite is it dear, my "Oh!
going." of but thought no has Harville

sorry. very so be should I and afraid; am I But so? think you "Do
will You again? them see you when it, mention to me promise you Will
me." promise Do say. dare I morning, this both them see

Captain see you if Charles, it. wish you if will, I sure be "To
indeed, But message. Anne's Miss give to remember anywhere, Harville
quite himself holds Harville Captain uneasy. be not need you dear, my
dare I same, the Wentworth Captain and it; for answer I'll engaged,
say."

damp to mischance some prophesied heart her but more; no do could Anne
however. lasting, very be not could It felicity. her of perfection the
her in be would it himself, Place Camden to come not did he if Even
Another Harville. Captain by sentence intelligible an send to power
good and concern real his in Charles, occurred. vexation momentary
was This him. preventing no was there her; with home go would nature,
sacrificing was he ungrateful; long be not could she But cruel. almost
off set she and her; to use of be to gunsmith's, a at engagement an
apparent. gratitude but feeling no with him, with

of something a behind, step quicker a when Street, Union on were They
of sight the for preparation moments' two her gave sound, familiar
to whether irresolute if as but, them; joined He Wentworth. Captain
command could Anne looked. only nothing, said on, pass to or join
cheeks The repulsively. not and look, that receive to enough herself
hesitated had which movements the and glowed, now pale been had which
sudden a by struck Presently, side. her by walked He decided. were
said-- Charles thought,

or Street, Gay to Only going? you are way which Wentworth, "Captain
town?" the up farther

surprised. Wentworth, Captain replied know," hardly "I

Place? Camden near going you Are Belmont? as high as going you "Are
my take to you asking in scruple no have shall I are, you if Because,
done rather is She door. father's her to arm your Anne give and place,
to ought I and help, without far so go not must and morning, this for
a of sight the me promised He Place. Market the in fellow's that at be
it keep would he said off; send to going just is he gun capital
do I if and it; see might I that moment, possible last the to unpacked
deal good a description, his By chance. no have I now, back turn not
day one with shot you which mine, of double-barrel size second the like
Winthrop." round

proper most the only be could There objection. an be not could There
reined smiles and view; public for compliance obliging most a alacrity,
Charles minute a half In rapture. private in dancing spirits and in
proceeding two other the and again, Street Union of bottom the at was
decide to them between passed had enough words soon and together:
gravel retired and quiet comparatively the towards direction their
a hour present the make would conversation of power the where walk,
the which immortality the all for it prepare and indeed, blessing
There bestow. could lives future own their of recollections happiest
once had which promises those and feelings those again exchanged they
so by followed been had which but everything, secure to seemed before
returned they There estrangement. and division of years many many,
their in perhaps, happy, exquisitely more past, the into again
more tender, more projected; first been had it when than re-union,
and truth, character, other's each of knowledge a in fixed more tried,
as there, And acting. in justified more act, to equal more attachment;
around group every of heedless ascent, gradual the paced slowly they
housekeepers, bustling politicians, sauntering neither seeing them,
in indulge could they children, and nursery-maids nor girls, flirting
those in especially and acknowledgements, and retrospections those
which moment, present the preceded directly had what of explanations
little the All interest. in ceaseless so and poignant so were
and yesterday of and through; gone were week last the of variations
end. an be scarcely could there today

retarding the been had Elliot Mr of Jealousy him. mistaken not had She
very the in operate to begun had That torment. the doubt, the weight,
short a after returned, had that Bath; in her meeting first of hour
in him influenced had that and concert; the ruin to suspension,
last the in do, and say to omitted or done, and said had he everything
better the to yielding gradually been had It hours. four-and-twenty
it encouraged; occasionally actions or words, or looks, her which hopes
which tones those and sentiments those by last at vanquished been had
the under and Harville; Captain with talked she while him reached had
and paper, of sheet a seized had he which of governance irresistible
feelings. his out poured

qualified. or retracted be to was nothing written, then had he what Of
been never had She her. but none loved having in persisted He
Thus equal. her see to himself believed even never He supplanted.
constant been had he that acknowledge: to obliged was he indeed much
her, forget to meant had he that unintentionally; nay unconsciously,
when indifferent, himself imagined had He done. be to it believed and
because merits, her to unjust been had he and angry; been only had he
his on fixed now was character Her them. from sufferer a been had he
of medium loveliest the maintaining itself, perfection as mind
only that acknowledge to obliged was he but gentleness; and fortitude
he had Lyme at only and justice, her do to learnt he had Uppercross at
more of lessons received had he Lyme, At himself. understand to begun
roused least at had Elliot Mr of admiration passing The sort. one than
her fixed had Harville's Captain at and Cobb the on scenes the and him,
superiority.

(the Musgrove Louisa to himself attach to attempts preceding his In
to it felt ever for had he that protested he pride), angry of attempts
Louisa; for care, not could cared, not had he that impossible; be
followed which reflection for leisure the till day, that till though
which with mind the of excellence perfect the understood not had he it,
hold unrivalled perfect the or comparison, a bear ill so could Louisa's
between distinguish to learnt had he There, own. his over possessed it
the between self-will, of obstinacy the and principle of steadiness the
There mind. collected a of resolution the and heedlessness of darings
had he woman the estimation his in exalt to everything seen had he
of madness the folly, the pride, the deplore to begun there and lost;
in thrown when her regain to trying from him kept had which resentment,
way. his

been sooner no had He severe. become had penance his period that From
of days few first the attending remorse and horror the from free
he than again, alive himself feel to begun sooner no accident, Louisa's
liberty. at not alive, though himself, feel to begun had

man! engaged an Harville by considered was I "that he, said found," "I
mutual our of doubt a entertained wife his nor Harville neither That
could I degree, a To shocked. and startled was I attachment.
others that reflect to began I when but, instantly; this contradict
was herself--I perhaps nay, family, own same--her the felt have might
it. wished she if honour in hers was I disposal. own my at longer no
subject this on seriously thought not had I unguarded. been had I
its have must intimacy excessive my that considered not had I before.
be to right no had I that and ways; many in consequence ill of danger
the at girls, the of either to myself attach could I whether trying
ill other no there were report, unpleasant an even raising of risk
consequences." the abide must and wrong, grossly been had I effects.

that and himself; entangled had he that short, in late, too found He
at Louisa for caring not his of satisfied fully became he as precisely
him for sentiments her if her, to bound as himself regard must he all,
and Lyme, leave to him determined It supposed. Harvilles the what were
any by weaken, gladly would He elsewhere. recovery complete her await
might him concerning speculations or feelings whatever means, fair
while a after meaning brother's, his to therefore, went, he and exist;
require. might circumstances as act and Kellynch, to return to

could I happy. him saw "and he, said Edward," with weeks six was "I
very you after enquired He none. deserved I pleasure. other no have
little altered, personally were you if even asked particularly;
alter." never could you eye my to that suspecting

a for blunder a pleasing too was It pass. it let and smiled, Anne
her in assured, be to woman a for something is It reproach.
earlier of charm one lost not has she that year, eight-and-twentieth
to increased inexpressibly was homage such of value the but youth;
the be to it feeling and words, former with it comparing by Anne,
attachment. warm his of revival a of cause the not result,

own his of blindness the lamenting Shropshire, in remained had He
released once at till calculations, own his of blunders the and pride,
her of intelligence felicitous and astonishing the by Louisa from
Benwick. with engagement

least at could I now for state; my of worst the "ended he, said "Here,"
do could I myself; exert could I happiness; of way the in myself put
for only waiting and inaction, in long so waiting be to But something.
will 'I said, I minutes five first the Within dreadful. been had evil,
it think to unpardonable it Was was. I and Wednesday,' on Bath at be
You hope? of degree some with arrive to and come? to while my worth
the of feelings the retain might you that possible was It single. were
could I mine. be to happened encouragement one and did; I as past,
to knew I but others, by sought and loved be would you that doubt never
better of least, at man, one refused had you that certainty a
this 'Was saying, often help not could I and myself; than pretensions
me?'" for

the but said, be to much afforded Street Milsom in meeting first Their
exquisite of up made be to seemed evening That more. still concert
to Room Octagon the in forward stepping her of moment The moments.
her tearing and appearing Elliot's Mr of moment the him: to speak
or hope returning by marked moments, subsequent two or one and away,
energy. with on dwelt were despondency, increasing

my be not could who those of midst the "in he, cried you," see "To
smiling, and conversing you, by close cousin your see to well-wishers;
match! the of proprieties and eligibilities horrible the all feel and
to hope could who being every of wish certain the as it consider To
or reluctant were feelings own your if Even you! influence
it Was his! be would supports powerful what consider to indifferent,
look I could How appeared? I which me of fool the make to enough not
behind sat who friend the of sight very the not Was agony? without on
her of knowledge the been, had what of recollection the not was you,
had persuasion what of impression immoveable indelible, the influence,
me?" against all not it done--was once

have not should "You Anne. replied distinguished," have should "You
different. so is age my and different, so is case the now; me suspected
to was it that remember once, persuasion to yielding in wrong was I If
yielded, I When risk. of not safety, of side the on exerted persuasion
In here. aid in called be could duty no but duty, to was it thought I
incurred, been have would risk all me, to indifferent man a marrying
violated." duty all and

not. could I "but replied, he thus," reasoned have to ought I "Perhaps
of acquired had I knowledge late the from benefit derive not could I
overwhelmed, was it play; into it bring not could I character. your
under smarting been had I which feelings earlier those in lost buried,
who yielded, had who one as only you of think could I year. after year
me. by than rather one any by influenced been had who up, me given had
of year that in you guided had who person very the with you saw I
The now. authority less of her believe to reason no had I misery.
added." be to was habit of force

might yourself to manner my "that Anne, said thought," have should "I
this." of all or much you spared have

to engagement your which ease the only be might manner your no! "No,
was I yet, and belief; this in you left I give. would man another
and morning, the with rallied spirits My again. you see to determined
here." remaining for motive a still had I that felt I

house that in one any than happier and again, home at was Anne last At
other every and suspense, and surprise the All conceived. have could
she conversation, this by dissipated morning the of part painful
some in alloy an find to obliged be to as happy so house the re-entered
interval An last. to impossible being its of apprehensions momentary
of corrective best the was grateful, and serious meditation, of
her to went she and felicity; high-wrought such in dangerous everything
her of thankfulness the in fearless and steadfast grew and room,
enjoyment.

company the up, lighted were drawing-rooms the came, evening The
who those of mixture a but was it party, card a but was It assembled.
commonplace a often; too met who those and before, met never had
Anne but variety; for small too intimacy, for numerous too business,
sensibility in lovely and Glowing shorter. evening an found never had
or about thought she than admired generally more and happiness, and
creature every for feelings forbearing or cheerful had she for, cared
him. pity could she but avoided, she there; was Elliot Mr her. around
Dalrymple Lady them. understanding in amusement had she Wallises, The
She her. to cousins innoxious be soon would Carteret--they Miss and
public the in for blush to nothing had and Clay, Mrs for not cared
the was there Musgroves, the With sister. and father her of manners
kind-hearted the Harville, Captain with ease; perfect of chat happy
at attempts Russell, Lady with sister; and brother of intercourse
Admiral with short; cut consciousness delicious a which conversation,
interest, fervent and cordiality peculiar of everything Croft, Mrs and
Captain with and conceal; to sought consciousness same the which
and occurring, continually communications of moments some Wentworth,
there. being his of knowledge the always and more, of hope the always

in occupied apparently each meetings, short these of one in was It
said-- she that plants, greenhouse of display fine a admiring

of judge to impartially trying and past, the over thinking been have "I
believe must I and myself; to regard with mean I wrong, and right the
perfectly was I that it, from suffered I as much right, was I that
you than better love will you whom friend the by guided being in right
me, mistake not Do parent. a of place the in was she me, To now. do
was, It advice. her in err not did she that saying not am I however.
the as only bad or good is advice which in cases those of one perhaps,
any in should, never certainly I myself, for and decides; event
mean, I But advice. such give similarity, tolerable of circumstance
done had I if that and her, to submitting in right was I that
engagement the continuing in more suffered have should I otherwise,
my in suffered have should I because up, it giving in even did I than
in allowable is sentiment a such as far as now, have I conscience.
a not, mistake I if and with; myself reproach to nothing nature, human
portion." woman's a of part bad no is duty of sense strong

her, at again looking and Russell, Lady at looked her, at looked He
deliberation-- cool in if as replied,

trust I time. in forgiven being her of hopes are there But yet. "Not
over thinking been have too I But soon. her with charity in being to
not may there whether itself, suggested has question a and past, the
self. own My lady? that than even enemy my more person one been have
few a with eight, year the in England to returned I when if, me Tell
written then had I if Laconia, the into posted was and pounds, thousand
have short, in you, Would letter? my answered have you would you, to
then?" engagement the renewed

enough. decisive was accent the but answer; her all was I!" "Would

of think not did I that not is It would! "you cried, he God!" "Good
I but success; other my all crown alone could what as it, desire or it,
shut I you. understand not did I again. ask to proud too proud, was
a is This justice. you do or you, understand not would and eyes, my
than sooner one every forgive me make to ought which recollection
spared. been have might suffering and separation of years Six myself.
the to used been have I me. to new is which too, pain, of sort a is It
I that blessing every earn to myself believing of gratification
rewards. just and toils honourable on myself valued have I enjoyed.
must "I smile. a with added, he reverses," under men great other Like
being brook to learn must I fortune. my to mind my subdue to endeavour
deserve." I than happier



24 Chapter


take people young two any When followed? what of doubt in be can Who
to perseverance by sure pretty are they marry, to heads their into it
ever or imprudent, so ever or poor, so ever they be point, their carry
comfort. ultimate other's each to necessary be to likely little so
be to it believe I but with, conclude to morality bad be may This
and Wentworth Captain a should how succeed, parties such if and truth;
consciousness mind, of maturity of advantage the with Elliot, Anne an
bearing of fail them, between fortune independent one and right, of
great a down borne have fact, in might They opposition? every down
them distress to little was there for with, met they than more deal
no made Walter Sir warmth. and graciousness of want the beyond
and cold look than worse nothing did Elizabeth and objection,
pounds, thousand five-and-twenty with Wentworth, Captain unconcerned.
him, place could activity and merit as profession his in high as and
the address to worthy quite esteemed now was He nobody. longer no was
principle had not had who baronet, spendthrift foolish, a of daughter
which in situation the in himself maintain to enough sense or
present at daughter his give could who and him, placed had Providence
hers be must which pounds thousand ten of share the of part small a but
hereafter.

vanity no and Anne, for affection no had he though indeed, Walter, Sir
from far very was occasion, the on happy really him make to flattered,
of more saw he when contrary, the On her. for match bad a it thinking
well, him eyed and daylight, by repeatedly him saw Wentworth, Captain
his that felt and claims, personal his by struck much very was he
her against balanced unfairly not be might appearance of superiority
name, well-sounding his by assisted this, all and rank; of superiority
grace, good very a with pen, his prepare to last at Walter Sir enabled
honour. of volume the in marriage the of insertion the for

any excite could feeling of opposition whose them, among one only The
be must Russell Lady that knew Anne Russell. Lady was anxiety serious
and Elliot, Mr relinquishing and understanding in pain some suffering
do and with, acquainted truly become to struggles some making be
had Russell Lady what was however This Wentworth. Captain to justice
with mistaken been had she that feel to learn must She do. to now
in appearances by influenced unfairly been had she that both; to regard
own her suited not had manners Wentworth's Captain because that each;
a indicate to them suspecting in quick too been had she ideas,
Elliot's Mr because that and impetuosity; dangerous of character
correctness, and propriety their in her pleased precisely had manners
in quick too been had she suavity, and politeness general their
and opinions correct most the of result certain the as them receiving
do, to Russell Lady for less nothing was There mind. well-regulated
up take to and wrong, completely pretty been had she that admit to than
hopes. of and opinions of set new a

discernment the in nicety a some, in perception of quickness a is There
in experience no which short, in penetration, natural a character, of
of part this in gifted less been had Russell Lady and equal, can others
woman, good very a was she But friend. young her than understanding
first her well-judging, and sensible be to was object second her if and
own her loved she than better Anne loved She happy. Anne see to was
found over, was beginning the of awkwardness the when and abilities;
was who man the to mother a as herself attaching in hardship little
child. other her of happiness the securing

gratified immediately most one the probably was Mary family, the all Of
and married, sister a have to creditable was It circumstance. the by
the to instrumental greatly been having with herself flatter might she
own her as and autumn; the in her with Anne keeping by connexion,
agreeable very was it sisters, husband's her than better be must sister
Captain either than man richer a be should Wentworth Captain that
when perhaps, suffer, to something had She Hayter. Charles or Benwick
of rights the to restored Anne seeing in again, contact into came they
a had she but landaulette; pretty very a of mistress the and seniority,
no had Anne consolation. powerful of to, forward look to future
family; a of headship no estate, landed no her, before Hall Uppercross
baronet, a made being from Wentworth Captain keep but could they if and
Anne. with situations change not would she

satisfied equally were she if sister eldest the for well be would It
had She there. probable very not is change a for situation, her with
of one no and withdraw, Elliot Mr seeing of mortification the soon
the even raise to himself presented since has condition proper
him. with sunk which hopes unfounded

most Elliot Mr on burst engagement Anne's cousin his of news The
his happiness, domestic of plan best his deranged It unexpectedly.
a which watchfulness the by single Walter Sir keeping of hope best
and discomfited though But, given. have would rights son-in-law's
his and interest own his for something do still could he disappointed,
it quitting Clay's Mrs on and Bath; quitted soon He enjoyment. own
his under established as of heard next being and afterwards, soon
been had he game a double how evident was it London, in protection
out cut being from himself save to was he determined how and playing,
least. at woman, artful one by

had she and interest, her overpowered had affections Clay's Mrs
scheming of possibility the sake, man's young the for sacrificed,
as well as however, abilities, has She Walter. Sir for longer
or cunning, his whether point doubtful a now is it and affections;
from her preventing after whether, day; the carry finally may hers,
at caressed and wheedled be not may he Walter, Sir of wife the being
William. Sir of wife the her making into last

and shocked were Elizabeth and Walter Sir that doubted be cannot It
their of discovery the and companion, their of loss the by mortified
resort to sure, be to cousins, great their had They her. in deception
follow and flatter to that feel long must they but comfort; for to
of state a but is turn, in followed and flattered being without others,
enjoyment. half

to meaning Russell's Lady of period early very a at satisfied Anne,
the to alloy other no had ought, she as Wentworth Captain love
of consciousness the from arose what than prospects her of happiness
value. could sense of man a which him on bestow to relations no having
in disproportion The keenly. very inferiority own her felt she There
but regret; moment's a her give not did it nothing; was fortune their
of nothing properly, him estimate and receive to family no have to
the all for return in offer to will good of harmony, of respectability,
and brothers his in her met which welcome prompt the all and worth
be well could mind her as pain lively as of source a was sisters,
had She felicity. strong otherwise of circumstances under of sensible
Mrs and Russell Lady list, his to add to world the in friends two but
himself. attach to disposed well very was he however, those, To Smith.
now could he transgressions, former her all of spite in Russell, Lady
believed he that say to obliged not was he While heart. his from value
say to ready was he them, dividing originally in right been have to her
had she Smith, Mrs for as and favour, her in else everything almost
permanently. and quickly her recommend to kinds various of claims

and themselves, in enough been had Anne by offices good recent Her
her secured friend, one of her depriving of instead marriage, their
Captain and life; settled their in visitor earliest their was She two.
husband's her recovering of way the in her putting by Wentworth,
and her, for acting her, for writing by Indies, West the in property
the with case the of difficulties petty the all through her seeing
fully friend, determined a and man fearless a of exertion and activity
render, to meant ever or rendered, had she which services the requited
wife. his to

income, of improvement this by spoiled not were enjoyments Smith's Mrs
to friends such of acquisition the and health, of improvement some with
fail not did alacrity mental and cheerfulness her for with, often be
have might she remained, good of supplies prime these while and her;
She prosperity. worldly of accessions greater to even defiance bid
be yet and healthy, perfectly and rich absolutely been have might
her as spirits, her of glow the in was felicity of spring Her happy.
tenderness was Anne heart. her of warmth the in was Anne's friend
Wentworth's Captain in it of worth full the had she and itself,
friends her make ever could that all was profession His affection.
dim could that all war future a of dread the less, tenderness that wish
pay must she but wife, sailor's a being in gloried She sunshine. her
if is, which profession that to belonging for alarm quick of tax the
its in than virtues domestic its in distinguished more possible,
importance. national



Finis
possession in man single a that acknowledged, universally truth a is ﻿It
wife. a of want in be must fortune, good a of

his on be may man a such of views or feelings the known little However
minds the in fixed well so is truth this neighbourhood, a entering first
property rightful the considered is he that families, surrounding the of
daughters. their of other or one some of

that heard you “have day, one him to lady his said Bennet,” Mr. dear “My
last?” at let is Park Netherfield

not. had he that replied Bennet Mr.

she and here, been just has Long Mrs. “for she; returned is,” it “But
it.” about all me told

answer. no made Bennet Mr.

impatiently. wife his cried it?” taken has who know to want not you “Do

it.” hearing to objection no have I and me, tell to want “_You_

enough. invitation was This

taken is Netherfield that says Long Mrs. know, must you dear, my “Why,
came he that England; of north the from fortune large of man young a by
much so was and place, the see to four and chaise a in Monday on down
he that immediately; Morris Mr. with agreed he that it, with delighted
to are servants his of some and Michaelmas, before possession take to is
week.” next of end the by house the in be

name?” his is “What

“Bingley.”

single?” or married he “Is

or four fortune; large of man single A sure! be to dear, my Single, “Oh!
girls!” our for thing fine a What year. a thousand five

them?” affect it can How so? “How

You tiresome! so be you can “how wife, his replied Bennet,” Mr. dear “My
them.” of one marrying his of thinking am I that know must

here?” settling in design his that “Is

he that likely very is it But so! talk you can how Nonsense, “Design!
as him visit must you therefore and them, of one with love in fall _may_
comes.” he as soon

send may you or go, may girls the and You that. for occasion no see “I
are you as for better, still be will perhaps which themselves, by them
the of best the you like may Bingley Mr. them, of any as handsome as
party.”

but beauty, of share my had _have_ certainly I me. flatter you dear, “My
five has woman a When now. extraordinary anything be to pretend not do I
beauty.” own her of thinking over give to ought she daughters, grown-up

of.” think to beauty much often not has woman a cases, such “In

into comes he when Bingley Mr. see and go indeed must you dear, my “But,
neighbourhood.” the

you.” assure I for, engage I than more is “It

would it establishment an what think Only daughters. your consider “But
to determined are Lucas Lady and William Sir them. of one for be
no visit they know, you general, in for account, that on merely go,
to _us_ for impossible be will it for go, must you Indeed newcomers.
not.” do you if him visit

very be will Bingley Mr. say dare I surely. over-scrupulous, are “You
my of him assure to you by lines few a send will I and you; see to glad
though girls; the of chooses he whichever marrying his to consent hearty
Lizzy.” little my for word good a in throw must I

the than better bit a not is Lizzy thing. such no do will you desire “I
so half nor Jane, as handsome so half not is she sure am I and others;
preference.” the _her_ giving always are you But Lydia. as good-humoured

are “they he; replied them,” recommend to much them of none have “They
of more something has Lizzy but girls; other like ignorant and silly all
sisters.” her than quickness

You way? a such in children own your abuse you _can_ how Bennet, “Mr.
nerves.” poor my for compassion no have You me. vexing in delight take

They nerves. your for respect high a have I dear. my me, mistake “You
consideration with them mention you heard have I friends. old my are
least.” at years twenty last these

suffer.” I what know not do you “Ah,

four of men young many see to live and it, over get will you hope I “But
neighbourhood.” the into come year a thousand

not will you since come, should such twenty if us, to use no be will “It
them.” visit

them visit will I twenty, are there when that dear, my it, upon “Depend
all.”

humour, sarcastic parts, quick of mixture a odd so was Bennet Mr.
had years three-and-twenty of experience the that caprice, and reserve,
mind _Her_ character. his understand wife his make to insufficient been
understanding, mean of woman a was She develop. to difficult less was
discontented, was she When temper. uncertain and information, little
her get to was life her of business The nervous. herself fancied she
news. and visiting was solace its married; daughters



2 Chapter


He Bingley. Mr. on waited who those of earliest the among was Bennet Mr.
assuring always last the to though him, visit to intended always had
was visit the after evening the till and go; not should he that wife his
following the in disclosed then was It it. of knowledge no had she paid
he hat, a trimming in employed daughter second his Observing manner.
with: her addressed suddenly

Lizzy.” it, like will Bingley Mr. hope “I

mother her said likes,” Bingley Mr. _what_ know to way a in not are “We
visit.” to not are we “since resentfully,

the at him meet shall we “that Elizabeth, said mamma,” forget, you “But
him.” introduce to promised Long Mrs. that and assemblies,

nieces two has She thing. such any do will Long Mrs. believe not do “I
opinion no have I and woman, hypocritical selfish, a is She own. her of
her.” of

do you that find to glad am I “and Bennet; Mr. said I,” have more “No
you.” serving her on depend not

contain to unable but, reply, any make to not deigned Bennet Mrs.
daughters. her of one scolding began herself,

little a Have sake! Heaven’s for Kitty, so, coughing keep “Don’t
pieces.” to them tear You nerves. my on compassion

times “she father; her said coughs,” her in discretion no has “Kitty
ill.” them

is “When fretfully. Kitty replied amusement,” own my for cough not do “I
Lizzy?” be, to ball next your

fortnight.” “To-morrow

back come not does Long Mrs. “and mother, her cried is,” it so “Aye,
him, introduce to her for impossible be will it so before; day the till
herself.” him know not will she for

introduce and friend, your of advantage the have may you dear, my “Then,
_her_.” to Bingley Mr.

him with acquainted not am I when impossible, Bennet, Mr. “Impossible,
teasing?” so be you can how myself;

certainly is acquaintance fortnight’s A circumspection. your honour “I
a of end the by is really man a what know cannot One little. very
all, after and will; else somebody venture not do _we_ if But fortnight.
as therefore, and, chance; their stand must neices her and Long Mrs.
will I office, the decline you if kindness, of act an it think will she
myself.” on it take

“Nonsense, only, said Bennet Mrs. father. their at stared girls The
nonsense!”

“Do he. cried exclamation?” emphatic that of meaning the be can “What
on laid is that stress the and introduction, of forms the consider you
you, say What _there_. you with agree quite cannot I nonsense? as them,
read and know, I reflection, deep of lady young a are you For Mary?
extracts.” make and books great

how. not knew but sensible, something say to wished Mary

Mr. to return us “let continued, he ideas,” her adjusting is Mary “While
Bingley.”

wife. his cried Bingley,” Mr. of sick am “I

If before? that me tell you not did why but _that_; hear to sorry am “I
called have not would certainly I morning this much as known had I
we visit, the paid actually have I as but unlucky; very is It him. on
now.” acquaintance the escape cannot

Mrs. of that wished; he what just was ladies the of astonishment The
joy of tumult first the when though, rest; the surpassing perhaps Bennet
the all expected had she what was it that declare to began she over, was
while.

should I knew I But Bennet! Mr. dear my you, in was it good “How
to well too girls your loved you sure was I last. at you persuade
a such is it and am! I pleased how Well, acquaintance. an such neglect
a said never and morning this gone have should you that too, joke, good
now.” till it about word

and, Bennet; Mr. said choose,” you as much as cough may you Kitty, “Now,
wife. his of raptures the with fatigued room, the left he spoke, he as

was door the when she, said girls!” have, you father excellent an “What
kindness; his for amends him make ever will you how know not do “I shut.
so not is it life of time our At matter. that for either, me, or
but day; every acquaintances new making be to you, tell can I pleasant,
_are_ you though love, my Lydia, anything. do would we sakes, your for
next the at you with dance will Bingley Mr. say dare I youngest, the
ball.”

the _am_ I though for afraid; not am “I stoutly, Lydia said “Oh!”
tallest.” the I’m youngest,

would he soon how conjecturing in spent was evening the of rest The
to him ask should they when determining and visit, Bennet’s Mr. return
dinner.



3 Chapter


five her of assistance the with however, Bennet, Mrs. that all Not
her from draw to sufficient was subject, the on ask could daughters,
him attacked They Bingley. Mr. of description satisfactory any husband
and suppositions, ingenious questions, barefaced ways--with various in
at were they and all, them of skill the eluded he but surmises; distant
neighbour, their of intelligence second-hand the accept to obliged last
been had William Sir favourable. highly was report Her Lucas. Lady
extremely handsome, wonderfully young, quite was He him. with delighted
assembly next the at be to meant he whole, the crown to and, agreeable,
of fond be To delightful! more be could Nothing party. large a with
lively very and love; in falling towards step certain a was dancing
entertained. were heart Bingley’s Mr. of hopes

Netherfield,” at settled happily daughters my of one see but can I “If
well equally others the all “and husband, her to Bennet Mrs. said
for.” wish to nothing have shall I married,

about sat and visit, Bennet’s Mr. returned Bingley Mr. days few a In
being of hopes entertained had He library. his in him with minutes ten
had he beauty whose of ladies, young the of sight a to admitted
more somewhat were ladies The father. the only saw he but much; heard
upper an from ascertaining of advantage the had they for fortunate,
horse. black a rode and coat, blue a wore he that window

already and dispatched; afterwards soon was dinner to invitation An
her to credit do to were that courses the planned Bennet Mrs. had
Bingley Mr. all. it deferred which arrived answer an when housekeeping,
unable consequently, and, day, following the town in be to obliged was
quite was Bennet Mrs. etc. invitation, their of honour the accept to
town in have could he business what imagine not could She disconcerted.
that fear to began she and Hertfordshire; in arrival his after soon so
never and another, to place one from about flying always be might he
fears her quieted Lucas Lady be. to ought he as Netherfield at settled
get to only London to gone being his of idea the starting by little a
Bingley Mr. that followed soon report a and ball; the for party large a
assembly. the to him with gentlemen seven and ladies twelve bring to was
the comforted were but ladies, of number a such over grieved girls The
only brought he twelve of instead that hearing, by ball the before day
when And cousin. a and sisters five London--his from him with six
five only of consisted it room assembly the entered party the
and eldest, the of husband the sisters, two his Bingley, altogether--Mr.
man. young another

pleasant a had he gentlemanlike; and good-looking was Bingley Mr.
women, fine were sisters His manners. unaffected easy, and countenance,
merely Hurst, Mr. brother-in-law, His fashion. decided of air an with
attention the drew soon Darcy Mr. friend his but gentleman; the looked
and mien, noble features, handsome person, tall fine, his by room the of
minutes five within circulation general in was which report the
gentlemen The year. a thousand ten having his of entrance, his after
he declared ladies the man, a of figure fine a be to him pronounced
great with at looked was he and Bingley, Mr. than handsomer much was
disgust a gave manners his till evening, the half about for admiration
be to discovered was he for popularity; his of tide the turned which
all not and pleased; being above and company, his above be to proud;
most a having from him save then could Derbyshire in estate large his
compared be to unworthy being and countenance, disagreeable forbidding,
friend. his with

principal the all with acquainted himself made soon had Bingley Mr.
dance, every danced unreserved, and lively was he room; the in people
giving of talked and early, so closed ball the that angry was
for speak must qualities amiable Such Netherfield. at himself one
danced Darcy Mr. friend! his and him between contrast a What themselves.
being declined Bingley, Miss with once and Hurst Mrs. with once only
in evening the of rest the spent and lady, other any to introduced
party. own his of one to occasionally speaking room, the about walking
man disagreeable most proudest, the was He decided. was character His
again. there come never would he that hoped everybody and world, the in
of dislike whose Bennet, Mrs. was him against violent most the Amongst
his by resentment particular into sharpened was behaviour general his
daughters. her of one slighted having

sit to gentlemen, of scarcity the by obliged, been had Bennet Elizabeth
been had Darcy Mr. time, that of part during and dances; two for down
Mr. and him between conversation a hear to her for enough near standing
friend his press to minutes, few a for dance the from came who Bingley,
it. join to

you see to hate I dance. you have must “I he, said Darcy,” “Come,
better much had You manner. stupid this in yourself by about standing
dance.”

am I unless it, detest I how know You not. shall certainly “I
this as assembly an such At partner. my with acquainted particularly
not is there and engaged, are sisters Your insupportable. be would it
to me to punishment a be not would it whom room the in woman another
with.” up stand

a “for Bingley, Mr. cried are,” you as fastidious so be not would “I
in girls pleasant many so with met never I honour, my Upon kingdom!
see you them of several are there and evening; this have I as life my
pretty.” uncommonly

Mr. said room,” the in girl handsome only the with dancing are “_You_
Bennet. Miss eldest the at looking Darcy,

one is there But beheld! ever I creature beautiful most the is She “Oh!
I and pretty, very is who you, behind just down sitting sisters her of
you.” introduce to partner my ask me let Do agreeable. very say dare

at moment a for looked he round turning and mean?” you do “Which
said: coldly and own his withdrew he eye, her catching till Elizabeth,
no in am I _me_; tempt to enough handsome not but tolerable, is “She
slighted are who ladies young to consequence give to present at humour
her enjoy and partner your to return better had You men. other by
me.” with time your wasting are you for smiles,

Elizabeth and off; walked Darcy Mr. advice. his followed Bingley Mr.
story, the told She him. toward feelings cordial very no with remained
lively, a had she for friends; her among spirit great with however,
ridiculous. anything in delighted which disposition, playful

Mrs. family. whole the to pleasantly off passed altogether evening The
Netherfield the by admired much daughter eldest her seen had Bennet
been had she and twice, her with danced had Bingley Mr. party.
as this by gratified much as was Jane sisters. his by distinguished
Jane’s felt Elizabeth way. quieter a in though be, could mother her
most the as Bingley Miss to mentioned herself heard had Mary pleasure.
been had Lydia and Catherine and neighbourhood; the in girl accomplished
they that all was which partners, without be to never enough fortunate
good in therefore, returned, They ball. a at for care to learnt yet had
they which of and lived, they where village the Longbourn, to spirits
With up. still Bennet Mr. found They inhabitants. principal the were
a had he occasion present the on and time; of regardless was he book a
raised had which evening an of event the to as curiosity of deal good
on views wife’s his that hoped rather had He expectations. splendid such
a had he that out found soon he but disappointed; be would stranger the
hear. to story different

most a had have “we room, the entered she as Bennet,” Mr. dear my “Oh!
there. been had you wish I ball. excellent most a evening, delightful
well how said Everybody it. like be could nothing admired, so was Jane
with danced and beautiful, quite her thought Bingley Mr. and looked; she
her with danced actually he dear; my _that_, of think Only twice! her
second a asked he that room the in creature only the was she and twice!
stand him see to vexed so was I Lucas. Miss asked he all, of First time.
nobody indeed, all; at her admire not did he however, But, her! with up
going was she as Jane with struck quite seemed he and know; you can,
and introduced, got and was, she who inquired he So dance. the down
King, Miss with danced he third two the Then next. two the for her asked
again, Jane with fifth two the and Lucas, Maria with fourth two the and
_Boulanger_--” the and Lizzy, with sixth two the and

impatiently, husband her cried _me_,” for compassion any had had he “If
of more no say sake, God’s For much! so half danced have not would “he
dance!” first the in ankle his sprained had he that Oh partners. his

excessively so is He him. with delighted quite am I dear, my “Oh!
saw life my in never I women. charming are sisters his And handsome!
Mrs. upon lace the say dare I dresses. their than elegant more anything
gown--” Hurst’s

any against protested Bennet Mr. again. interrupted was she Here
branch another seek to obliged therefore was She finery. of description
some and spirit of bitterness much with related, and subject, the of
Darcy. Mr. of rudeness shocking the exaggeration,

not by much lose not does Lizzy “that added, she you,” assure can I “But
at not man, horrid disagreeable, most a is he for fancy; _his_ suiting
enduring no was there that conceited so and high So pleasing. worth all
very so himself fancying there, walked he and here, walked He him!
my there, been had you wish I with! dance to enough handsome Not great!
man.” the detest quite I set-downs. your of one him given have to dear,



4 Chapter


in cautious been had who former, the alone, were Elizabeth and Jane When
very how just sister her to expressed before, Bingley Mr. of praise her
him. admired she much

“sensible, she, said be,” to ought man young a what just is “He
much manners!--so happy such saw never I and lively; good-humoured,
breeding!” good perfect such with ease,

ought man young a “which Elizabeth, replied handsome,” also is “He
complete.” thereby is character His can. possibly he if be, to likewise

I time. second a dance to me asking his by flattered much very was “I
compliment.” a such expect not did

between difference great one is that But you. for did I you? not “Did
What never. _me_ and surprise, by _you_ take always Compliments us.
help not could He again? you asking his than natural more be could
woman other every as pretty as times five about were you that seeing
is certainly he Well, that. for gallantry his to thanks No room. the in
a many liked have You him. like to leave you give I and agreeable, very
person.” stupider

Lizzy!” “Dear

general. in people like to know, you apt, too deal great a are you “Oh!
agreeable and good are world the All anybody. in fault a see never You
your in being human a of ill speak you heard never I eyes. your in
life.”

speak always I but anyone; censuring in hasty be to wish not would “I
think.” I what

_your_ With wonder. the makes which _that_ is it and do; you know “I
of nonsense and follies the to blind honestly so be to sense, good
it with meets enough--one common is candour of Affectation others!
the take design--to or ostentation without candid be to But everywhere.
nothing say and better, still it make and character everybody’s of good
sisters, man’s this like you so And alone. you to bad--belongs the of
his.” to equal not are manners Their you? do too,

you when women pleasing very are they But first. not--at “Certainly
keep and brother, her with live to is Bingley Miss them. with converse
charming very a find not shall we if mistaken much am I and house; his
her.” in neighbour

at behaviour their convinced; not was but silence, in listened Elizabeth
more with and general; in please to calculated been not had assembly the
sister, her than temper of pliancy less and observation of quickness
she herself, to attention any by unassailed too judgement a with and
fine very fact in were They them. approve to disposed little very was
the in nor pleased, were they when humour good in deficient not ladies;
and proud but it, chose they when agreeable themselves making of power
the of one in educated been had handsome, rather were They conceited.
thousand twenty of fortune a had town, in seminaries private first
of and ought, they than more spending of habit the in were pounds,
respect every in therefore were and rank, of people with associating
of were They others. of meanly and themselves, of well think to entitled
deeply more circumstance a England; of north the in family respectable a
their and fortune brother’s their that than memories their on impressed
trade. by acquired been had own

hundred a nearly of amount the to property inherited Bingley Mr.
an purchase to intended had who father, his from pounds thousand
and likewise, it intended Bingley Mr. it. do to live not did but estate,
a with provided now was he as but county; his of choice made sometimes
those of many to doubtful was it manor, a of liberty the and house good
the spend not might he whether temper, his of easiness the knew best who
to generation next the leave and Netherfield, at days his of remainder
purchase.

but, own; his of estate an having his for anxious were sisters His
no by was Bingley Miss tenant, a as established only now was he though
had who Hurst, Mrs. was table--nor his at preside to unwilling means
consider to disposed less fortune, than fashion more of man a married
of been not had Bingley Mr. her. suited it when home her as house his
recommendation accidental an by tempted was he when years, two age
for it into and it, at look did He House. Netherfield at look to
principal the and situation the with pleased half-an-hour--was
it took and praise, its in said owner the what with satisfied rooms,
immediately.

of spite in friendship, steady very a was there Darcy and him Between
the by Darcy to endeared was Bingley character. of opposition great
disposition no though temper, his of ductility and openness, easiness,
he own his with though and own, his to contrast greater a offer could
Bingley regard, Darcy’s of strength the On dissatisfied. appeared never
opinion. highest the judgement his of and reliance, firmest the had
means no by was Bingley superior. the was Darcy understanding, In
haughty, time same the at was He clever. was Darcy but deficient,
not were well-bred, though manners, his and fastidious, and reserved,
Bingley advantage. the greatly had friend his respect that In inviting.
continually was Darcy appeared, he wherever liked being of sure was
offense. giving

sufficiently was assembly Meryton the of spoke they which in manner The
or people pleasant more with met never had Bingley characteristic.
attentive and kind most been had everybody life; his in girls prettier
felt soon had he stiffness; no formality, no been had there him; to
not could he Bennet, Miss to as and, room; the all with acquainted
a seen had contrary, the on Darcy, beautiful. more angel an conceive
for fashion, no and beauty little was there whom in people of collection
received none from and interest, smallest the felt had he whom of none
pretty, be to acknowledged he Bennet Miss pleasure. or attention either
much. too smiled she but

admired they still so--but be to it allowed sister her and Hurst Mrs.
one and girl, sweet a be to her pronounced and her, liked and her
therefore was Bennet Miss of. more know to object not would they whom
such by authorized felt brother their and girl, sweet a as established
chose. he as her of think to commendation



5 Chapter


Bennets the whom with family a lived Longbourn of walk short a Within
trade in formerly been had Lucas William Sir intimate. particularly were
the to risen and fortune, tolerable a made had he where Meryton, in
mayoralty. his during king the to address an by knighthood of honour
a him given had It strongly. too felt been perhaps had distinction The
town; market small a in residence his to and business, his to disgust
house a to family his with removed had he both, them quitting in and,
Lodge, Lucas period that from denominated Meryton, from mile a about
and, importance, own his of pleasure with think could he where
all to civil being in solely himself occupy business, by unshackled
him render not did it rank, his by elated though For, world. the
By everybody. to attention all was he contrary, the on supercilious;
St. at presentation his obliging, and friendly, inoffensive, nature
courteous. him made had James’s

a be to clever too not woman, of kind good very a was Lucas Lady
eldest The children. several had They Bennet. Mrs. to neighbour valuable
was twenty-seven, about woman, young intelligent sensible, a them, of
friend. intimate Elizabeth’s

over talk to meet should Bennets Miss the and Lucases Miss the That
assembly the after morning the and necessary; absolutely was ball a
communicate. to and hear to Longbourn to former the brought

civil with Bennet Mrs. said Charlotte,” well, evening the began “_You_
choice.” first Bingley’s Mr. were “_You_ Lucas. Miss to self-command

better.” second his like to seemed he but “Yes;

be To twice. her with danced he because suppose, I Jane, mean you “Oh!
he believe rather I her--indeed admired he if as seem _did_ that sure
what--something know hardly I it--but about something heard _did_--I
Robinson.” Mr. about

not did Robinson; Mr. and him between overheard I what mean you “Perhaps
Meryton our liked he how him asking Robinson’s Mr. you? to it mention I
many great a were there think not did he whether and assemblies,
his and prettiest? the thought he _which_ and room, the in women pretty
Bennet, Miss eldest the ‘Oh! question: last the to immediately answering
point.’” that on opinions two be cannot there doubt; a beyond

as seem does indeed--that decided very is that Well, word! my “Upon
know.” you nothing, to come all may it however, if--but,

said Eliza,” _yours_, than purpose the to more were overhearings “_My_
friend, his as to listening worth well so not is Darcy “Mr. Charlotte.
_tolerable_.” just only be Eliza!--to he?--poor is

his by vexed be to head Lizzy’s into it put not would you beg “I
quite be would it that man, disagreeable a such is he for ill-treatment,
he that night last me told Long Mrs. him. by liked be to misfortune a
lips.” his opening once without half-an-hour for her to close sat

Jane. said mistake?” little a there not ma’am?--is sure, quite you “Are
her.” to speaking Darcy Mr. saw certainly “I

he and Netherfield, liked he how last at him asked she “Aye--because
at angry quite seemed he said she but her; answering help not could
to.” spoke being

much, speaks never he “that Jane, said me,” told Bingley “Miss
remarkably is he _them_ With acquaintances. intimate his among unless
agreeable.”

very so been had he If dear. my it, of word a believe not do “I
it how guess can I But Long. Mrs. to talked have would he agreeable,
had he say dare I and pride, with up eat is he that says everybody was;
to come had and carriage, a keep not does Long Mrs. that somehow heard
chaise.” hack a in ball the

I “but Lucas, Miss said Long,” Mrs. to talking not his mind not do “I
Eliza.” with danced had he wish

_him_, with dance not would “I mother, her said Lizzy,” time, “Another
you.” were I if

him.” with dance to _never_ you promise safely may I ma’am, believe, “I

pride as much so _me_ offend not “does Lucas, Miss said pride,” “His
so that wonder cannot One it. for excuse an is there because does, often
favour, his in everything fortune, family, with man, young a fine very
_right_ a has he it, express so may I If himself. of highly think should
proud.” be to

forgive easily could I “and Elizabeth, replied true,” very is “That
_mine_.” mortified not had he if pride, _his_

her of solidity the upon herself piqued who Mary, observed “Pride,”
have I that all By believe. I failing, common very a “is reflections,
human that indeed; common very is it that convinced am I read, ever
us of few very are there that and it, to prone particularly is nature
some of score the on self-complacency of feeling a cherish not do who
different are pride and Vanity imaginary. or real other, or quality
may person A synonymously. used often are words the though things,
of opinion our to more relates Pride vain. being without proud be
us.” of think others have would we what to vanity ourselves,

with came who Lucas, young a cried Darcy,” Mr. as rich as were I “If
of pack a keep would I was. I proud how care not should “I sisters, his
day.” a wine of bottle a drink and foxhounds,

Mrs. said ought,” you than more deal great a drink would you “Then
bottle your away take should I it, at you see to were I if “and Bennet;
directly.”

she that declare to continued she not; should she that protested boy The
visit. the with only ended argument the and would,



6 Chapter


visit The Netherfield. of those on waited soon Longbourn of ladies The
on grew manners pleasing Bennet’s Miss form. due in returned soon was
was mother the though and Bingley; Miss and Hurst Mrs. of goodwill the
to, speaking worth not sisters younger the and intolerable, be to found
towards expressed was _them_ with acquainted better being of wish a
greatest the with received was attention this Jane, By eldest. two the
treatment their in superciliousness saw still Elizabeth but pleasure,
them; like not could and sister, her even excepting hardly everybody, of
in arising as value a had was, it as such Jane, to kindness their though
It admiration. brother’s their of influence the from probability all
and her admire _did_ he that met, they whenever evident generally was
preference the to yielding was Jane that evident equally was it _her_ to
a in was and first, the from him for entertain to begun had she which
it that pleasure with considered she but love; in much very be to way
Jane since general, in world the by discovered be to likely not was
a and temper of composure a feeling, of strength great with united,
suspicions the from her guard would which manner of cheerfulness uniform
Lucas. Miss friend her to this mentioned She impertinent. the of

impose to able be “to Charlotte, replied pleasant,” be perhaps may “It
be to disadvantage a sometimes is it but case; a such in public the on
skill same the with affection her conceals woman a If guarded. very so
and him; fixing of opportunity the lose may she it, of object the from
in equally world the believe to consolation poor but be then will it
every almost in vanity or gratitude of much so is There dark. the
all can We itself. to any leave to safe not is it that attachment,
are there but enough; natural is preference slight freely--a _begin_
without love in really be to enough heart have who us of few very
_more_ show better had women a ten of out cases nine In encouragement.
he but undoubtedly; sister your likes Bingley feels. she than affection
on.” him help not does she if her, like than more do never may

can I If allow. will nature her as much as on, him help does she “But
to not indeed, simpleton, a be must he him, for regard her perceive
too.” it discover

do.” you as disposition Jane’s know not does he that Eliza, “Remember,

conceal to endeavour not does and man, a to partial is woman a if “But
out.” it find must he it,

Jane and Bingley though But, her. of enough sees he if must, he “Perhaps
they as and, together; hours many for never is it often, tolerably meet
that impossible is it parties, mixed large in other each see always
should Jane together. conversing in employed be should moment every
his command can she which in half-hour every of most the make therefore
for leisure more be will there him, of secure is she When attention.
chooses.” she as much as love in falling

in is nothing “where Elizabeth, replied one,” good a is plan “Your
determined were I if and married, well being of desire the but question
But it. adopt should I say dare I husband, any or husband, rich a get to
yet, As design. by acting not is she feelings; Jane’s not are these
its of nor regard own her of degree the of certain be even cannot she
four danced She fortnight. a only him known has She reasonableness.
house, own his at morning one him saw she Meryton; at him with dances
quite not is This times. four company in him with dined since has and
character.” his understand her make to enough

might she him, with _dined_ merely she Had it. represent you as “Not
must you but appetite; good a had he whether discovered have only
four together--and spent been also have evenings four that remember
deal.” great a do may evenings

they that ascertain to them enabled have evenings four these “Yes;
other any to respect with but Commerce; than better Vingt-un like both
unfolded.” been has much that imagine not do I characteristic, leading

and heart; my all with success Jane wish “I Charlotte, said “Well,”
a good as had she think should I to-morrow, him to married were she if
a for character his studying be to were she if as happiness of chance
If chance. of matter a entirely is marriage in Happiness twelvemonth.
or other each to known well so ever are parties the of dispositions the
the in felicity their advance not does it beforehand, similar so ever
to afterwards unlike sufficiently grow to continue always They least.
as little as know to better is it and vexation; of share their have
your pass to are you whom with person the of defects the of possible
life.”

not is it know You sound. not is it but Charlotte; laugh, me make “You
yourself.” way this in act never would you that and sound,

Elizabeth sister, her to attentions Bingley’s Mr. observing in Occupied
some of object an becoming herself was she that suspecting from far was
scarcely first at had Darcy Mr. friend. his of eyes the in interest
the at admiration without her at looked had he pretty; be to her allowed
no But criticise. to only her at looked he met, next they when and ball;
hardly she that friends his and himself to clear it made he had sooner
rendered was it find to began he than face, her in feature good a had
To eyes. dark her of expression beautiful the by intelligent uncommonly
had he Though mortifying. equally others some succeeded discovery this
symmetry perfect of failure one than more eye critical a with detected
and light be to figure her acknowledge to forced was he form, her in
those not were manners her that asserting his of spite in and pleasing;
Of playfulness. easy their by caught was he world, fashionable the of
made who man the only was he her to unaware; perfectly was she this
enough handsome her thought not had who and nowhere, agreeable himself
with. dance to

conversing towards step a as and her, of more know to wish to began He
so doing His others. with conversation her to attended himself, her with
were party large a where Lucas’s, William Sir at was It notice. her drew
assembled.

my to listening “by Charlotte, to she said mean,” Darcy Mr. does “What
Forster?” Colonel with conversation

answer.” can only Darcy Mr. which question a is “That

see I that know him let certainly shall I more any it does he if “But
by begin not do I if and eye, satirical very a has He about. is he what
him.” of afraid grow soon shall I myself, impertinent being

have to seeming without though afterwards, soon them approaching his On
such mention to friend her defied Lucas Miss speaking, of intention any
she it, do to Elizabeth provoking immediately which him; to subject a
said: and him to turned

uncommonly myself expressed I that Darcy, Mr. think, not you “Did
at ball a us give to Forster Colonel teasing was I when now, just well
Meryton?”

lady a makes which subject a always is it but energy; great “With
energetic.”

us.” on severe are “You

going am “I Lucas. Miss said teased,” be to soon turn _her_ be will “It
follows.” what know you and Eliza, instrument, the open to

me wanting friend!--always a of way by creature strange very a are “You
taken had vanity my If everybody! and anybody before sing and play to
would I is, it as but invaluable; been have would you turn, musical a
of habit the in be must who those before down sit not rather really
however, persevering, Lucas’s Miss On performers.” best very the hearing
glancing gravely And must.” it so, be must it if well, “Very added, she
of is here everybody which saying, old fine a is “There Darcy, Mr. at
I and porridge’; your cool to breath your ‘Keep with: familiar course
song.” my swell to mine keep shall

song a After capital. means no by though pleasing, was performance Her
that several of entreaties the to reply could she before and two, or
her by instrument the at succeeded eagerly was she again, sing would she
in one plain only the being of consequence in having, who Mary, sister
always was accomplishments, and knowledge for hard worked family, the
display. for impatient

her given had vanity though and taste; nor genius neither had Mary
conceited and air pedantic a likewise her given had it application,
she than excellence of degree higher a injured have would which manner,
with to listened been had unaffected, and easy Elizabeth, reached. had
the at Mary, and well; so half playing not though pleasure, more much
by gratitude and praise purchase to glad was concerto, long a of end
who, sisters, younger her of request the at airs, Irish and Scotch
in eagerly joined officers, three or two and Lucases, the of some with
room. the of end one at dancing

of mode a such at indignation silent in them near stood Darcy Mr.
too was and conversation, all of exclusion the to evening, the passing
was Lucas William Sir that perceive to thoughts his by engrossed much
began: thus William Sir till neighbour, his

There Darcy! Mr. is, this people young for amusement charming a “What
first the of one as it consider I all. after dancing like nothing is
society.” polished of refinements

amongst vogue in being of also advantage the has it and sir; “Certainly,
dance.” can savage Every world. the of societies polished less the

he delightfully,” performs friend “Your smiled. only William Sir
doubt I “and group; the join Bingley seeing on pause, a after continued
Darcy.” Mr. yourself, science the in adept an are you that not

sir.” believe, I Meryton, at dance me saw “You

Do sight. the from pleasure inconsiderable no received and indeed, “Yes,
James’s?” St. at dance often you

sir.” “Never,

place?” the to compliment proper a be would it think not you “Do

it.” avoid can I if place any to pay never I which compliment a is “It

conclude?” I town, in house a have “You

bowed. Darcy Mr.

fond am I myself--for town in fixing of thought some had once had “I
of air the that certain quite feel not did I but society; superior of
Lucas.” Lady with agree would London

disposed not was companion his but answer; an of hopes in paused He
was he them, towards moving instant that at Elizabeth and any; make to
to out called and thing, gallant very a doing of action the with struck
her:

allow must you Darcy, Mr. dancing? not you are why Eliza, Miss dear “My
You partner. desirable very a as you to lady young this present to me
you.” before is beauty much so when sure am I dance, to refuse cannot
though who, Darcy Mr. to it given have would he hand, her taking And,
instantly she when it, receive to unwilling not was surprised, extremely
William: Sir to discomposure some with said and back, drew

you entreat I dancing. of intention least the not have I sir, “Indeed,
partner.” a for beg to order in way this moved I that suppose to not

of honour the allowed be to requested propriety, grave with Darcy, Mr.
at William Sir did nor determined; was Elizabeth vain. in but hand, her
persuasion. at attempt his by purpose her shake all

deny to cruel is it that Eliza, Miss dance, the in much so excel “You
the dislikes gentleman this though and you; seeing of happiness the me
us oblige to sure, am I objection, no have can he general, in amusement
half-hour.” one for

smiling. Elizabeth, said politeness,” all is Darcy “Mr.

Eliza, Miss dear my inducement, the considering but, indeed; is, “He
a such to object would who complaisance--for his at wonder cannot we
partner?”

not had resistance Her away. turned and archly, looked Elizabeth
some with her of thinking was he and gentleman, the with her injured
Bingley: Miss by accosted thus when complacency,

reverie.” your of subject the guess can “I

not.” imagine should “I

evenings many pass to be would it insupportable how considering are “You
opinion. your of quite am I indeed and society; such manner--in this in
noise--the the yet and insipidity, The annoyed! more never was I
would What people! those all of self-importance the yet and nothingness,
them!” on strictures your hear to give I

more was mind My you. assure I wrong, totally is conjecture “Your
pleasure great very the on meditating been have I engaged. agreeably
bestow.” can woman pretty a of face the in eyes fine of pair a which

he desired and face, his on eyes her fixed immediately Bingley Miss
reflections. such inspiring of credit the had lady what her tell would
intrepidity: great with replied Darcy Mr.

Bennet.” Elizabeth “Miss

astonishment. all am “I Bingley. Miss repeated Bennet!” Elizabeth “Miss
you wish to I am when pray, favourite?--and a such been she has long How
joy?”

lady’s A ask. to you expected I which question the exactly is “That
love from love, to admiration from jumps it rapid; very is imagination
joy.” me wishing be would you knew I moment. a in matrimony, to

is matter the consider shall I it, about serious are you if “Nay,
indeed; mother-in-law, charming a having be will You settled. absolutely
you.” with Pemberley at be always will she course, of and,

to chose she while indifference perfect with her to listened He
her convinced composure his as and manner; this in herself entertain
long. flowed wit her safe, was all that



7 Chapter


two of estate an in entirely almost consisted property Bennet’s Mr.
entailed, was daughters, his for unfortunately which, year, a thousand
mother’s their and relation; distant a on male, heirs of default in
supply ill but could life, in situation her for ample though fortune,
and Meryton, in attorney an been had father Her his. of deficiency the
pounds. thousand four her left had

to clerk a been had who Phillips, Mr. a to married sister a had She
in settled brother a and business, the in him succeeded and father their
trade. of line respectable a in London

most a Meryton; from mile one only was Longbourn of village The
tempted usually were who ladies, young the for distance convenient
and aunt their to duty their pay to week, a times four or three thither
family, the of youngest two The way. the over just shop milliner’s a to
attentions; these in frequent particularly were Lydia, and Catherine
nothing when and sisters’, their than vacant more were minds their
morning their amuse to necessary was Meryton to walk a offered, better
news of bare however and evening; the for conversation furnish and hours
some learn to contrived always they be, might general in country the
with both supplied well were they indeed, present, At aunt. their from
the in regiment militia a of arrival recent the by happiness and news
the was Meryton and winter, whole the remain to was it neighbourhood;
headquarters.

most the of productive now were Phillips Mrs. to visits Their
knowledge their to something added day Every intelligence. interesting
a long not were lodgings Their connections. and names officers’ the of
Mr. themselves. officers the know to began they length at and secret,
of store a nieces his to opened this and all, them visited Phillips
and officers; but nothing of talk could They before. unknown felicity
animation gave which of mention the fortune, large Bingley’s Mr.
the to opposed when eyes their in worthless was mother, their to
ensign. an of regimentals

Mr. subject, this on effusions their to morning one listening After
observed: coolly Bennet

two be must you talking, of manner your by collect can I that all “From
but time, some it suspected have I country. the in girls silliest the of
convinced.” now am I

perfect with Lydia, but answer; no made and disconcerted, was Catherine
Carter, Captain of admiration her express to continued indifference,
the going was he as day, the of course the in him seeing of hope her and
London. to morning next

so be should you “that Bennet, Mrs. said dear,” my astonished, am “I
slightingly think to wished I If silly. children own your think to ready
however.” own, my of be not should it children, anybody’s of

it.” of sensible always be to hope must I silly, are children my “If

clever.” very them of all are they happens, it as “Yes--but

I agree. not do we which on myself, flatter I point, only the is “This
must I but particular, every in coincided sentiments our that hoped had
uncommonly daughters youngest two our think to as you from differ far so
foolish.”

of sense the have to girls such expect not must you Bennet, Mr. dear “My
will they say dare I age, our to get they When mother. and father their
when time the remember I do. we than more any officers about think not
my at still do I so indeed, well--and, very myself coat red a liked I
year, a thousand six or five with colonel, young smart a if and heart;
thought I and him; to nay say not shall I girls my of one want should
in William’s Sir at night other the becoming very looked Forster Colonel
regimentals.” his

Captain and Forster Colonel that says aunt “my Lydia, cried “Mamma,”
first they when did they as Watson’s Miss to often so go not do Carter
library.” Clarke’s in standing often very now them sees she came;

with footman the of entrance the by replying prevented was Bennet Mrs.
waited servant the and Netherfield, from came it Bennet; Miss for note a
was she and pleasure, with sparkled eyes Bennet’s Mrs. answer. an for
read, daughter her while out, calling eagerly

Well, say? he does What about? it is What from? it is who Jane, “Well,
love.” my haste, make us; tell and haste make Jane,

aloud. it read then and Jane, said Bingley,” Miss from is “It

FRIEND,-- DEAR “MY

me, and Louisa with to-day dine to as compassionate so not are you “If
lives, our of rest the for other each hating of danger in be shall we
a without end never can women two between tete-a-tete day’s whole a for
the and brother My this. of receipt on can you as soon as Come quarrel.
ever, officers.--Yours the with dine to are gentlemen

BINGLEY” “CAROLINE

of us tell not did aunt my wonder “I Lydia. cried officers!” the “With
_that_.”

unlucky.” very is “that Bennet, Mrs. said out,” “Dining

Jane. said carriage?” the have I “Can

to likely seems it because horseback, on go better had you dear, my “No,
night.” all stay must you then and rain;

that sure were you “if Elizabeth, said scheme,” good a be would “That
home.” her send to offer not would they

Meryton, to go to chaise Bingley’s Mr. have will gentlemen the but “Oh!
theirs.” to horses no have Hursts the and

coach.” the in go rather much had “I

are They sure. am I horses, the spare cannot father your dear, my “But,
not?” they are Bennet, Mr. farm, the in wanted

them.” get can I than oftener much farm the in wanted are “They

purpose mother’s “my Elizabeth, said to-day,” them got have you if “But
answered.” be will

horses the that acknowledgment an father her from extort last at did She
her and horseback, on go to obliged therefore was Jane engaged. were
a of prognostics cheerful many with door the to her attended mother
before long gone been not had Jane answered; were hopes Her day. bad
was mother her but her, for uneasy were sisters Her hard. rained it
intermission; without evening whole the continued rain The delighted.
back. come not could certainly Jane

than more Bennet Mrs. said indeed!” mine, of idea lucky a was “This
the Till own. her all were rain it making of credit the if as once,
her of felicity the all of aware not was she however, morning, next
Netherfield from servant a when over scarcely was Breakfast contrivance.
Elizabeth: for note following the brought

LIZZY,-- DEAREST “MY

be to is suppose, I which, morning, this unwell very myself find “I
not will friends kind My yesterday. through wet getting my to imputed
Mr. seeing my on also insist They better. am I till returning my of hear
been having his of hear should you if alarmed be not do Jones--therefore
the much not is there headache, and throat sore a excepting me--and, to
etc.” me.--Yours, with matter

note the read had Elizabeth when Bennet, Mr. said dear,” my “Well,
she illness--if of fit dangerous a have should daughter your “if aloud,
of pursuit in all was it that know to comfort a be would it die, should
orders.” your under and Bingley, Mr.

trifling little of die not do People dying. her of afraid not am I “Oh!
is it there, stays she as long As of. care good taken be will She colds.
carriage.” the have could I if her see and go would I well. very all

though her, to go to determined was anxious, really feeling Elizabeth,
walking horsewoman, no was she as and had; be to not was carriage the
resolution. her declared She alternative. only her was

a such of think to “as mother, her cried silly,” so be you can “How
get you when seen be to fit be not will You dirt! this all in thing,
there.”

want.” I all is Jane--which see to fit very be shall “I

the for send “to father, her said Lizzy,” me, to hint a this “Is
horses?”

nothing is distance The walk. the avoid to wish not do I indeed, “No,
dinner.” by back be shall I miles. three only motive; a has one when

every “but Mary, observed benevolence,” your of activity the admire “I
opinion, my in and, reason; by guided be should feeling of impulse
required.” is what to proportion in be always should exertion

Lydia. and Catherine said you,” with Meryton as far as go will “We
off set ladies young three the and company, their accepted Elizabeth
together.

may we “perhaps along, walked they as Lydia, said haste,” make we “If
goes.” he before Carter Captain of something see

one of lodgings the to repaired youngest two the parted; they Meryton In
crossing alone, walk her continued Elizabeth and wives, officers’ the of
springing and stiles over jumping pace, quick a at field after field
last at herself finding and activity, impatient with puddles over
face a and stockings, dirty ankles, weary with house, the of view within
exercise. of warmth the with glowing

were Jane but all where breakfast-parlour, the into shown was She
surprise. of deal great a created appearance her where and assembled,
such in day, the in early so miles three walked have should she That
and Hurst Mrs. to incredible almost was herself, by and weather, dirty
contempt in her held they that convinced was Elizabeth and Bingley; Miss
their in and them; by politely very however, received, was She it. for
there politeness; than better something was there manners brother’s
Mr. and little, very said Darcy Mr. kindness. and humour good was
the of admiration between divided was former The all. at nothing Hurst
as doubt and complexion, her to given had exercise which brilliancy
was latter The alone. far so coming her justifying occasion’s the to
breakfast. his of only thinking

Miss answered. favourably very not were sister her after inquiries Her
not and feverish, very was up, though and ill, slept had Bennet
her to taken be to glad was Elizabeth room. her leave to enough well
giving of fear the by withheld been only had who Jane, and immediately;
longed she much how note her in expressing from inconvenience or alarm
equal, not was She entrance. her at delighted was visit, a such for
them left Bingley Miss when and conversation, much to however,
the for gratitude of expressions besides little attempt could together,
attended silently Elizabeth with. treated was she kindness extraordinary
her.

Elizabeth and sisters; the by joined were they over was breakfast When
and affection much how saw she when herself, them like to began
having and came, apothecary The Jane. for showed they solicitude
caught had she that supposed, be might as said, patient, his examined
it; of better the get to endeavour must they that and cold, violent a
advice The draughts. some her promised and bed, to return to her advised
head her and increased, symptoms feverish the for readily, followed was
were nor moment; a for room her quit not did Elizabeth acutely. ached
in had, they out, being gentlemen the absent; often ladies other the
elsewhere. do to nothing fact,

very and go, must she that felt Elizabeth three, struck clock the When
only she and carriage, the her offered Bingley Miss so. said unwillingly
concern such testified Jane when it, accept to pressing little a wanted
offer the convert to obliged was Bingley Miss that her, with parting in
present. the for Netherfield at remain to invitation an to chaise the of
to dispatched was servant a and consented, thankfully most Elizabeth
supply a back bring and stay her with family the acquaint to Longbourn
clothes. of



8 Chapter


six half-past at and dress, to retired ladies two the o’clock five At
then which inquiries civil the To dinner. to summoned was Elizabeth
the distinguishing of pleasure the had she which amongst and in, poured
very a make not could she Bingley’s, Mr. of solicitude superior much
hearing on sisters, The better. means no by was Jane answer. favourable
how grieved, were they much how times four or three repeated this,
disliked they excessively how and cold, bad a have to was it shocking
their and matter: the of more no thought then and themselves; ill being
restored them before immediately not when Jane towards indifference
dislike. former her all of enjoyment the to Elizabeth

could she whom party the of one only the was indeed, brother, Their
his and evident, was Jane for anxiety His complacency. any with regard
feeling her prevented they and pleasing, most herself to attentions
the by considered was she believed she as intruder an much so herself
was Bingley Miss him. but any from notice little very had She others.
Mr. for as and so; less scarcely sister her Darcy, Mr. by engrossed
to only lived who man, indolent an was he sat, Elizabeth whom by Hurst,
plain a prefer to her found he when who, cards; at play and drink, eat,
her. to say to nothing had ragout, a to dish

Bingley Miss and Jane, to directly returned she over, was dinner When
were manners Her room. the of out was she as soon as her abusing began
impertinence; and pride of mixture a indeed, bad very be to pronounced
the thought Hurst Mrs. beauty. no style, no conversation, no had she
added: and same,

excellent an being but her, recommend to short, in nothing, has “She
really She morning. this appearance her forget never shall I walker.
wild.” almost looked

Very countenance. my keep hardly could I Louisa. indeed, did, “She
the about scampering be _she_ must Why all! at come to nonsensical
blowsy!” so untidy, so hair, Her cold? a had sister her because country,

deep inches six petticoat, her saw you hope I petticoat; her and “Yes,
to down let been had which gown the and certain; absolutely am I mud, in
office.” its doing not it hide

was this “but Bingley; said Louisa,” exact, very be may picture “Your
remarkably looked Bennet Elizabeth Miss thought I me. upon lost all
quite petticoat dirty Her morning. this room the into came she when well
notice.” my escaped

am I “and Bingley; Miss said sure,” am I Darcy, Mr. it, observed “_You_
such make sister _your_ see to wish not would you that think to inclined
exhibition.” an

not.” “Certainly

is, it whatever or miles, five or miles, four or miles, three walk “To
by mean she could What alone! quite alone, and dirt, in ankles her above
independence, conceited of sort abominable an show to me to seems It it?
decorum.” to indifference country-town most a

said pleasing,” very is that sister her for affection an shows “It
Bingley.

“that whisper, half a in Bingley Miss observed Darcy,” Mr. afraid, am “I
eyes.” fine her of admiration your affected rather has adventure this

A exercise.” the by brightened were “they replied; he all,” at “Not
again: began Hurst Mrs. and speech, this followed pause short

very a really is she Bennet, Jane Miss for regard excessive an have “I
with But settled. well were she heart my all with wish I and girl, sweet
is there afraid am I connections, low such and mother, and father a such
it.” of chance no

in attorney an is uncle their that say you heard have I think “I
Meryton.”

Cheapside.” near somewhere lives who another, have they and “Yes;

heartily. laughed both they and sister, her added capital,” is “That

“it Bingley, cried Cheapside,” _all_ fill to enough uncles had they “If
agreeable.” less jot one them make not would

any of men marrying of chance their lessen materially very must it “But
Darcy. replied world,” the in consideration

their it gave sisters his but answer; no made Bingley speech this To
of expense the at time some for mirth their indulged and assent, hearty
relations. vulgar friend’s dear their

on room her to returned they however, tenderness, of renewal a With
coffee. to summoned till her with sat and dining-parlour, the leaving
till all, at her quit not would Elizabeth and poorly, very still was She
and sleep, her seeing of comfort the had she when evening, the in late
go should she that pleasant than right rather her to seemed it when
whole the found she drawing-room the entering On herself. downstairs
suspecting but them; join to invited immediately was and loo, at party
the sister her making and it, declined she high playing be to them
stay could she time short the for herself amuse would she said excuse,
astonishment. with her at looked Hurst Mr. book. a with below,

singular.” rather is “that he; said cards?” to reading prefer you “Do

great a is She cards. “despises Bingley, Miss said Bennet,” Eliza “Miss
else.” anything in pleasure no has and reader,

am “I Elizabeth; cried censure,” such nor praise such neither deserve “I
things.” many in pleasure have I and reader, great a _not_

“and Bingley; said pleasure,” have you sure am I sister your nursing “In
well.” quite her seeing by increased soon be will it hope I

the towards walked then and heart, her from him thanked Elizabeth
her fetch to offered immediately He lying. were books few a where table
afforded. library his that others--all

own my and benefit your for larger were collection my wish I “And
more have I many, not have I though and fellow, idle an am I but credit;
into.” looked ever I than

those with perfectly herself suit could she that him assured Elizabeth
room. the in

left have should father my “that Bingley, Miss said astonished,” am “I
at have you library delightful a What books. of collection a small so
Darcy!” Mr. Pemberley,

many of work the been has “it replied, he good,” be to ought “It
generations.”

buying always are you yourself, it to much so added have you then “And
books.”

as days such in library family a of neglect the comprehend cannot “I
these.”

of beauties the to add can that nothing neglect you sure am I “Neglect!
be may it wish I house, _your_ build you when Charles, place. noble that
Pemberley.” as delightful as half

may.” it wish “I

that in purchase your make to you advise really would I “But
a not is There model. of kind a for Pemberley take and neighbourhood,
Derbyshire.” than England in county finer

it.” sell will Darcy if itself Pemberley buy will I heart; my all “With

Charles.” possibilities, of talking am “I

get to possible more it think should I Caroline, word, my “Upon
imitation.” by than purchase by Pemberley

very her leave to as passed, what with caught much so was Elizabeth
drew she aside, wholly it laying soon and book; her for attention little
his and Bingley Mr. between herself stationed and card-table, the near
game. the observe to sister, eldest

“will Bingley; Miss said spring?” the since grown much Darcy Miss “Is
am?” I as tall as be she

or height, Bennet’s Elizabeth Miss about now is She will. she think “I
taller.” rather

me delighted who anybody with met never I again! her see to long I “How
accomplished extremely so And manners! such countenance, a Such much. so
exquisite.” is pianoforte the on performance Her age! her for

patience have can ladies young “how Bingley, said me,” to amazing is “It
are.” all they as accomplished very so be to

mean?” you do what Charles, dear My accomplished! ladies young “All

and screens, cover tables, paint all They think. I them, of all “Yes,
sure am I and this, all do cannot who anyone know scarcely I purses. net
being without time, first the for of spoken lady young a heard never I
accomplished.” very was she that informed

“has Darcy, said accomplishments,” of extent common the of list “Your
no it deserves who woman a many to applied is word The truth. much too
very am I But screen. a covering or purse a netting by than otherwise
I general. in ladies of estimation your in you with agreeing from far
my of range whole the in half-a-dozen, than more knowing of boast cannot
accomplished.” really are that acquaintance,

Bingley. Miss said sure,” am I I, “Nor

your in deal great a comprehend must “you Elizabeth, observed “Then,”
woman.” accomplished an of idea

it.” in deal great a comprehend do I “Yes,

really be can one “no assistant, faithful his cried certainly,” “Oh!
met usually is what surpass greatly not does who accomplished esteemed
drawing, singing, music, of knowledge thorough a have must woman A with.
besides and word; the deserve to languages, modern the and dancing,
of manner and air her in something certain a possess must she this, all
word the or expressions, and address her voice, her of tone the walking,
half-deserved.” but be will

must she this all to “and Darcy, added possess,” must she this “All
by mind her of improvement the in substantial, more something add yet
reading.” extensive

women. accomplished six _only_ knowing your at surprised longer no am “I
_any_.” knowing your at now wonder rather I

all of possibility the doubt to as sex own your upon severe so you “Are
this?”

and taste, and capacity, such saw never I woman. a such saw never “I
united.” describe you as elegance, and application,

her of injustice the against out cried both Bingley Miss and Hurst Mrs.
who women many knew they that protesting both were and doubt, implied
with order, to them called Hurst Mr. when description, this answered
all As forward. going was what to inattention their of complaints bitter
the left afterwards soon Elizabeth end, an at thereby was conversation
room.

her, on closed was door the when Bingley, Miss said Bennet,” “Elizabeth
the to themselves recommend to seek who ladies young those of one “is
it say, dare I men, many with and own; their undervaluing by sex other
art.” mean very a device, paltry a is it opinion, my in But, succeeds.

addressed, chiefly was remark this whom to Darcy, replied “Undoubtedly,”
condescend sometimes ladies which arts the _all_ in meanness a is “there
is cunning to affinity bears Whatever captivation. for employ to
despicable.”

to as reply this with satisfied entirely so not was Bingley Miss
subject. the continue

and worse, was sister her that say to only again them joined Elizabeth
for sent being Jones Mr. urged Bingley her. leave not could she that
could advice country no that convinced sisters, his while immediately;
most the of one for town to express an recommended service, any of be
so not was she but of; hear not would she This physicians. eminent
settled was it and proposal; brother’s their with comply to unwilling
Bennet Miss if morning, the in early for sent be should Jones Mr. that
sisters his uncomfortable; quite was Bingley better. decidedly not were
wretchedness, their solaced They miserable. were they that declared
relief better no find could he while supper, after duets by however,
every that directions housekeeper his giving by than feelings his to
sister. her and lady sick the to paid be might attention



9 Chapter


the in and room, sister’s her in night the of chief the passed Elizabeth
the to answer tolerable a send to able being of pleasure the had morning
housemaid, a by Bingley Mr. from received early very she which inquiries
his on waited who ladies elegant two the from afterwards time some and
a have to requested she however, amendment, this of spite In sisters.
her form and Jane, visit to mother her desiring Longbourn, to sent note
and dispatched, immediately was note The situation. her of judgement own
her by accompanied Bennet, Mrs. with. complied quickly as contents its
breakfast. family the after soon Netherfield reached girls, youngest two

been have would Bennet Mrs. danger, apparent any in Jane found she Had
was illness her that her seeing on satisfied being but miserable; very
her as immediately, recovering her of wish no had she alarming, not
She Netherfield. from her remove probably would health to restoration
carried being of proposal daughter’s her to therefore, listen, not would
think time, same the about arrived who apothecary, the did neither home;
Miss on Jane, with while little a sitting After advisable. all at it
all daughters three and mother the invitation, and appearance Bingley’s
hopes with them met Bingley parlour. breakfast the into her attended
expected. she than worse Bennet Miss found not had Bennet Mrs. that

be to ill too deal great a is “She answer. her was sir,” have, I “Indeed
trespass must We her. moving of think not must we says Jones Mr. moved.
kindness.” your on longer little a

am I sister, My of. thought be not must “It Bingley. cried “Removed!”
removal.” her of hear not will sure,

civility, cold with Bingley, Miss said Madam,” it, upon depend may “You
she while attention possible every receive will Bennet Miss “that
us.” with remains

acknowledgments. her in profuse was Bennet Mrs.

not do I friends good such for not was it “if added, she sure,” am “I
suffers and indeed, ill very is she for her, of become would what know
is which world, the in patience greatest the with though deal, vast a
sweetest the exception, without has, she for her, with way the always
are they girls other my tell often I with. met ever have I temper
a and Bingley, Mr. here, room sweet a have You _her_. to nothing
the in place a know not do I walk. gravel the over prospect charming
it quitting of think not will You Netherfield. to equal is that country
lease.” short a but have you though hope, I hurry, a in

I if therefore “and he; replied hurry,” a in done is do I “Whatever
five in off be probably should I Netherfield, quit to resolve should
here.” fixed quite as myself consider I however, present, At minutes.

Elizabeth. said you,” of supposed have should I what exactly is “That

her. towards turning he, cried you?” do me, comprehend to begin “You

perfectly.” you understand yes--I “Oh!

seen easily so be to but compliment; a for this take might I wish “I
pitiful.” is afraid am I through

intricate deep, a that follow not does It happens. it as is “That
yours.” as one a such than estimable less or more is character

in on run not do and are, you where “remember mother, her cried “Lizzy,”
home.” at do to suffered are you that manner wild the

a were you “that immediately, Bingley continued before,” know not did “I
study.” amusing an be must It character. of studier

at have They amusing. _most_ the are characters intricate but “Yes,
advantage.” that least

for subjects few a but supply general in “can Darcy, said country,” “The
and confined very a in move you neighbourhood country a In study. a such
society.” unvarying

be to new something is there that much, so alter themselves people “But
ever.” for them in observed

mentioning of manner his by offended Bennet, Mrs. cried indeed,” “Yes,
_that_ of much as quite is there you assure “I neighbourhood. country a
town.” in as country the in on going

moment, a for her at looking after Darcy, and surprised, was Everybody
complete a gained had she fancied who Bennet, Mrs. away. silently turned
triumph. her continued him, over victory

for country, the over advantage great any has London that see cannot “I
deal vast a is country The places. public and shops the except part, my
Bingley?” Mr. not, it is pleasanter,

it; leave to wish never “I replied, he country,” the in am I “When
their each have They same. the much pretty is it town in am I when and
either.” in happy equally be can I and advantages,

that But disposition. right the have you because is “Aye--that
nothing was country the think to “seemed Darcy, at looking gentleman,”
all.” at

her for blushing Elizabeth, said mistaken,” are you Mamma, “Indeed,
not was there that meant only He Darcy. Mr. mistook quite “You mother.
town, the in as country the in with met be to people of variety a such
true.” be to acknowledge must you which

meeting not to as but were; there said nobody dear, my “Certainly,
few are there believe I neighbourhood, this in people many with
families.” four-and-twenty with dine we know I larger. neighbourhoods

his keep to Bingley enable could Elizabeth for concern but Nothing
towards eyes her directed and delicate, less was sister His countenance.
of sake the for Elizabeth, smile. expressive very a with Darcy Mr.
if her asked now thoughts, mother’s her turn might that something saying
away. coming _her_ since Longbourn at been had Lucas Charlotte

Sir man agreeable an What father. her with yesterday called she “Yes,
So fashion! of man the much So he? not is Bingley, Mr. is, William
_That_ everybody. to say to something always has He easy! and genteel
very themselves fancy who persons those and breeding; good of idea my is
matter.” the mistake quite mouths, their open never and important,

you?” with dine Charlotte “Did

For mince-pies. the about wanted was she fancy I home. go would she “No,
work; own their do can that servants keep always I Bingley, Mr. part, my
to is everybody But differently. very up brought are daughters _my_
girls, of sort good very a are Lucases the and themselves, for judge
think I that Not handsome! not are they pity a is It you. assure I
friend.” particular our is she then plain--but _very_ so Charlotte

woman.” young pleasant very a seems “She

herself Lucas Lady plain. very is she own must you but yes; dear, “Oh!
boast to like not do I beauty. Jane’s me envied and so, said often has
anybody see often not does Jane--one sure, be to but child, own my of
own my trust not do I says. everybody what is It looking. better
brother my at man a was there fifteen, only was she When partiality.
was sister-in-law my that her with love in much so town in Gardiner’s
he however, But, away. came we before offer an her make would he sure
verses some wrote he However, young. too her thought he Perhaps not. did
were.” they pretty very and her, on

has “There impatiently. Elizabeth said affection,” his ended so “And
first who wonder I way. same the in overcome fancy, I one, a many been
love!” away driving in poetry of efficacy the discovered

Darcy. said love,” of _food_ the as poetry consider to used been have “I

is what nourishes Everything may. it love healthy stout, fine, a “Of
I inclination, of sort thin slight, a only be it if But already. strong
away.” entirely it starve will sonnet good one that convinced am

Elizabeth made ensued which pause general the and smiled; only Darcy
to longed She again. herself exposing be should mother her lest tremble
Mrs. silence short a after and say; to nothing of think could but speak,
to kindness his for Bingley Mr. to thanks her repeating began Bennet
was Bingley Mr. Lizzy. with also him troubling for apology an with Jane,
be to sister younger his forced and answer, his in civil unaffectedly
part her performed She required. occasion the what say and also, civil
and satisfied, was Bennet Mrs. but graciousness, much without indeed
of youngest the signal, this Upon carriage. her ordered afterwards soon
to whispering been had girls two The forward. herself put daughters her
the that was, it of result the and visit, whole the during other each
coming first his on promised having with Bingley Mr. tax should youngest
Netherfield. at ball a give to country the into

complexion fine a with fifteen, of girl well-grown stout, a was Lydia
whose mother, her with favourite a countenance; good-humoured and
high had She age. early an at public into her brought had affection
the which self-consequence, natural of sort a and spirits, animal
own her and dinners, good uncle’s her whom to officers, the of attention
very was She assurance. into increased had her, recommended manners easy
and ball, the of subject the on Bingley Mr. address to therefore, equal,
most the be would it that adding, promise; his of him reminded abruptly
this to answer His it. keep not did he if world the in thing shameful
ear: mother’s their to delightful was attack sudden

when and engagement; my keep to you, assure I ready, perfectly am “I
of day very the name please, you if shall, you recovered, is sister your
ill.” is she when dancing be to wish not would you But ball. the

to better much be would yes--it “Oh! satisfied. herself declared Lydia
Carter Captain likely most time that by and well, was Jane till wait
she ball,” _your_ given have you when And again. Meryton at be would
Colonel tell shall I also. one giving their on insist shall “I added,
not.” does he if shame a quite be will it Forster

returned Elizabeth and departed, then daughters her and Bennet Mrs.
the to behaviour relations’ her and own her leaving Jane, to instantly
however, whom, of latter the Darcy; Mr. and ladies two the of remarks
of spite in _her_, of censure their in join to on prevailed be not could
eyes_. _fine on witticisms Bingley’s Miss all



10 Chapter


Miss and Hurst Mrs. done. had before day the as much passed day The
who invalid, the with morning the of hours some spent had Bingley
joined Elizabeth evening the in and mend; to slowly, though continued,
appear. not did however, loo-table, The drawing-room. the in party their
watching was him, near seated Bingley, Miss and writing, was Darcy Mr.
by attention his off calling repeatedly and letter his of progress the
and piquet, at were Bingley Mr. and Hurst Mr. sister. his to messages
game. their observing was Hurst Mrs.

in amused sufficiently was and needlework, some up took Elizabeth
perpetual The companion. his and Darcy between passed what to attending
evenness the on or handwriting, his on either lady, the of commendations
unconcern perfect the with letter, his of length the on or lines, his of
was and dialogue, curious a formed received, were praises her which with
each. of opinion her with union in exactly

letter!” a such receive to be will Darcy Miss delighted “How

answer. no made He

fast.” uncommonly write “You

slowly.” rather write I mistaken. are “You

a of course the in write to occasion have must you letters many “How
them!” think should I odious How too! business, of Letters year!

yours.” of instead lot my to fall they that then, fortunate, is “It

her.” see to long I that sister your tell “Pray

desire.” your by once, so her told already have “I

mend I you. for it mend me Let pen. your like not do you afraid am “I
well.” remarkably pens

own.” my mend always I you--but “Thank

even?” so write to contrive you can “How

silent. was He

harp; the on improvement her of hear to delighted am I sister your “Tell
beautiful her with raptures in quite am I that know her let pray and
Miss to superior infinitely it think I and table, a for design little
Grantley’s.”

At again? write I till raptures your defer to leave me give you “Will
justice.” them do to room not have I present

you do But January. in her see shall I consequence. no of is it “Oh!
Darcy?” Mr. her, to letters long charming such write always

me for not is it charming always whether but long; generally are “They
determine.” to

with letter long a write can who person a that me, with rule a is “It
ill.” write cannot ease,

her cried Caroline,” Darcy, to compliment a for do not will “That
for much too studies He ease. with write _not_ does he “because brother,
Darcy?” you, not Do syllables. four of words

yours.” from different very is writing of style “My

way careless most the in writes “Charles Bingley, Miss cried “Oh!”
rest.” the blots and words, his half out leaves He imaginable.

which them--by express to time not have I that rapidly so flow ideas “My
correspondents.” my to all at ideas no convey sometimes letters my means

reproof.” disarm “must Elizabeth, said Bingley,” Mr. humility, “Your

of appearance the “than Darcy, said deceitful,” more is “Nothing
an sometimes and opinion, of carelessness only often is It humility.
boast.” indirect

modesty?” of piece recent little _my_ call you do two the of which “And

in defects your of proud really are you for boast; indirect “The
of rapidity a from proceeding as them consider you because writing,
you estimable, not if which, execution, of carelessness and thought
with anything doing of power The interesting. highly least at think
any without often and possessor, the by much prized always is quickness
Mrs. told you When performance. the of imperfection the to attention
Netherfield quitting upon resolved ever you if that morning this Bennet
of sort a be to it meant you minutes, five in gone be should you
very so there is what yet yourself--and to compliment of panegyric,
business necessary very leave must which precipitance a in laudable
else?” anyone or yourself to advantage real no of be can and undone,

the all night at remember to much, too is “this Bingley, cried “Nay,”
honour, my upon yet, And morning. the in said were that things foolish
this at it believe I and true, be to myself of said I what believe I
needless of character the assume not did I therefore, least, At moment.
ladies.” the before off show to merely precipitance

that convinced means no by am I but it; believed you say dare “I
as quite be would conduct Your celerity. such with gone be would you
were you as if, and know; I man any of that as chance on dependent
better had you ‘Bingley, say, to were friend a horse, your mounting
not probably would you it, do probably would you week,’ next till stay
month.” a stay might word, another at go--and

did Bingley Mr. “that Elizabeth, cried this,” by proved only have “You
much now off him shown have You disposition. own his to justice do not
himself.” did he than more

my what converting your “by Bingley, said gratified,” exceedingly am “I
am I But temper. my of sweetness the on compliment a into says friend
means no by did gentleman that which turn a it giving are you afraid
a such under if me, of better think certainly would he for intend;
I as fast as off ride and denial, flat a give to were I circumstance
could.”

intentions original your of rashness the consider then Darcy Mr. “Would
it?” to adhering in obstinacy your by for atoned as

for speak must Darcy matter; the explain exactly cannot I word, my “Upon
himself.”

mine, call to choose you which opinions for account to me expect “You
to however, case, the Allowing acknowledged. never have I which but
Bennet, Miss remember, must you representation, your to according stand
and house, the to return his desire to supposed is who friend the that
offering without it asked it, desired merely has plan, his of delay the
propriety.” its of favour in argument one

merit no is friend a of _persuasion_ the readily--easily--to yield “To
you.” with

of understanding the to compliment no is conviction without yield “To
either.”

of influence the for nothing allow to Darcy, Mr. me, to appear “You
make often would requester the for regard A affection. and friendship
reason to arguments for waiting without request, a to yield readily one
have you as case a such of speaking particularly not am I it. into one
the till perhaps, wait, well as may We Bingley. Mr. about supposed
behaviour his of discretion the discuss we before occurs circumstance
friend, and friend between cases ordinary and general in But thereupon.
no of resolution a change to other the by desired is them of one where
complying for person that of ill think you should moment, great very
it?” into argued be to waiting without desire, the with

to subject, this on proceed we before advisable, be not it “Will
to is which importance of degree the precision more rather with arrange
subsisting intimacy of degree the as well as request, this to appertain
parties?” the between

not particulars, the all hear us “let Bingley; cried means,” all “By
more have will that for size; and height comparative their forgetting
assure I of. aware be may you than Bennet, Miss argument, the in weight
with comparison in fellow, tall great a such not were Darcy if that you,
not do I declare I deference. much so half him pay not should I myself,
in and occasions, particular on Darcy, than object awful more a know
evening, Sunday a of and especially, house own his at places; particular
do.” to nothing has he when

was he that perceive could she thought Elizabeth but smiled; Darcy Mr.
warmly Bingley Miss laugh. her checked therefore and offended, rather
her with expostulation an in received, had he indignity the resented
nonsense. such talking for brother

argument, an dislike “You friend. his said Bingley,” design, your see “I
this.” silence to want and

Miss and you If disputes. like much too are Arguments do. I “Perhaps
very be shall I room, the of out am I till yours defer will Bennet
me.” of like you whatever say may you then and thankful;

Mr. and side; my on sacrifice no “is Elizabeth, said ask,” you “What
letter.” his finish better much had Darcy

letter. his finish did and advice, her took Darcy Mr.

Elizabeth and Bingley Miss to applied he over, was business that When
alacrity some with moved Bingley Miss music. some of indulgence an for
lead would Elizabeth that request polite a after and, pianoforte; the to
she negatived, earnestly more and politely as other the which way the
herself. seated

employed, thus were they while and sister, her with sang Hurst Mrs.
music-books some over turned she as observing, help not could Elizabeth
fixed were eyes Darcy’s Mr. frequently how instrument, the on lay that
of object an be could she that suppose to how knew hardly She her. on
her at look should he that yet and man; a great so to admiration
imagine, only could She strange. more still was her, disliked he because
something was there because notice his drew she that last at however,
in than right, of ideas his to according reprehensible, and wrong more
liked She her. pain not did supposition The present. person other any
approbation. his for care to little too him

by charm the varied Bingley Miss songs, Italian some playing After
near drawing Darcy, Mr. afterwards soon and air; Scotch lively a
her: to said Elizabeth,

an such seize to Bennet, Miss inclination, great a feel you not “Do
reel?” a dancing of opportunity

some with question, the repeated He answer. no made but smiled, She
silence. her at surprise

immediately not could I but before, you heard “I she, said “Oh!”
‘Yes,’ say to know, I me, wanted You reply. in say to what determine
always I but taste; my despising of pleasure the have might you that
of person a cheating and schemes, of kind those overthrowing in delight
tell to mind my up made therefore, have, I contempt. premeditated their
if me despise now all--and at reel a dance to want not do I that you,
dare.” you

dare.” not do I “Indeed

his at amazed was him, affront to expected rather having Elizabeth,
her in archness and sweetness of mixture a was there but gallantry;
Darcy and anybody; affront to her for difficult it made which manner
really He her. by was he as woman any by bewitched so been never had
he connections, her of inferiority the for not it were that believed,
danger. some in be should

great her and jealous; be to enough suspected or saw, Bingley Miss
some received Jane friend dear her of recovery the for anxiety
Elizabeth. of rid getting of desire her from assistance

of talking by guest, her disliking into Darcy provoke to tried often She
alliance. an such in happiness his planning and marriage, supposed their

shrubbery the in together walking were they as she, said hope,” “I
this when hints, few a mother-in-law your give will “you day, next the
tongue; her holding of advantage the to as place, takes event desirable
after running of girls younger the cure do it, compass can you if and
to endeavour subject, a delicate so mention may I if And, officers.
impertinence, and conceit on bordering something, little that check
possesses.” lady your which

felicity?” domestic my for propose to else anything you “Have

placed be Phillips aunt and uncle your of portraits the let Do yes. “Oh!
the great-uncle your to next them Put Pemberley. at gallery the in
different in only know, you profession, same the in are They judge.
for taken, it have not must you picture, Elizabeth’s your for As lines.
eyes?” beautiful those to justice do could painter what

their but expression, their catch to indeed, easy, be not would “It
be might fine, remarkably so eyelashes, the and shape, and colour
copied.”

and Hurst Mrs. by walk another from met were they moment that At
herself. Elizabeth

some in Bingley, Miss said walk,” to intended you that know not did “I
overheard. been had they lest confusion,

without away “running Hurst, Mrs. answered ill,” abominably us used “You
out.” coming were you that us telling

walk to Elizabeth left she Darcy, Mr. of arm disengaged the taking Then
rudeness, their felt Darcy Mr. three. admitted just path The herself. by
said: immediately and

the into go better had We party. our for enough wide not is walk “This
avenue.”

them, with remain to inclination least the not had who Elizabeth, But
answered: laughingly

appear and grouped, charmingly are You are. you where stay no; “No,
a admitting by spoilt be would picturesque The advantage. uncommon to
Good-bye.” fourth.

of hope the in about, rambled she as rejoicing off, gaily ran then She
recovered much so already was Jane two. or day a in again home at being
evening. that hours of couple a for room her leaving intend to as



11 Chapter


her to up ran Elizabeth dinner, after removed ladies the When
the into her attended cold, from guarded well her seeing and sister,
many with friends two her by welcomed was she where drawing-room,
agreeable so them seen never had Elizabeth and pleasure; of professions
appeared. gentlemen the before passed which hour the during were they as
an describe could They considerable. were conversation of powers Their
laugh and humour, with anecdote an relate accuracy, with entertainment
spirit. with acquaintance their at

object; first the longer no was Jane entered, gentlemen the when But
had she and Darcy, toward turned instantly were eyes Bingley’s Miss
addressed He steps. many advanced had he before him to say to something
also Hurst Mr. congratulation; polite a with Bennet, Miss to himself
diffuseness but glad;” “very was he said and bow, slight a her made
and joy of full was He salutation. Bingley’s for remained warmth and
she lest fire, the up piling in spent was half-hour first The attention.
desire his at removed she and room; of change the from suffer should
from further be might she that fireplace, the of side other the to
anyone to scarcely talked and her, by down sat then He door. the
great with all it saw corner, opposite the in work at Elizabeth, else.
delight.

the of sister-in-law his reminded Hurst Mr. over, was tea When
Mr. that intelligence private obtained had She vain. in card-table--but
open his even found soon Hurst Mr. and cards; for wish not did Darcy
and play, to intended one no that him assured She rejected. petition
Mr. her. justify to seemed subject the on party whole the of silence the
the of one on himself stretch to but do, to nothing therefore had Hurst
same; the did Bingley Miss book; a up took Darcy sleep. to go and sofas
bracelets her with playing in occupied principally Hurst, Mrs. and
Miss with conversation brother’s her in then and now joined rings, and
Bennet.

Mr. watching in engaged much as quite was attention Bingley’s Miss
she and own; her reading in as book, _his_ through progress Darcy’s
She page. his at looking or inquiry, some making either perpetually was
her answered merely he conversation; any to however, him, win not could
be to attempt the by exhausted quite length, At on. read and question,
the was it because chosen only had she which book, own her with amused
pleasant “How said, and yawn great a gave she his, of volume second
no is there all after declare I way! this in evening an spend to is it
a of than anything of tires one sooner much How reading! like enjoyment
not have I if miserable be shall I own, my of house a have I When book!
library.” excellent an

and book, her aside threw again, yawned then She reply. any made one No
hearing when amusement; some for quest in room the round eyes her cast
suddenly turned she Bennet, Miss to ball a mentioning brother her
said: and him towards

at dance a meditating in serious really you are Charles, bye, the “By
consult to it, on determine you before you, advise would I Netherfield?
are there if mistaken much am I party; present the of wishes the
a than punishment a rather be would ball a whom to us among some not
pleasure.”

he if bed, to go may “he brother, her cried Darcy,” mean you “If
settled a quite is it ball, the for as begins--but it before chooses,
send shall I enough, soup white made has Nicholls as soon as and thing;
cards.” my round

were they “if replied, she better,” infinitely balls like should “I
insufferably something is there but manner; different a in on carried
much be surely would It meeting. a such of process usual the in tedious
of order the made were dancing of instead conversation if rational more
day.” the

be not would it but say, dare I Caroline, dear my rational, more “Much
ball.” a like much so near

walked and up got she afterwards soon and answer, no made Bingley Miss
but well; walked she and elegant, was figure Her room. the about
In studious. inflexibly still was aimed, all was it whom at Darcy,
and, more, effort one on resolved she feelings, her of desperation the
said: Elizabeth, to turning

a take and example, my follow to you persuade me let Bennet, Eliza “Miss
so sitting after refreshing very is it you assure I room. the about turn
attitude.” one in long

Bingley Miss immediately. it to agreed but surprised, was Elizabeth
looked Darcy Mr. civility; her of object real the in less no succeeded
as quarter that in attention of novelty the to awake much as was He up.
was He book. his closed unconsciously and be, could herself Elizabeth
that observing it, declined he but party, their join to invited directly
down and up walk to choosing their for motives two but imagine could he
would them joining his motives which of either with together, room the
his be could what know to dying was She mean? he could “What interfere.
him? understand all at could she whether Elizabeth asked meaning?”--and

severe be to means he it, upon depend “but answer; her was all,” at “Not
nothing ask to be will him disappointing of way surest our and us, on
it.” about

in Darcy Mr. disappointing of incapable was however, Bingley, Miss
his of explanation an requiring in therefore persevered and anything,
motives. two

soon as he, said them,” explaining to objection smallest the not have “I
passing of method this choose either “You speak. to him allowed she as
secret have and confidence, other’s each in are you because evening the
figures your that conscious are you because or discuss, to affairs
be would I first, the if walking; in advantage greatest the to appear
better much you admire can I second, the if and way, your in completely
fire.” the by sit I as

so anything heard never “I Bingley. Miss cried shocking!” “Oh!
speech?” a such for him punish we shall How abominable.

“We Elizabeth. said inclination,” the but have you if easy, so “Nothing
Intimate him. at him--laugh Tease another. one punish and plague all can
done.” be to is it how know must you are, you as

has intimacy my that you assure do I _not_. do I honour, my upon “But
of presence and manner of calmness Tease _that_. me taught yet not
will we laughter, to as And there. us defy may he feel I no; No, mind!
a without laugh to attempting by please, you if ourselves, expose not
himself.” hug may Darcy Mr. subject.

an is “That Elizabeth. cried at!” laughed be to not is Darcy “Mr.
would it for continue, will it hope I uncommon and advantage, uncommon
a love dearly I acquaintances. such many have to _me_ to loss great a be
laugh.”

be. can than credit more me given “has he, said Bingley,” “Miss
their of best and wisest the men--nay, of best the and wisest The
in object first whose person a by ridiculous rendered be actions--may
joke.” a is life

I hope I but people, such are Elizabeth--“there replied “Certainly,”
good. and wise is what ridicule never I hope I _them_. of one not am
own, I me, divert _do_ inconsistencies, and whims nonsense, and Follies
precisely are suppose, I these, But can. I whenever them at laugh I and
without.” are you what

study the been has it But anyone. for possible not is that “Perhaps
strong a expose often which weaknesses those avoid to life my of
ridicule.” to understanding

pride.” and vanity as “Such

real a is there pride--where But indeed. weakness a is vanity “Yes,
regulation.” good under always be will pride mind, of superiority

smile. a hide to away turned Elizabeth

Bingley; Miss said presume,” I over, is Darcy Mr. of examination “Your
result?” the is what pray “and

it owns He defect. no has Darcy Mr. that it by convinced perfectly am “I
disguise.” without himself

enough, faults have I pretension. such no made have “I Darcy, said “No,”
vouch not dare I temper My understanding. of hope, I not, are they but
the for little too yielding--certainly little too believe, I is, It for.
others of vices and follies the forget cannot I world. the of convenience
feelings My myself. against offenses their nor ought, I as soon so
temper My them. move to attempt every with about puffed not are
lost is lost, once opinion good My resentful. called be perhaps would
forever.”

resentment “Implacable Elizabeth. cried indeed!” failing a is “_That_
I well. fault your chosen have you But character. a in shade a _is_
me.” from safe are You it. at _laugh_ cannot really

particular some to tendency a disposition every in believe, I is, “There
overcome.” can education best the even not which defect, natural evil--a

everybody.” hate to is defect _your_ “And

misunderstand to willfully “is smile, a with replied he yours,” “And
them.”

a of tired Bingley, Miss cried music,” little a have us let “Do
my mind not will you “Louisa, share. no had she which in conversation
Hurst?” Mr. waking

was pianoforte the and objection, smallest the not had sister Her
for sorry not was recollection, moments’ few a after Darcy, and opened;
attention. much too Elizabeth paying of danger the feel to began He it.



12 Chapter


the wrote Elizabeth sisters, the between agreement an of consequence In
for sent be might carriage the that beg to mother, their to morning next
on calculated had who Bennet, Mrs. But day. the of course the in them
which Tuesday, following the till Netherfield at remaining daughters her
receive to herself bring not could week, Jane’s finish exactly would
at propitious, not was therefore, answer, Her before. pleasure with them
Mrs. home. get to impatient was she for wishes, Elizabeth’s to not least
carriage the have possibly not could they that word them sent Bennet
Bingley Mr. if that added, was it postscript her in and Tuesday; before
them spare could she longer, stay to them pressed sister his and
positively was Elizabeth however, longer, staying Against well. very
the on fearful, and asked; be would it expect much she did resolved--nor
long, needlessly themselves intruding as considered being as contrary,
at and immediately, carriage Bingley’s Mr. borrow to Jane urged she
Netherfield leaving of design original their that settled was it length
made. request the and mentioned, be should morning that

was enough and concern; of professions many excited communication The
work to day following the till least at stay to them wishing of said
was Bingley Miss deferred. was going their morrow the till and Jane; on
dislike and jealousy her for delay, the proposed had she that sorry then
other. the for affection her exceeded much sister one of

so go to were they that sorrow real with heard house the of master The
be not would it that Bennet Miss persuade to tried repeatedly and soon,
where firm was Jane but recovered; enough not was she her--that for safe
right. be to herself felt she

at been had intelligence--Elizabeth welcome was it Darcy Mr. To
Miss liked--and he than more him attracted She enough. long Netherfield
himself. to usual than teasing more and _her_, to uncivil was Bingley
admiration of sign no that careful particularly be to resolved wisely He
hope the with her elevate could that nothing him, escape _now_ should
been had idea an such if that sensible felicity; his influencing of
weight material have must day last the during behaviour his suggested,
spoke scarcely he purpose, his to Steady it. crushing or confirming in
were they though and Saturday, of whole the through her to words ten
most adhered he half-an-hour, for themselves by left time one at
her. at look even not would and book, his to conscientiously

almost to agreeable so separation, the service, morning after Sunday, On
last at increased Elizabeth to civility Bingley’s Miss place. took all,
parted, they when and Jane; for affection her as well as rapidly, very
her give always would it pleasure the of latter the assuring after
most her embracing and Netherfield, or Longbourn at either her see to
of leave took Elizabeth former. the with hands shook even she tenderly,
spirits. of liveliest the in party whole the

Bennet Mrs. mother. their by cordially very home welcomed not were They
much so give to wrong very them thought and coming, their at wondered
their But again. cold caught have would Jane sure was and trouble,
really was pleasure, of expressions his in laconic very though father,
The circle. family the in importance their felt had he them; see to glad
of much lost had assembled, all were they when conversation, evening
and Jane of absence the by sense its all almost and animation, its
Elizabeth.

human and thorough-bass of study the in deep usual, as Mary, found They
of observations new some and admire, to extracts some had and nature;
information had Lydia and Catherine to. listen to morality threadbare
said been had much and done been had Much sort. different a of them for
officers the of several Wednesday; preceding the since regiment the in
it and flogged, been had private a uncle, their with lately dined had
married. be to going was Forster Colonel that hinted been actually had



13 Chapter


at were they as wife, his to Bennet Mr. said dear,” my hope, “I
to-day, dinner good a ordered have you “that morning, next the breakfast
party.” family our to addition an expect to reason have I because

sure, am I coming, is that nobody of know I dear? my mean, you do “Who
dinners _my_ hope I in--and call to happen should Lucas Charlotte unless
home.” at such sees often she believe not do I her. for enough good are

stranger.” a and gentleman, a is speak I whom of person “The

Mr. is It stranger! a and gentleman “A sparkled. eyes Bennet’s Mrs.
Mr. see to glad extremely be shall I sure am I Well, sure! am I Bingley,
be to fish of bit a not is There unlucky! how Lord! But--good Bingley.
this Hill to speak must bell--I the ring love, my Lydia, to-day. got
moment.”

I whom person a is “it husband; her said Bingley,” Mr. _not_ is “It
life.” my of course whole the in saw never

being of pleasure the had he and astonishment; general a roused This
once. at daughters five his and wife his by questioned eagerly

explained: thus he curiosity, their with time some himself amusing After

ago fortnight a about and letter; this received I ago month a “About
requiring and delicacy, some of case a it thought I for it, answered I
dead, am I when who, Collins, Mr. cousin, my from is It attention. early
pleases.” he as soon as house this of out all you turn may

mentioned. that hear to bear cannot “I wife, his cried dear,” my “Oh!
thing hardest the is it think do I man. odious that of talk not do Pray
own your from away entailed be should estate your that world, the in
ago long tried have should I you, been had I if sure, am I and children;
it.” about other or something do to

They entail. an of nature the her to explain to tried Elizabeth and Jane
which on subject a was it but before, it do to attempted often had
rail to continued she and reason, of reach the beyond was Bennet Mrs.
of family a from away estate an settling of cruelty the against bitterly
about. anything cared nobody whom man a of favour in daughters, five

“and Bennet, Mr. said affair,” iniquitous most a is certainly “It
Longbourn. inheriting of guilt the from Collins Mr. clear can nothing
little a be perhaps may you letter, his to listen will you if But
himself.” expressing of manner his by softened

of impertinent very is it think I and not; shall I sure am I that “No,
false such hate I hypocritical. very and all, at you to write to him
did father his as you, with quarreling on keep not he could Why friends.
him?” before

that on scruples filial some had have to seem does he indeed; “Why,
hear.” will you as head,

October. 15th Kent, Westerham, near “Hunsford,

Sir,-- “Dear

honoured late my and yourself between subsisting disagreement “The
the had have I since and uneasiness, much me gave always father
but breach; the heal to wished frequently have I him, lose to misfortune
might it lest fearing doubts, own my by back kept was I time some for
anyone with terms good on be to me for memory his to disrespectful seem
Mrs. variance.--‘There, at be to him pleased always had it whom with
having for subject, the on up made now is however, mind, Bennet.’--My
be to as fortunate so been have I Easter, at ordination received
de Catherine Lady Honourable Right the of patronage the by distinguished
has beneficence and bounty whose Bourgh, de Lewis Sir of widow Bourgh,
be shall it where parish, this of rectory valuable the to me preferred
her towards respect grateful with myself demean to endeavour earnest my
which ceremonies and rites those perform to ready ever be and ladyship,
I moreover, clergyman, a As England. of Church the by instituted are
in peace of blessing the establish and promote to duty my it feel
I grounds these on and influence; my of reach the within families all
and commendable, highly are overtures present my that myself flatter
estate Longbourn of entail the in next being my of circumstance the that
the reject to you lead not and side, your on overlooked kindly be will
the being at concerned than otherwise be cannot I olive-branch. offered
for apologise to leave beg and daughters, amiable your injuring of means
possible every them make to readiness my of you assure to as well as it,
to objection no have should you If hereafter. this of amends--but
waiting of satisfaction the myself propose I house, your into me receive
and o’clock, four by 18th, November Monday, family, your and you on
se’ennight Saturday the till hospitality your on trespass probably shall
Catherine Lady as inconvenience, any without do can I which following,
provided Sunday, a on absence occasional my to objecting from far is
day.--I the of duty the do to engaged is clergyman other some that
and lady your to compliments respectful with sir, dear remain,
friend, and well-wisher your daughters,

COLLINS” “WILLIAM

gentleman,” peace-making this expect may we therefore, o’clock, four “At
most a be to seems “He letter. the up folded he as Bennet, Mr. said
will not doubt I and word, my upon man, young polite and conscientious
so be should Catherine Lady if especially acquaintance, valuable a prove
again.” us to come him let to as indulgent

if and however, girls, the about says he what in sense some is “There
to person the be not shall I amends, any them make to disposed is he
him.” discourage

mean can he way what in guess “to Jane, said difficult,” is it “Though
his to certainly is wish the due, our thinks he atonement the us make to
credit.”

Lady for deference extraordinary his by struck chiefly was Elizabeth
burying and marrying, christening, of intention kind his and Catherine,
required. were it whenever parishioners his

him make cannot “I she. said think,” I oddity, an be must “He
he can what style.--And his in pompous very something is out.--There
he suppose cannot entail?--We the in next being for apologising by mean
sir?” man, sensible a be he could.--Could he if it help would

the quite him finding of hopes great have I not. think I dear, my “No,
his in self-importance and servility of mixture a is There reverse.
him.” see to impatient am I well. promises which letter,

seem not does letter “the Mary, said composition,” of point “In
I yet new, wholly not is perhaps olive-branch the of idea The defective.
expressed.” well is it think

any in were writer its nor letter the neither Lydia, and Catherine To
should cousin their that impossible to next was It interesting. degree
had they since weeks some now was it and coat, scarlet a in come
for As colour. other any in man a of society the from pleasure received
ill-will, her of much away done had letter Collins’s Mr. mother, their
which composure of degree a with him see to preparing was she and
daughters. and husband her astonished

great with received was and time, his to punctual was Collins Mr.
the but little; said indeed Bennet Mr. family. whole the by politeness
in neither seemed Collins Mr. and talk, to enough ready were ladies
a was He himself. silent be to inclined nor encouragement, of need
and grave was air His five-and-twenty. of man young heavy-looking tall,
seated long been not had He formal. very were manners his and stately,
of family a fine so having on Bennet Mrs. complimented he before
this in that but beauty, their of much heard had he said daughters;
did he that added, and truth; the of short fallen had fame instance
This marriage. in of disposed time due in all them seeing her doubt not
Mrs. but hearers; his of some of taste the to much not was gallantry
readily. most answered compliments, no with quarreled who Bennet,

may it heart my all with wish I and sure; am I kind, very are “You
so settled are Things enough. destitute be will they else for so, prove
oddly.”

estate.” this of entail the to perhaps, allude, “You

you girls, poor my to affair grievous a is It indeed. do I sir, “Ah!
things such for _you_, with fault find to mean I that Not confess. must
estates how knowing no is There world. this in chance all are know I
entailed.” be to come they once when go will

and cousins, fair my to hardship the of madam, sensible, very am “I
appearing of cautious am I that but subject, the on much say could
come I that ladies young the assure can I But precipitate. and forward
perhaps, but, more; say not will I present At them. admire to prepared
acquainted--” better are we when

each on smiled girls the and dinner; to summons a by interrupted was He
The admiration. Collins’s Mr. of objects only the not were They other.
praised; and examined were furniture, its all and dining-room, the hall,
Bennet’s Mrs. touched have would everything of commendation his and
his as all it viewing his of supposition mortifying the for but heart,
and admired; highly was turn its in too dinner The property. future own
its of excellency the cousins fair his of which to know to begged he
who Bennet, Mrs. by there right set was he But owing. was cooking
a keep to able well very were they that asperity some with him assured
He kitchen. the in do to nothing had daughters her that and cook, good
declared she tone softened a In her. displeased having for pardon begged
a about for apologise to continued he but offended; all at not herself
hour. an of quarter



14 Chapter


servants the when but all; at spoke scarcely Bennet Mr. dinner, During
his with conversation some have to time it thought he withdrawn, were
to him expected he which in subject a started therefore and guest,
Lady patroness. his in fortunate very seemed he that observing by shine,
for consideration and wishes, his to attention Bourgh’s de Catherine
chosen have not could Bennet Mr. remarkable. very appeared comfort, his
him elevated subject The praise. her in eloquent was Collins Mr. better.
aspect important most a with and manner, of solemnity usual than more to
in behaviour such witnessed life his in never had “he that protested he
himself had he as condescension, and affability rank--such of person a
to pleased graciously been had She Catherine. Lady from experienced
of honour the had already had he which discourses the of both of approve
Rosings, at dine to twice him asked also had She her. before preaching
of pool her up make to before, Saturday the only him for sent had and
many by proud reckoned was Catherine Lady evening. the in quadrille
her. in affability but anything seen never had _he_ but knew, he people
she gentleman; other any to would she as him to spoken always had She
the of society the in joining his to objection smallest the not made
or week a for occasionally parish the leaving his to nor neighbourhood
to him advise to condescended even had She relations. his visit to two,
had and discretion; with chose he provided could, he as soon as marry
perfectly had she where parsonage, humble his in visit a him paid once
vouchsafed even had and making, been had he alterations the all approved
stairs.” up closet the in shelves herself--some some suggest to

“and Bennet, Mrs. said sure,” am I civil, and proper very all is “That
ladies great that pity a is It woman. agreeable very a is she say dare I
sir?” you, near live she Does her. like more not are general in

lane a by only separated is abode humble my stands which in garden “The
residence.” ladyship’s her Park, Rosings from

family?” any she Has sir? widow, a was she said you think “I

very of and Rosings, of heiress the daughter, one only has “She
property.” extensive

than off better is she “then head, her shaking Bennet, Mrs. said “Ah!”
handsome?” she Is she? is lady young of sort what And girls. many

says herself Catherine Lady indeed. lady young charming most a is “She
the to superior far is Bourgh de Miss beauty, true of point in that,
marks which features her in that is there because sex, her of handsomest
sickly a of unfortunately is She birth. distinguished of lady young the
many in progress that making from her prevented has which constitution,
am I as of, failed otherwise have not could she which accomplishments
still who and education, her superintended who lady the by informed
condescends often and amiable, perfectly is she But them. with resides
ponies.” and phaeton little her in abode humble my by drive to

at ladies the among name her remember not do I presented? been she “Has
court.”

town; in being her prevents unhappily health of state indifferent “Her
the deprived has day, one Catherine Lady told I as means, that by and
pleased seemed ladyship Her ornament. brightest its of court British
to occasion every on happy am I that imagine may you and idea; the with
acceptable always are which compliments delicate little those offer
that Catherine, Lady to observed once than more have I ladies. to
most the that and duchess, a be to born seemed daughter charming her
by adorned be would consequence, her giving of instead rank, elevated
and ladyship, her please which things little of kind the are These her.
to bound peculiarly myself conceive I which attention of sort a is it
pay.”

you for happy is it “and Bennet, Mr. said properly,” very judge “You
ask I May delicacy. with flattering of talent the possess you that
the of impulse the from proceed attentions pleasing these whether
study?” previous of result the are or moment,

I though and time, the at passing is what from chiefly arise “They
elegant little such arranging and suggesting with myself amuse sometimes
to wish always I occasions, ordinary to adapted be may as compliments
possible.” as air an unstudied as them give

absurd as was cousin His answered. fully were expectations Bennet’s Mr.
enjoyment, keenest the with him to listened he and hoped, had he as
countenance, of composure resolute most the time same the at maintaining
partner no requiring Elizabeth, at glance occasional an in except and,
pleasure. his in

glad was Bennet Mr. and enough, been had dose the however, tea-time, By
over, was tea when and, again, drawing-room the into guest his take to
readily Collins Mr. ladies. the to aloud read to him invite to glad
everything (for it beholding on but, produced; was book a and assented,
and back, started he library), circulating a from be to it announced
at stared Kitty novels. read never he that protested pardon, begging
some after and produced, were books Other exclaimed. Lydia and him,
the opened he as gaped Lydia Sermons. Fordyce’s chose he deliberation
three read solemnity, monotonous very with had, he before and volume,
with: him interrupted she pages,

away turning of talks Phillips uncle my that mamma, know, you “Do
me told aunt My him. hire will Forster Colonel does, he if and Richard;
more hear to to-morrow Meryton to walk shall I Saturday. on herself so
town.” from back comes Denny Mr. when ask to and it, about

Mr. but tongue; her hold to sisters eldest two her by bid was Lydia
said: and book, his aside laid offended, much Collins,

books by interested are ladies young little how observed often have “I
amazes It benefit. their for solely written though stamp, serious a of
to advantageous so nothing be can there certainly, for, confess; I me,
cousin.” young my importune longer no will I But instruction. as them

at antagonist his as himself offered he Bennet, Mr. to turning Then
acted he that observing challenge, the accepted Bennet Mr. backgammon.
amusements. trifling own their to girls the leaving in wisely very
Lydia’s for civilly most apologised daughters her and Bennet Mrs.
would he if again, occur not should it that promised and interruption,
his bore he that them assuring after Collins, Mr. but book; his resume
any as behaviour her resent never should and ill-will, no cousin young
prepared and Bennet, Mr. with table another at himself seated affront,
backgammon. for



15 Chapter


had nature of deficiency the and man, sensible a not was Collins Mr.
part greatest the society; or education by assisted little but been
and illiterate an of guidance the under spent been having life his of
he universities, the of one to belonged he though and father; miserly
useful any it at forming without terms, necessary the kept merely had
had up him brought had father his which in subjection The acquaintance.
a now was it but manner; of humility great originally him given
in living head, weak a of self-conceit the by counteracted deal good
unexpected and early of feelings consequential the and retirement,
de Catherine Lady to him recommended had chance fortunate A prosperity.
which respect the and vacant; was Hunsford of living the when Bourgh
patroness, his as her for veneration his and rank, high her for felt he
a as authority his of himself, of opinion good very a with mingling
of mixture a altogether him made rector, a as right his and clergyman,
humility. and self-importance obsequiousness, and pride

to intended he income, sufficient very a and house good a now Having
had he family Longbourn the with reconciliation a seeking in and marry;
found he if daughters, the of one choose to meant he as view, in wife a
report. common by represented were they as amiable and handsome as them
father’s their inheriting atonement--for amends--of of plan his was This
and eligibility of full one, excellent an it thought he and estate;
own his on disinterested and generous excessively and suitableness,
part.

face lovely Bennet’s Miss them. seeing on vary not did plan His
what of notions strictest his all established and views, his confirmed
settled his was _she_ evening first the for and seniority; to due was
a in for alteration; an made however, morning, next The choice.
a breakfast, before Bennet Mrs. with tete-a-tete hour’s an of quarter
naturally leading and parsonage-house, his with beginning conversation
at it for found be might mistress a that hopes, his of avowal the to
general and smiles complaisant very amid her, from produced Longbourn,
to “As on. fixed had he Jane very the against caution a encouragement,
could say--she to her upon take not could she daughters, _younger_ her
her prepossession; any of _know_ not did she answer--but positively not
her on incumbent it felt mention--she just must she daughter, _eldest_
engaged.” soon very be to likely was hint, to

soon was it Elizabeth--and to Jane from change to only had Collins Mr.
equally Elizabeth, fire. the stirring was Bennet Mrs. while done--done
course. of her succeeded beauty, and birth in Jane to next

have soon might she that trusted and hint, the up treasured Bennet Mrs.
of speak to bear not could she whom man the and married; daughters two
graces. good her in high now was before day the

sister every forgotten; not was Meryton to walking of intention Lydia’s
them, attend to was Collins Mr. and her; with go to agreed Mary except
him, of rid get to anxious most was who Bennet, Mr. of request the at
followed had Collins Mr. thither for himself; to library his have and
with engaged nominally continue, would he there and breakfast; after him
Mr. to talking really but collection, the in folios largest the of one
Such Hunsford. at garden and house his of cessation, little with Bennet,
been had he library his In exceedingly. Bennet Mr. discomposed doings
told he as prepared, though and tranquillity; and leisure of sure always
the of room other every in conceit and folly with meet to Elizabeth,
therefore, civility, his there; them from free be to used was he house,
their in daughters his join to Collins Mr. inviting in prompt most was
walker a for fitted better much fact in being Collins, Mr. and walk;
go. and book, large his close to pleased extremely was reader, a than

his of that on assents civil and side, his on nothings pompous In
of attention The Meryton. entered they till passed time their cousins,
were eyes Their him. by gained be to longer no then was ones younger the
and officers, the of quest in street the in up wandering immediately
in muslin new really a or indeed, bonnet smart very a than less nothing
them. recall could window, shop a

whom man, young a by caught soon was lady every of attention the But
walking appearance, gentlemanlike most of before, seen never had they
was officer The way. the of side other the on officer another with
came Lydia London from return whose concerning Denny Mr. very the
the with struck were All passed. they as bowed he and inquire, to
Lydia, and Kitty and be; could he who wondered all air, stranger’s
under street, the across way the led out, find to possible if determined
fortunately and shop, opposite an in something wanting of pretense
had back, turning gentlemen, two the when pavement the gained just had
entreated and directly, them addressed Denny Mr. spot. same the reached
with returned had who Wickham, Mr. friend, his introduce to permission
a accepted had say to happy was he and town, from before day the him
the for be; should it as exactly was This corps. their in commission
charming. completely him make to regimentals only wanted man young
of part best the all had he favour; his in greatly was appearance His
address. pleasing very and figure, good a countenance, fine a beauty,
readiness happy a by side his on up followed was introduction The
and correct perfectly time same the at readiness conversation--a of
together talking and standing still were party whole the and unassuming;
Darcy and notice, their drew horses of sound the when agreeably, very
the distinguishing On street. the down riding seen were Bingley and
and them, towards directly came gentlemen two the group, the of ladies
and spokesman, principal the was Bingley civilities. usual the began
to way his on said, he then, was He object. principal the Bennet Miss
corroborated Darcy Mr. her. after inquire to purpose on Longbourn
eyes his fix to not determine to beginning was and bow, a with it
the of sight the by arrested suddenly were they when Elizabeth, on
they as both of countenance the see to happening Elizabeth and stranger,
meeting. the of effect the at astonishment all was other, each at looked
Wickham, Mr. red. other the white, looked one colour, changed Both
just Darcy Mr. which salutation hat--a his touched moments, few a after
to impossible was It it? of meaning the be could What return. to deigned
know. to long to not impossible was it imagine;

what noticed have to seeming without but Bingley, Mr. minute, another In
friend. his with on rode and leave took passed,

of door the to ladies young the with walked Wickham Mr. and Denny Mr.
Lydia’s Miss of spite in bows, their made then and house, Phillip’s Mr.
of spite in even and in, come should they that entreaties pressing
the seconding loudly and window parlour the up throwing Phillips’s Mrs.
invitation.

eldest, two the and nieces; her see to glad always was Phillips Mrs.
was she and welcome, particularly were absence, recent their from
as which, home, return sudden their at surprise her expressing eagerly
nothing known have should she them, fetched not had carriage own their
the in shop-boy Jones’s Mr. see to happened not had she if about,
to draughts more any send to not were they that her told had who street,
civility her when away, come were Bennets Miss the because Netherfield
She him. of introduction Jane’s by Collins Mr. towards claimed was
with returned he which politeness, best very her with him received
previous any without intrusion, his for apologising more, much as
himself, flattering help not could he which her, with acquaintance
who ladies young the to relationship his by justified be might however,
an such by awed quite was Phillips Mrs. notice. her to him introduced
soon was stranger one of contemplation her but breeding; good of excess
whom, of other; the about inquiries and exclamations by end an to put
that knew, already they what nieces her tell only could she however,
a have to was he that and London, from him brought had Denny Mr.
the him watching been had She ----shire. the in commission lieutenant’s
Mr. had and street, the down and up walked he as said, she hour, last
the continued have certainly would Lydia and Kitty appeared, Wickham
the of few a except now windows passed one no unluckily but occupation,
“stupid, become were stranger, the with comparison in who, officers,
Phillipses the with dine to were them of Some fellows.” disagreeable
Mr. on call husband her make to promised aunt their and day, next the
Longbourn from family the if also, invitation an him give and Wickham,
Phillips Mrs. and to, agreed was This evening. the in come would
lottery of game noisy comfortable nice a have would they that protested
such of prospect The afterwards. supper hot of bit little a and tickets,
Mr. spirits. good mutual in parted they and cheering, very was delights
assured was and room, the quitting in apologies his repeated Collins
needless. perfectly were they that civility unwearying with

pass seen had she what Jane to related Elizabeth home, walked they As
either defended have would Jane though but gentlemen; two the between
explain more no could she wrong, the in be to appeared they had both, or
sister. her than behaviour such

admiring by Bennet Mrs. gratified highly return his on Collins Mr.
Lady except that, protested He politeness. and manners Phillips’s Mrs.
woman; elegant more a seen never had he daughter, her and Catherine
even but civility, utmost the with him received only not had she for
although evening, next the for invitation her in him included pointedly
be might supposed, he Something, before. her to unknown utterly
so with met never had he yet but them, with connection his to attributed
life. his of course whole the in attention much



16 Chapter


their with engagement people’s young the to made was objection no As
for Bennet Mrs. and Mr. leaving of scruples Collins’s Mr. all and aunt,
coach the resisted, steadily most were visit his during evening single a
and Meryton; to hour suitable a at cousins five his and him conveyed
drawing-room, the entered they as hearing, of pleasure the had girls the
in then was and invitation, uncle’s their accepted had Wickham Mr. that
house. the

Mr. seats, their taken all had they and given, was information this When
much so was he and admire, and him around look to leisure at was Collins
he declared he that apartment, the of furniture and size the with struck
breakfast summer small the in himself supposed have almost might
much convey first at not did that comparison a Rosings; at parlour
what him from understood Phillips Mrs. when but gratification;
the to listened had she proprietor--when its was who and was, Rosings
found and drawing-rooms, Catherine’s Lady of one only of description
all felt she pounds, hundred eight cost had alone chimney-piece the that
comparison a resented have hardly would and compliment, the of force the
room. housekeeper’s the with

mansion, her and Catherine Lady of grandeur the all her to describing In
and abode, humble own his of praise in digressions occasional with
the until employed happily was he receiving, was it improvements the
attentive very a Phillips Mrs. in found he and them; joined gentlemen
she what with increased consequence his of opinion whose listener,
as neighbours her among all it retail to resolving was who and heard,
cousin, their to listen not could who girls, the To could. she as soon
examine and instrument, an for wish to but do to nothing had who and
the mantelpiece, the on china of imitations indifferent own their
however. last, at over was It long. very appeared waiting of interval
room, the into walked Wickham Mr. when and approach, did gentlemen The
thinking nor before, him seeing been neither had she that felt Elizabeth
admiration. unreasonable of degree smallest the with since, him of
creditable, very a general in were ----shire the of officers The
but party; present the of were them of best the and set, gentlemanlike
and air, countenance, person, in all them beyond far as was Wickham Mr.
Phillips, uncle stuffy broad-faced, the to superior were _they_ as walk,
room. the into them followed who wine, port breathing

was eye female every almost whom towards man happy the was Wickham Mr.
seated finally he whom by woman happy the was Elizabeth and turned,
into fell immediately he which in manner agreeable the and himself;
feel her made night, wet a being its on only was it though conversation,
rendered be might topic threadbare most dullest, commonest, the that
speaker. the of skill the by interesting

the and Wickham Mr. as fair the of notice the for rivals such With
young the to insignificance; into sink to seemed Collins Mr. officers,
kind a intervals at still had he but nothing; was certainly he ladies
abundantly most watchfulness, her by was and Phillips, Mrs. in listener
he placed, were card-tables the When muffin. and coffee with supplied
whist. to down sitting by turn, in her obliging of opportunity the had

glad be shall I “but he, said present,” at game the of little know “I
very was Phillips Mrs. life--” in situation my in for myself, improve to
reason. his for wait not could but compliance, his for glad

he was delight ready with and whist, at play not did Wickham Mr.
there first At Lydia. and Elizabeth between table other the at received
most a was she for entirely, him engrossing Lydia’s of danger seemed
tickets, lottery of fond extremely likewise being but talker; determined
bets making in eager too game, the in interested much too grew soon she
particular. in anyone for attention have to prizes after exclaiming and
therefore was Wickham Mr. game, the of demands common the for Allowing
hear to willing very was she and Elizabeth, to talk to leisure at
be to hope not could she hear to wished chiefly she what though him,
not dared She Darcy. Mr. with acquaintance his of history told--the
unexpectedly was however, curiosity, Her gentleman. that mention even
far how inquired He himself. subject the began Wickham Mr. relieved.
in asked answer, her receiving after and, Meryton; from was Netherfield
there. staying been had Darcy Mr. long how manner hesitating a

subject the let to unwilling then, and Elizabeth; said month,” a “About
I Derbyshire, in property large very of man a is “He added, drop,
understand.”

clear A one. noble a is there estate “his Wickham; Mr. replied “Yes,”
more person a with met have not could You annum. per thousand ten
for myself, than head that on information certain you giving of capable
my from manner particular a in family his with connected been have I
infancy.”

surprised. look but not could Elizabeth

after assertion, an such at Bennet, Miss surprised, be well may “You
meeting our of manner cold very the might, probably you as seeing,
Darcy?” Mr. with acquainted much you Are yesterday.

have “I warmly. very Elizabeth cried be,” to wish ever I as much “As
very him think I and him, with house same the in days four spent
disagreeable.”

being his to “as Wickham, said opinion,” _my_ give to right no have “I
him known have I one. form to qualified not am I otherwise. or agreeable
_me_ for impossible is It judge. fair a be to well too and long too
general in would him of opinion your believe I But impartial. be to
strongly so quite it express not would you perhaps astonish--and
family.” own your in are you Here else. anywhere

in house any in say might I than _here_ more no say I word, my “Upon
in liked all at not is He Netherfield. except neighbourhood, the
find not will You pride. his with disgusted is Everybody Hertfordshire.
anyone.” by of spoken favourably more him

short a after Wickham, said sorry,” be to pretend cannot “I
beyond estimated be not should man any that or he “that interruption,
The happen. often not does it believe I _him_ with but deserts; their
his by frightened or consequence, and fortune his by blinded is world
seen.” be to chooses he as only him sees and manners, imposing and high

an be to acquaintance, slight _my_ on even him, take should “I
head. his shook only Wickham man.” ill-tempered

is he “whether speaking, of opportunity next the at he, said wonder,” “I
longer.” much country this in be to likely

I when away going his of nothing _heard_ I but know; all at not do “I
will ----shire the of favour in plans your hope I Netherfield. at was
neighbourhood.” the in being his by affected be not

_he_ If Darcy. Mr. by away driven be to _me_ for not is no--it “Oh!
terms, friendly on not are We go. must he _me_, seeing avoid to wishes
for reason no have I but him, meet to pain me gives always it and
sense a world, the all before proclaim might I what but _him_ avoiding
he what being his at regrets painful most and ill-usage, great very of
men best the of one was Darcy, Mr. late the Bennet, Miss father, His is.
never can I and had; ever I friend truest the and breathed, ever that
by soul the to grieved being without Darcy Mr. this with company in be
been has myself to behaviour His recollections. tender thousand a
and anything him forgive could I believe verily I but scandalous;
the disgracing and hopes the disappointing his than rather everything,
father.” his of memory

with listened and increase, subject the of interest the found Elizabeth
inquiry. further prevented it of delicacy the but heart; her all

the Meryton, topics, general more on speak to began Wickham Mr.
that all with pleased highly appearing society, the neighbourhood,
very but gentle with latter the of speaking and seen, yet had he
gallantry. intelligible

added, he society,” good and society, constant of prospect the was “It
be to it knew I ----shire. the enter to inducement chief my was “which
me tempted Denny friend my and corps, agreeable respectable, most a
great very the and quarters, present their of account his by further
them. procured had Meryton acquaintances excellent and attentions
and man, disappointed a been have I me. to necessary is own, I Society,
society. and employment have _must_ I solitude. bear not will spirits my
have circumstances but for, intended was I what not is life military A
profession--I my been have to _ought_ church The eligible. it made now
in been have time this at should I and church, the for up brought was
we gentleman the pleased it had living, valuable most a of possession
now.” just of speaking were

“Indeed!”

best the of presentation next the me bequeathed Darcy Mr. late “Yes--the
me. to attached excessively and godfather, my was He gift. his in living
amply, me for provide to meant He kindness. his to justice do cannot I
given was it fell, living the when but it; done had he thought and
elsewhere.”

his could How be? _that_ could how “but Elizabeth; cried heavens!” “Good
redress?” legal seek not you did Why disregarded? be will

to as bequest the of terms the in informality an such just was “There
the doubted have not could honour of man A law. from hope no me give
merely a as it treat to it--or doubt to chose Darcy Mr. but intention,
claim all forfeited had I that assert to and recommendation, conditional
Certain nothing. or anything short imprudence--in extravagance, by it to
was I as exactly ago, years two vacant became living the that is, it
no and man; another to given was it that and it, hold to age an of
done really having of myself accuse cannot I that it, is certain less
and temper, unguarded warm, a have I it. lose to deserve to anything
can I freely. too him, _to_ and him, _of_ opinion my spoken have may I
sort different very are we that is, fact the But worse. nothing recall
me.” hates he that and men, of

disgraced.” publicly be to deserves He shocking! quite is “This

I Till _me_. by be not shall it be--but _will_ he other or time “Some
_him_.” expose or defy never can I father, his forget can

than handsomer him thought and feelings, such for him honoured Elizabeth
them. expressed he as ever

can What motive? his been have “can pause, a after she, said what,” “But
cruelly?” so behave to him induced have

but cannot I which dislike me--a of dislike determined thorough, “A
me liked Darcy Mr. late the Had jealousy. to measure some in attribute
uncommon father’s his but better; me with borne have might son his less,
had He life. in early very believe, I him, irritated me to attachment
sort stood--the we which in competition of sort the bear to temper a not
me.” given often was which preference of

liked never have I this--though as bad so Darcy Mr. thought not had “I
be to him supposed had I him. of ill very so thought not had I him.
of him suspect not did but general, in fellow-creatures his despising
as inhumanity such injustice, such revenge, malicious such to descending
this.”

_do_ “I continued, she however, reflection, minutes’ few a After
of implacability the of Netherfield, at day, one boasting his remember
disposition His temper. unforgiving an having his of resentments, his
dreadful.” be must

hardly can “I Wickham; replied subject,” the on myself trust not will “I
him.” to just be

“To exclaimed, time a after and thought, in deep again was Elizabeth
his of favourite the friend, the godson, the manner a such in treat
very whose _you_, like too, man, young “A added, have could She father!”
herself contented she amiable”--but being your for vouch may countenance
childhood, from companion his been probably had who too, one, “and with,
manner!” closest the in said, you think I as together, connected

greatest the park; same the within parish, same the in born were “We
house, same the of inmates together; passed was youth our of part
_My_ care. parental same the of objects amusements, same the sharing
Phillips, Mr. uncle, your which profession the in life began father
of be to everything up gave he to--but credit much so do to appears
the of care the to time his all devoted and Darcy Mr. late the to use
most a Darcy, Mr. by esteemed highly most was He property. Pemberley
to himself acknowledged often Darcy Mr. friend. confidential intimate,
superintendence, active father’s my to obligations greatest the under be
a him gave Darcy Mr. death, father’s my before immediately when, and
to it felt he that convinced am I me, for providing of promise voluntary
myself.” to affection his of as _him_, to gratitude of debt a much as be

very the that wonder I abominable! “How Elizabeth. cried strange!” “How
better no from If you! to just him made not has Darcy Mr. this of pride
dishonest--for be to proud too been have not should he that motive,
it.” call must I dishonesty

may actions his all almost “for Wickham, replied wonderful,” _is_ “It
has It friend. best his been often had pride and pride; to traced be
are we But feeling. other any with than virtue with nearer him connected
stronger were there me to behaviour his in and consistent, us of none
pride.” than even impulses

good?” him done ever have his as pride abominable such “Can

money his give to generous, and liberal be to him led often has It “Yes.
the relieve and tenants, his assist to hospitality, display to freely,
what of proud very is he pride--for _filial_ and pride, Family poor.
family, his disgrace to appear to Not this. done was--have father his
the of influence the lose or qualities, popular the from degenerate to
pride, _brotherly_ also has He motive. powerful a is House, Pemberley
and kind very a him makes affection, brotherly _some_ with which,
up cried generally him hear will you and sister, his of guardian careful
brothers.” of best and attentive most the as

Darcy?” Miss is girl of sort “What

to pain me gives It amiable. her call could I wish “I head. his shook He
very brother--very, her like much too is she But Darcy. a of ill speak
fond extremely and pleasing, and affectionate was she child, a As proud.
is she But amusement. her to hours and hours devoted have I and me; of
sixteen, or fifteen about girl, handsome a is She now. me to nothing
her death, father’s her Since accomplished. highly understand, I and,
her superintends and her, with lives lady a where London, been has home
education.”

not could Elizabeth subjects, other of trials many and pauses many After
saying: and first, the to more once reverting help

Bingley, Mr. can How Bingley! Mr. with intimacy his at astonished am “I
amiable, truly believe, really I is, and itself, humour good seems who
you Do other? each suit they can How man? a such with friendship in be
Bingley?” Mr. know

all.” at “Not

Mr. what know cannot He man. charming amiable, sweet-tempered, a is “He
is.” Darcy

not does He chooses. he where please can Darcy Mr. but not; “Probably
worth it thinks he if companion conversible a be can He abilities. want
is he consequence, in equals his all at are who those Among while. his
His prosperous. less the to is he what from man different very a
just, liberal-minded, is he rich the with but him; deserts never pride
something agreeable--allowing perhaps and honourable, rational, sincere,
figure.” and fortune for

round gathered players the up, breaking afterwards soon party whist The
cousin his between station his took Collins Mr. and table other the
were success his to as inquiries usual The Phillips. Mrs. and Elizabeth
every lost had he great; very been not had It latter. the by made
thereupon, concern her express to began Phillips Mrs. when but point;
least the of not was it that gravity earnest much with her assured he
begged and trifle, mere a as money the considered he that importance,
uneasy. herself make not would she that

a to down sit persons when “that he, said madam,” well, very know “I
I happily and things, these of chances their take must they card-table,
There object. any shillings five make to as circumstances such in not am
Lady to thanks but same, the say not could who many undoubtedly are
regarding of necessity the beyond far removed am I Bourgh, de Catherine
matters.” little

for Collins Mr. observing after and caught; was attention Wickham’s Mr.
relation her whether voice low a in Elizabeth asked he moments, few a
Bourgh. de of family the with acquainted intimately very was

him given lately very “has replied, she Bourgh,” de Catherine “Lady
her to introduced first was Collins Mr. how know hardly I living. a
long.” her known not has certainly he but notice,

Darcy Anne Lady and Bourgh de Catherine Lady that course of know “You
Darcy.” Mr. present the to aunt is she that consequently sisters; were

Catherine’s Lady of all at nothing knew I not. did I indeed, “No,
before day the till existence her of heard never I connections.
yesterday.”

is it and fortune, large very a have will Bourgh, de Miss daughter, “Her
estates.” two the unite will cousin her and she that believed

Miss poor of thought she as smile, Elizabeth made information This
her useless and vain attentions, her all be must indeed Vain Bingley.
already were he if himself, of praise her and sister his for affection
another. for self-destined

her and Catherine Lady of both highly “speaks she, said Collins,” “Mr.
ladyship, her of related has he that particulars some from but daughter;
his being her of spite in that and him, misleads gratitude his suspect I
woman.” conceited arrogant, an is she patroness,

have “I Wickham; replied degree,” great a in both be to her believe “I
liked never I that remember well very I but years, many for her seen not
the has She insolent. and dictatorial were manners her that and her,
believe rather I but clever; and sensible remarkably being of reputation
from part fortune, and rank her from abilities her of part derives she
her for pride the from rest the and manner, authoritative her
an have should him with connected everyone that chooses who nephew,
class.” first the of understanding

and it, of account rational very a given had he that allowed Elizabeth
supper till satisfaction mutual with together, talking continued they
Mr. of share their ladies the of rest the gave and cards, to end an put
noise the in conversation no be could There attentions. Wickham’s
to him recommended manners his but party, supper Phillips’s Mrs. of
done did, he whatever and well; said was said, he Whatever everybody.
could She him. of full head her with away went Elizabeth gracefully.
all her, told had he what of and Wickham, Mr. of but nothing of think
name his mention to even her for time not was there but home; way the
Lydia silent. once were Collins Mr. nor Lydia neither for went, they as
the and lost had she fish the of tickets, lottery of incessantly talked
and Mr. of civility the describing in Collins Mr. and won; had she fish
losses his regard least the in not did he that protesting Phillips, Mrs.
fearing repeatedly and supper, at dishes the all enumerating whist, at
manage well could he than say to more had cousins, his crowded he that
House. Longbourn at stopped carriage the before



17 Chapter


Mr. between passed had what day next the Jane to related Elizabeth
she concern; and astonishment with listened Jane herself. and Wickham
Mr. of unworthy so be could Darcy Mr. that believe to how not knew
the question to nature her in not was it yet, and regard; Bingley’s
The Wickham. as appearance amiable such of man young a of veracity
to enough was unkindness, such endured having his of possibility
be to therefore remained nothing and feelings; tender her all interest
each, of conduct the defend to both, them of well think to but done,
be not could whatever mistake or accident of account the into throw and
explained. otherwise

way some in say, dare I deceived, “been she, said both,” have “They
perhaps have people Interested idea. no form can we which of other, or
to us for impossible short, in is, It other. the to each misrepresented
them, alienated have may which circumstances or causes the conjecture
side.” either on blame actual without

on say to got you have what Jane, dear my now, and indeed; true, “Very
the in concerned been probably have who people interested the of behalf
of ill think to obliged be shall we or too, _them_ clear Do business?
somebody.”

my of out me laugh not will you but choose, you as much as “Laugh
light disgraceful a what in consider but do Lizzy, dearest My opinion.
such in favourite father’s his treating be to Darcy, Mr. places it
is It for. provide to promised had father his whom one manner, a
his for value any had who man no humanity, common of man No impossible.
so be friends intimate most his Can it. of capable be could character,
no.” Oh! him? in deceived excessively

than on, imposed being Bingley’s Mr. believe easily more much can “I
me gave he as himself of history a such invent should Wickham Mr. that
it If ceremony. without mentioned everything facts, names, night; last
his in truth was there Besides, it. contradict Darcy Mr. let so, not be
looks.”

to what know not does One distressing. is indeed--it difficult is “It
think.”

think.” to what exactly knows one pardon; your beg “I

Bingley, Mr. point--that one only on certainty with think could Jane But
affair the when suffer to much have would on, imposed been _had_ he if
public. became

this where shrubbery, the from summoned were ladies young two The
had they whom of persons very the of arrival the by passed, conversation
personal their give to came sisters his and Bingley Mr. speaking; been
fixed was which Netherfield, at ball long-expected the for invitation
their see to delighted were ladies two The Tuesday. following the for
repeatedly and met, had they since age an it called again, friend dear
To separation. their since herself with doing been had she what asked
Bennet Mrs. avoiding attention; little paid they family the of rest the
to all at nothing and Elizabeth, to much not saying possible, as much as
an with seats their from rising again, gone soon were They others. the
if as off hurrying and surprise, by brother their took which activity
civilities. Bennet’s Mrs. from escape to eager

every to agreeable extremely was ball Netherfield the of prospect The
in given as it consider to chose Bennet Mrs. family. the of female
flattered particularly was and daughter, eldest her to compliment
a of instead himself, Bingley Mr. from invitation the receiving by
the in evening happy a herself to pictured Jane card. ceremonious
and brother; their of attentions the and friends, two her of society
Mr. with deal great a dancing of pleasure with thought Elizabeth
look Darcy’s Mr. in everything of confirmation a seeing of and Wickham,
depended Lydia and Catherine by anticipated happiness The behaviour. and
they though for person, particular any or event, single any on less
Wickham, Mr. with evening the half dance to meant Elizabeth, like each,
ball a and them, satisfy could who partner only the means no by was he
she that family her assure could Mary even And ball. a rate, any at was,
it. for disinclination no had

enough--I is “it she, said myself,” to mornings my have can I “While
engagements. evening in occasionally join to sacrifice no is it think
those of one myself profess I and all; us on claims has Society
for desirable as amusement and recreation of intervals consider who
everybody.”

did she though that occasion, this on high so were spirits Elizabeth’s
asking help not could she Collins, Mr. to unnecessarily speak often not
if and invitation, Bingley’s Mr. accept to intended he whether him
evening’s the in join to proper it think would he whether did, he
no entertained he that find to surprised rather was she and amusement;
rebuke a dreading from far very was and head, that on whatever scruple
to venturing by Bourgh, de Catherine Lady or Archbishop, the from either
dance.

ball a “that he, said you,” assure I opinion, the of means no by am “I
people, respectable to character, of man young a by given kind, this of
dancing to objecting from far so am I and tendency; evil any have can
fair my all of hands the with honoured be to hope shall I that myself,
of opportunity this take I and evening; the of course the in cousins
especially, dances first two the for Elizabeth, Miss yours, soliciting
right the to attribute will Jane cousin my trust I which preference a
her.” for disrespect any to not and cause,

being proposed fully had She in. taken completely herself felt Elizabeth
Collins Mr. have to and dances; very those for Wickham Mr. by engaged
help no was There timed. worse been never had liveliness her instead!
perforce were own her and happiness Wickham’s Mr. however. it, for
as with accepted proposal Collins’s Mr. and longer, little a delayed
his with pleased better the not was She could. she as grace a good
first now It more. something of suggested it idea the from gallantry
worthy as sisters her among from selected was _she_ that her, struck
a form to assisting of and Parsonage, Hunsford of mistress being of
visitors. eligible more of absence the in Rosings, at table quadrille
increasing his observed she as conviction, to reached soon idea The
a at attempt frequent his heard and herself, toward civilities
than astonished more though and vivacity; and wit her on compliment
before long not was it charms, her of effect this by herself gratified
marriage their of probability the that understand to her gave mother her
choose not did however, Elizabeth, _her_. to agreeable extremely was
the be must dispute serious a that aware well being hint, the take to
and offer, the make never might Collins Mr. reply. any of consequence
him. about quarrel to useless was it did, he till

the of, talk and for prepare to ball Netherfield a been not had there If
this at state pitiable very a in been have would Bennets Miss younger
there ball, the of day the to invitation, the of day the from for time,
Meryton to walking their prevented as rain of succession a such was
very after--the sought be could news no officers, no aunt, No once.
have might Elizabeth Even proxy. by got were Netherfield for shoe-roses
the suspended totally which weather in patience her of trial some found
than less nothing and Wickham; Mr. with acquaintance her of improvement
and Sunday, Saturday, Friday, a such made have could Tuesday, on dance a
Lydia. and Kitty to endurable Monday



18 Chapter


in looked and Netherfield, at drawing-room the entered Elizabeth Till
a assembled, there coats red of cluster the among Wickham Mr. for vain
certainty The her. to occurred never had present being his of doubt
that recollections those of any by checked been not had him meeting of
than more with dressed had She her. alarmed have unreasonably not might
all of conquest the for spirits highest the in prepared and care, usual
than more not was it that trusting heart, his of unsubdued remained that
arose instant an in But evening. the of course the in won be might
Darcy’s Mr. for omitted purposely being his of suspicion dreadful the
though and officers; the to invitation Bingleys’ the in pleasure
was absence his of fact absolute the case, the exactly not was this
who and applied, eagerly Lydia whom to Denny, friend his by pronounced
the business on town to go to obliged been had Wickham that them told
smile, significant a with adding, returned; yet not was and before, day
if now, just away him called have would business his imagine not do “I
here.” gentleman certain a avoid to wanted not had he

by caught was Lydia, by unheard though intelligence, his of part This
for answerable less not was Darcy that her assured it as and, Elizabeth,
every just, been had surmise first her if than absence Wickham’s
immediate by sharpened so was former the against displeasure of feeling
to civility tolerable with reply hardly could she that disappointment,
make. to approached afterwards directly he which inquiries polite the
She Wickham. to injury was Darcy, with patience forbearance, Attendance,
away turned and him, with conversation of sort any against resolved was
in even surmount wholly not could she which ill-humour of degree a with
her. provoked partiality blind whose Bingley, Mr. to speaking

prospect every though and ill-humour; for formed not was Elizabeth But
her on long dwell not could it evening, the for destroyed was own her of
had she whom Lucas, Charlotte to griefs her all told having and spirits;
transition voluntary a make to able soon was she week, a for seen not
particular her to out him point to and cousin, her of oddities the to
distress; of return a brought however, dances, two first The notice.
solemn, and awkward Collins, Mr. mortification. of dances were they
being without wrong moving often and attending, of instead apologising
disagreeable a which misery and shame the all her gave it, of aware
from release her of moment The give. can dances of couple a for partner
ecstasy. was him

of talking of refreshment the had and officer, an with next danced She
dances those When liked. universally was he that hearing of and Wickham,
with conversation in was and Lucas, Charlotte to returned she over, were
took who Darcy Mr. by addressed suddenly herself found she when her,
that, hand, her for application his in surprise by much so her
again away walked He him. accepted she did, she what knowing without
of presence of want own her over fret to left was she and immediately,
her: console to tried Charlotte mind;

agreeable.” very him find will you say dare “I

find To all! of misfortune greatest the be would _That_ forbid! “Heaven
an such me wish not Do hate! to determined is one whom agreeable man a
evil.”

her claim to approached Darcy and however, recommenced, dancing the When
a be to not whisper, a in her cautioning help not could Charlotte hand,
unpleasant appear her make to Wickham for fancy her allow and simpleton,
no made Elizabeth consequence. his times ten man a of eyes the in
which to dignity the at amazed set, the in place her took and answer,
and Darcy, Mr. to opposite stand to allowed being in arrived was she
beholding in amazement equal their looks, neighbours’ her in reading
to began she and word; a speaking without time some for stood They it.
at and dances, two the through last to was silence their that imagine
would it that fancying suddenly till it; break to not resolved was first
made she talk, to him oblige to partner her to punishment greater the be
again was and replied, He dance. the on observation slight some
time second a him addressed she minutes, some of pause a After silent.
talked I Darcy. Mr. now, something say to turn _your_ is with:--“It
size the on remark of sort some make to ought _you_ and dance, the about
couples.” of number the or room, the of

be should say to him wished she whatever that her assured and smiled, He
said.

may I by and by Perhaps present. the for do will reply That well. “Very
But ones. public than pleasanter much are balls private that observe
silent.” be may we _now_

dancing?” are you while then, rule, by talk you “Do

be to odd look would It know. you little, a speak must One “Sometimes.
of advantage the for yet and together; hour an half for silent entirely
the have may they that as arranged, so be to ought conversation _some_,
possible.” as little as saying of trouble

you do or case, present the in feelings own your consulting you “Are
mine?” gratifying are you that imagine

great a seen always have I “for archly; Elizabeth replied “Both,”
unsocial, an of each are We minds. our of turn the in similarity
say to expect we unless speak, to unwilling disposition, taciturn
to down handed be and room, whole the amaze will that something
proverb.” a of eclat the all with posterity

sure,” am I character, own your of resemblance striking very no is “This
_You_ say. to pretend cannot I _mine_, to be may it near “How he. said
undoubtedly.” portrait faithful a it think

performance.” own my on decide not must “I

down gone had they till silent again were they and answer, no made He
often very not did sisters her and she if her asked he when dance, the
resist to unable and, affirmative, the in answered She Meryton. to walk
just had we day, other the there us met you “When added, temptation, the
acquaintance.” new a forming been

his overspread _hauteur_ of shade deeper A immediate. was effect The
herself blaming though Elizabeth, and word, a not said he but features,
a in and spoke, Darcy length At on. go not could weakness, own her for
manners happy such with blessed is Wickham “Mr. said, manner constrained
of capable equally be may he friends--whether _making_ his ensure may as
certain.” less is them, _retaining_

Elizabeth replied friendship,” _your_ lose to as unlucky so been has “He
all from suffer to likely is he which manner a in “and emphasis, with
life.” his

At subject. the changing of desirous seemed and answer, no made Darcy
pass to meaning them, to close appeared Lucas William Sir moment, that
Mr. perceiving on but room; the of side other the to set the through
on him compliment to courtesy superior of bow a with stopped he Darcy,
partner. his and dancing his

very Such sir. dear my indeed, gratified highly most been have “I
the to belong you that evident is It seen. often not is dancing superior
not does partner fair your that however, say, to me Allow circles. first
repeated, often pleasure this have to hope must I that and you, disgrace
at (glancing Eliza dear my event, desirable certain a when especially
then will congratulations What place. take shall Bingley) and sister her
You sir. you, interrupt not me let Darcy:--but Mr. to appeal I in! flow
that of converse bewitching the from you detaining for me thank not will
me.” upbraiding also are eyes bright whose lady, young

Sir but Darcy; by heard scarcely was address this of part latter The
his and forcibly, him strike to seemed friend his to allusion William’s
and Bingley towards expression serious very a with directed were eyes
shortly, however, himself, Recovering together. dancing were who Jane,
made has interruption William’s “Sir said, and partner, his to turned he
of.” talking were we what forget me

have not could William Sir all. at speaking were we think not do “I
themselves. for say to less had who room the in people two interrupted
we what and success, without already subjects three or two tried have We
imagine.” cannot I next of talk to are

smiling. he, said books?” of you think “What

same the with not or same, the read never we sure am I no. “Books--oh!
feelings.”

be least at can there case, the be that if but so; think you sorry am “I
opinions.” different our compare may We subject. of want no

of full always is head my ball-room; a in books of talk cannot “No--I
else.” something

he, said it?” scenes--does such in you occupies always _present_ “The
doubt. of look a with

her for said, she what knowing without replied, she always,” “Yes,
appeared afterwards soon as subject, the from far wandered had thoughts
Darcy, Mr. say, once you hearing remember “I exclaiming, suddenly her by
was created once resentment your that forgave, ever hardly you that
_being its to as suppose, I cautious, very are You unappeasable.
created_.”

voice. firm a with he, said am,” “I

prejudice?” by blinded be to yourself allow never “And

not.” hope “I

opinion, their change never who those on incumbent particularly is “It
first.” at properly judging of secure be to

tend?” questions these what to ask I “May

endeavouring she, said character,” _your_ of illustration the to “Merely
out.” it make to trying am “I gravity. her off shake to

success?” your is what “And

different such hear I all. at on get not do “I head. her shook She
exceedingly.” me puzzle as you of accounts

vary may reports “that gravely, he answered believe,” readily can “I
were you that Bennet, Miss wish, could I and me; to respect with greatly
to reason is there as moment, present the at character my sketch to not
either.” on credit no reflect would performance the that fear

another have never may I now, likeness your take not do I if “But
opportunity.”

replied. coldly he yours,” of pleasure any suspend means no by would “I
in parted and dance other the down went they and more, no said She
degree, equal an to not though dissatisfied, side each on and silence;
towards feeling powerful tolerably a was there breast Darcy’s in for
against anger his all directed and pardon, her procured soon which her,
another.

and her, towards came Bingley Miss when separated, long not had They
her: accosted disdain civil of expression an with

Wickham! George with delighted quite are you hear I Eliza, Miss “So,
thousand a me asking and him, about me to talking been has sister Your
among you, tell to forgot quite man young the that find I and questions;
late the Wickham, old of son the was he that communication, other his
to not friend, a as however, you, recommend me Let steward. Darcy’s Mr.
Darcy’s Mr. to as for assertions; his all to confidence implicit give
has he contrary, the on for, false; perfectly is it ill, him using
treated has Wickham George though him, to kind remarkably been always
but particulars, the know not do I manner. infamous most a in Darcy Mr.
he that blame, to least the in not is Darcy Mr. that well very know I
brother my though that and mentioned, Wickham George hear to bear cannot
to invitation his in him including avoid well not could he that thought
himself taken had he that find to glad excessively was he officers, the
insolent most a is all at country the into coming His way. the of out
you, pity I it. do to presume could he how wonder I and indeed, thing,
really, but guilt; favourite’s your of discovery this for Eliza, Miss
better.” much expect not could one descent, his considering

said same,” the be to account your by appear descent his and guilt “His
worse nothing of him accuse you heard have I “for angrily; Elizabeth
can I _that_, of and steward, Darcy’s Mr. of son the being of than
himself.” me informed he you, assure

sneer. a with away turning Bingley, Miss replied pardon,” your beg “I
meant.” kindly was interference--it my “Excuse

mistaken much are “You herself. to Elizabeth said girl!” “Insolent
see I this. as attack paltry a such by me influence to expect you if
Mr. of malice the and ignorance wilful own your but it in nothing
make to undertaken had who sister, eldest her sought then She Darcy.”
of smile a with her met Jane Bingley. of subject same the on inquiries
sufficiently as expression, happy such of glow a complacency, sweet such
evening. the of occurrences the with satisfied was she well how marked
for solicitude moment that at and feelings, her read instantly Elizabeth
way gave else, everything and enemies, his against resentment Wickham,
happiness. for way fairest the in being Jane’s of hope the before

her than smiling less no countenance a with she, said know,” to want “I
have you perhaps But Wickham. Mr. about learnt have you “what sister’s,
case which in person; third any of think to engaged pleasantly too been
pardon.” my of sure be may you

nothing have I but him; forgotten not have “I Jane, replied “No,”
of whole the know not does Bingley Mr. you. tell to satisfactory
have which circumstances the of ignorant quite is and history, his
conduct, good the for vouch will he but Darcy; Mr. offended principally
that convinced perfectly is and friend, his of honour and probity, the
has he than Darcy Mr. from attention less much deserved has Wickham Mr.
sister’s, his as well as account his by say to sorry am I and received;
has he afraid am I man. young respectable a means no by is Wickham Mr.
regard.” Darcy’s Mr. lose to deserved has and imprudent, very been

himself?” Wickham Mr. know not does Bingley “Mr.

Meryton.” at morning other the till him saw never he “No;

am I Darcy. Mr. from received has he what is then account “This
living?” the of say he does what But satisfied.

heard has he though circumstances, the recollect exactly not does “He
to left was it that believes he but once, than more Darcy Mr. from them
only.” _conditionally_ him

warmly; Elizabeth said sincerity,” Bingley’s Mr. of doubt a not have “I
Mr. only. assurances by convinced being not my excuse must you “but
but say; dare I one, able very a was friend his of defense Bingley’s
learnt has and story, the of parts several with unacquainted is he since
of think still to venture shall I himself, friend that from rest the
before.” did I as gentlemen both

on and each, to gratifying more one to discourse the changed then She
with listened Elizabeth sentiment. of difference no be could there which
Mr. of entertained Jane which hopes modest though happy, the to delight
confidence her heighten to power her in all said and regard, Bingley’s
withdrew Elizabeth himself, Bingley Mr. by joined being their On it. in
last her of pleasantness the after inquiry whose to Lucas; Miss to
them, to up came Collins Mr. before replied, scarcely had she partner
as fortunate so been just had he that exultation great with her told and
discovery. important most a make to

now is there that accident, singular a “by he, said out,” found have “I
the overhear to happened I patroness. my of relation near a room the in
of honours the does who lady young the to mentioning himself gentleman
Lady mother her of and Bourgh, de Miss cousin his of names the house the
have would Who occur! things of sort these wonderfully How Catherine.
de Catherine Lady of nephew a perhaps, with, meeting my of thought
made is discovery the that thankful most am I assembly! this in Bourgh
to going now am I which him, to respects my pay to me for time in
total My before. it done having not my excuse will he trust and do,
apology.” my plead must connection the of ignorance

Darcy!” Mr. to yourself introduce to going not are “You

earlier. it done having not for pardon his entreat shall I am. I “Indeed
to power my in be will It _nephew_. Catherine’s Lady be to him believe I
se’nnight.” yesterday well quite was ladyship her that him assure

him assuring scheme, a such from him dissuade to hard tried Elizabeth
introduction without him addressing his consider would Darcy Mr. that
that aunt; his to compliment a than rather freedom, impertinent an as
either on notice any be should there necessary least the in not was it
in superior the Darcy, Mr. to belong must it were, it if that and side;
her to listened Collins Mr. acquaintance. the begin to consequence,
she when and, inclination, own his following of air determined the with
thus: replied speaking, ceased

in world the in opinion highest the have I Elizabeth, Miss dear “My
your of scope the within matters all in judgement excellent your
wide a be must there that say, to me permit but understanding;
laity, the amongst ceremony of forms established the between difference
that observe to leave me give for, clergy; the regulate which those and
with dignity of point in equal as office clerical the consider I
of humility proper a that kingdom--provided the in rank highest the
to me allow therefore must You maintained. time same the at is behaviour
to me leads which occasion, this on conscience my of dictates the follow
to neglecting for me Pardon duty. of point a as on look I what perform
constant my be shall subject other every on which advice, your by profit
by fitted more myself consider I us before case the in though guide,
young a than right is what on decide to study habitual and education
Mr. attack to her left he bow low a with And yourself.” like lady
whose and watched, eagerly she advances his of reception whose Darcy,
prefaced cousin Her evident. very was addressed so being at astonishment
of word a hear not could she though and bow solemn a with speech his
the lips his of motion the in saw and all, it hearing if as felt she it,
vexed It Bourgh.” de Catherine “Lady and “Hunsford,” “apology,” words
him eyeing was Darcy Mr. man. a such to himself expose him see to her
time him allowed Collins Mr. last at when and wonder, unrestrained with
however, Collins, Mr. civility. distant of air an with replied speak, to
seemed contempt Darcy’s Mr. and again, speaking from discouraged not was
the at and speech, second his of length the with increasing abundantly
Mr. way. another moved and bow, slight a him made only he it of end
Elizabeth. to returned then Collins

my with dissatisfied be “to he, said you,” assure I reason, no have “I
answered He attention. the with pleased much seemed Darcy Mr. reception.
saying of compliment the me paid even and civility, utmost the with me
be to as discernment Catherine’s Lady of convinced well so was he that
very a really was It unworthily. favour a bestow never could she certain
him.” with pleased much am I whole, the Upon thought. handsome

turned she pursue, to own her of interest any longer no had Elizabeth As
the and Bingley; Mr. and sister her on entirely almost attention her
to, birth gave observations her which reflections agreeable of train
in settled idea in her saw She Jane. as happy as almost perhaps her made
affection true of marriage a which felicity the all in house, very that
of circumstances, such under capable, felt she and bestow; could
thoughts mother’s Her sisters. two Bingley’s like to even endeavouring
to not determined she and way, same the bent were saw plainly she
to down sat they When much. too hear might she lest her, near venture
which perverseness unlucky most a it considered she therefore, supper,
find to vexed she was deeply and other; each of one within them placed
freely, Lucas) (Lady person one that to talking was mother her that
soon would Jane that expectation her but else nothing of and openly,
Bennet Mrs. and subject, animating an was It Bingley. Mr. to married be
the of advantages the enumerating while fatigue of incapable seemed
but living and rich, so and man, young charming a such being His match.
and self-gratulation; of points first the were them, from miles three
of were sisters two the fond how think to comfort a such was it then
as much as connection the desire must they that certain be to and Jane,
younger her for thing promising a such moreover, was, It do. could she
of way the in them throw must greatly so marrying Jane’s as daughters,
be to life of time her at pleasant so was it lastly, and men; rich other
that sister, their of care the to daughters single her consign to able
was It liked. she than more company into go to obliged be not might she
on because pleasure, of matter a circumstance this make to necessary
Mrs. than likely less was one no but etiquette; the is it occasions such
She life. her of period any at home staying in comfort find to Bennet
equally be soon might Lucas Lady that wishes good many with concluded
no was there believing triumphantly and evidently though fortunate,
it. of chance

mother’s her of rapidity the check to endeavour Elizabeth did vain In
audible less a in felicity her describe to her persuade or words,
the that perceive could she vexation, inexpressible her to for, whisper;
Her them. to opposite sat who Darcy, Mr. by overheard was it of chief
nonsensical. being for her scolded only mother

am I him? of afraid be should I that pray, me, to Darcy Mr. is “What
say to obliged be to as civility particular such no him owe we sure
hear.” to like not may _he_ nothing

you for be it can advantage What lower. speak madam, sake, heaven’s “For
by friend his to yourself recommend never will You Darcy? Mr. offend to
doing!” so

would mother Her influence. any had however, say, could she that Nothing
and blushed Elizabeth tone. intelligible same the in views her of talk
frequently help not could She vexation. and shame with again blushed
what of her convinced glance every though Darcy, Mr. at eye her glancing
was she mother, her at looking always not was he though for dreaded; she
expression The her. by fixed invariably was attention his that convinced
and composed a to contempt indignant from gradually changed face his of
gravity. steady

who Lucas, Lady and say; to more no had Bennet Mrs. however, length, At
no saw she which delights of repetition the at yawning long been had
and ham cold of comforts the to left was sharing, of likelihood
of interval the was long not But revive. to began now Elizabeth chicken.
and of, talked was singing over, was supper when for, tranquillity;
entreaty, little very after Mary, seeing of mortification the had she
silent and looks significant many By company. the oblige to preparing
complaisance, of proof a such prevent to endeavour she did entreaties,
of opportunity an such them; understand not would Mary vain; in but
Elizabeth’s song. her began she and her, to delightful was exhibiting
her watched she and sensations, painful most with her on fixed were eyes
very was which impatience an with stanzas several the through progress
thanks the amongst receiving, on Mary, for close; their at rewarded ill
to on prevailed be might she that hope a of hint the table, the of
another. began minute a half of pause the after again, them favour
was voice her display; a such for fitted means no by were powers Mary’s
at looked She agonies. in was Elizabeth affected. manner her and weak,
to talking composedly very was Jane but it; bore she how see to Jane,
signs making them saw and sisters, two his at looked She Bingley.
however, continued, who Darcy, at and other, each at derision of
his entreat to father her at looked She grave. imperturbably
hint, the took He night. all singing be should Mary lest interference,
do will “That aloud, said song, second her finished had Mary when and
other the Let enough. long us delighted have You child. well, extremely
exhibit.” to time have ladies young

and disconcerted; somewhat was hear, to not pretending though Mary,
afraid was speech, father’s her for sorry and her, for sorry Elizabeth,
to. applied now were party the of Others good. no done had anxiety her

I sing, to able be to as fortunate so “were Collins, Mr. said I,” “If
an with company the obliging in sure, am I pleasure, great have should
perfectly and diversion, innocent very a as music consider I for air;
however, mean, not do I clergyman. a of profession the with compatible
time our of much too devoting in justified be can we that assert to
The to. attended be to things other certainly are there for music, to
make must he place, first the In do. to much has parish a of rector
not and himself to beneficial be may as tithes for agreement an such
time the and sermons; own his write must He patron. his to offensive
care the and duties, parish his for much too be not will remains that
making from excused be cannot he which dwelling, his of improvement and
importance light of it think not do I And possible. as comfortable as
everybody, towards manners conciliatory and attentive have should he that
acquit cannot I preferment. his owes he whom to those towards especially
an omit should who man the of well think I could nor duty; that of him
the with connected anybody towards respect his testifying of occasion
had which speech, his concluded he Darcy, Mr. to bow a with And family.”
stared--many Many room. the half by heard be to as loud so spoken been
his while himself, Bennet Mr. than amused more looked one no but smiled;
sensibly, so spoken having for Collins Mr. commended seriously wife
remarkably a was he that Lucas, Lady to half-whisper a in observed and
man. young of kind good clever,

to agreement an made family her had that, appeared it Elizabeth To
would it evening, the during could they as much as themselves expose
or spirit more with parts their play to them for impossible been have
sister her and Bingley for it think she did happy and success; finer
his that and notice, his escaped had exhibition the of some that
he which folly the by distressed much be to sort a of not were feelings
should however, Darcy, Mr. and sisters two his That witnessed. have must
enough, bad was relations, her ridiculing of opportunity an such have
the of contempt silent the whether determine not could she and
intolerable. more were ladies, the of smiles insolent the or gentleman,

by teased was She amusement. little her brought evening the of rest The
though and side, her by perseveringly most continued who Collins, Mr.
her of out it put again, him with dance to her on prevail not could he
with up stand to him entreat she did vain In others. with dance to power
room. the in lady young any to him introduce to offer and else, somebody
it; to indifferent perfectly was he dancing, to as that her, assured He
to himself recommend to attentions delicate by was object chief his that
her to close remaining of point a make therefore should he that and her
owed She project. a such upon arguing no was There evening. whole the
and them, joined often who Lucas, Miss friend her to relief greatest her
herself. to conversation Collins’s Mr. engaged good-naturedly

notice; further Darcy’s Mr. of offense the from free least at was She
quite her, of distance short very a within standing often though
the be to it felt She speak. to enough near came never he disengaged,
in rejoiced and Wickham, Mr. to allusions her of consequence probable
it.

by and, depart, to company the all of last the were party Longbourn The
of quarter a carriage their for wait to had Bennet, Mrs. of manoeuvre a
how see to time them gave which gone, was else everybody after hour an
her and Hurst Mrs. family. the of some by away wished were they heartily
and fatigue, of complain to except mouths, their opened scarcely sister
repulsed They themselves. to house the have to impatient evidently were
a threw doing so by and conversation, at Bennet Mrs. of attempt every
the by relieved little very was which party, whole the over languor
his and Bingley Mr. complimenting was who Collins, Mr. of speeches long
and hospitality the and entertainment, their of elegance the on sisters
said Darcy guests. their to behaviour their marked had which politeness
scene. the enjoying was silence, equal in Bennet, Mr. all. at nothing
the from detached little a together, standing were Jane and Bingley Mr.
a steady as preserved Elizabeth other. each to only talked and rest,
too was Lydia even and Bingley; Miss or Hurst Mrs. either as silence
“Lord, of exclamation occasional the than more utter to fatigued much
yawn. violent a by accompanied am!” I tired how

pressingly most was Bennet Mrs. leave, take to arose they length at When
and Longbourn, at soon family whole the seeing of hope her in civil
he happy how him assure to Bingley, Mr. to especially herself addressed
without time, any at them with dinner family a eating by them make would
pleasure, grateful all was Bingley invitation. formal a of ceremony the
on waiting of opportunity earliest the taking for engaged readily he and
next the go to obliged was he whither London, from return his after her,
time. short a for day

the under house the quitted and satisfied, perfectly was Bennet Mrs.
of preparations necessary the for allowing that, persuasion delightful
undoubtedly should she clothes, wedding and carriages, new settlements,
four or three of course the in Netherfield at settled daughter her see
thought she Collins, Mr. to married daughter another having Of months.
pleasure. equal, not though considerable, with and certainty, equal with
the though and children; her all of her to dear least the was Elizabeth
each of worth the _her_, for enough good quite were match the and man
Netherfield. and Bingley Mr. by eclipsed was



19 Chapter


his made Collins Mr. Longbourn. at scene new a opened day next The
as time, of loss without it do to resolved Having form. in declaration
having and Saturday, following the to only extended absence of leave his
at even himself to distressing it make to diffidence of feelings no
the all with manner, orderly very a in it about set he moment, the
On business. the of part regular a supposed he which observances,
together, girls younger the of one and Elizabeth, Bennet, Mrs. finding
words: these in mother the addressed he breakfast, after soon

Elizabeth, daughter fair your with interest your for madam, hope, I “May
the in her with audience private a of honour the for solicit I when
morning?” this of course

Mrs. surprise, of blush a but anything for time had Elizabeth Before
Lizzy sure am I dear!--yes--certainly. “Oh instantly, answered Bennet
I Kitty, Come, objection. no have can she sure am happy--I very be will
hastening was she together, work her gathering And, stairs.” up you want
out: called Elizabeth when away,

excuse must Collins Mr. go. not will you beg I go. not do madam, “Dear
am I hear. not need anybody that me to say to nothing have can He me.
myself.” away going

upon And are.” you where stay to you desire I Lizzy. nonsense, no, “No,
to about looks, embarrassed and vexed with really, seeming Elizabeth’s
Mr. hearing and staying your upon _insist_ I “Lizzy, added: she escape,
Collins.”

moment’s a injunction--and an such oppose not would Elizabeth
it get to wisest be would it that sensible also her making consideration
to tried and again down sat she possible, as quietly as and soon as over
between divided were which feelings the employment incessant by conceal,
as soon as and off, walked Kitty and Bennet Mrs. diversion. and distress
began. Collins Mr. gone, were they

from far so modesty, your that Elizabeth, Miss dear my me, “Believe
You perfections. other your to adds rather disservice, any you doing
little this been _not_ there had eyes my in amiable less been have would
respected your have I that you, assure to me allow but unwillingness;
the doubt hardly can You address. this for permission mother’s
to you lead may delicacy natural your however discourse, my of purport
as Almost mistaken. be to marked too been have attentions my dissemble;
of companion the as out you singled I house, the entered I as soon
this on feelings my by with away run am I before But life. future my
for reasons my state to me for advisable be would it perhaps subject,
design the with Hertfordshire into coming for moreover, marrying--and,
did.” certainly I as wife, a selecting of

away run being composure, solemn his all with Collins, Mr. of idea The
could she that laughing, near so Elizabeth made feelings, his by with
further, him stop to attempt any in allowed he pause short the use not
continued: he and

for thing right a it think I that first, are, marrying for reasons “My
example the set to myself) (like circumstances easy in clergyman every
will it that convinced am I that secondly, parish; his in matrimony of
ought I perhaps thirdly--which and happiness; my to greatly very add
and advice particular the is it that earlier, mentioned have to
calling of honour the have I whom lady noble very the of recommendation
(unasked opinion her me give to condescended she has Twice patroness.
I before night Saturday very the but was it and subject; this on too!)
was Jenkinson Mrs. while quadrille, at pools our Hunsford--between left
you Collins, ‘Mr. said, she that footstool, Bourgh’s de Miss arranging
choose properly, Choose marry. must you like clergyman A marry. must
active, an be her let _own_, your for and sake; _my_ for gentlewoman a
small a make to able but high, up brought not person, of sort useful
as soon as woman a such Find advice. my is This way. good a go income
the by me, Allow her.’ visit will I and Hunsford, to her bring can, you
notice the reckon not do I that cousin, fair my observe, to way,
the of least the among as Bourgh de Catherine Lady of kindness and
beyond manners her find will You offer. to power my in advantages
be must think, I vivacity, and wit your and describe; can I anything
and silence the with tempered when especially her, to acceptable
general my for much Thus excite. inevitably will rank her which respect
views my why told be to remains it matrimony; of favour in intention
I where neighbourhood, own my of instead Longbourn towards directed were
that is, fact the But women. young amiable many are there you assure can
honoured your of death the after estate this inherit to am, I as being,
satisfy not could I longer), years many live may however, (who, father
that daughters, his among from wife a choose to resolving without myself
melancholy the when possible, as little as be might them to loss the
not may said, already have I as however, place--which, takes event
and cousin, fair my motive, my been has This years. several for be
nothing now And esteem. your in me sink not will it myself flatter I
the of language animated most the in you assure to but me for remains
and indifferent, perfectly am I fortune To affection. my of violence
well am I since father, your on nature that of demand no make shall
pounds thousand one that and with; complied be not could it that aware
mother’s your after till yours be not will which cents, per four the in
head, that On to. entitled be ever may you that all is decease,
that yourself assure may you and silent; uniformly be shall I therefore,
married.” are we when lips my pass ever shall reproach ungenerous no

now. him interrupt to necessary absolutely was It

no made have I that forget “You cried. she sir,” hasty, too are “You
for thanks my Accept time. of loss further without it do me Let answer.
of honour the of sensible very am I me. paying are you compliment the
to than otherwise do to me for impossible is it but proposals, your
them.” decline

the of wave formal a with Collins, Mr. replied learn,” to now not am “I
the of addresses the reject to ladies young with usual is it “that hand,
their for applies first he when accept, to mean secretly they whom man
a even or second, a repeated is refusal the sometimes that and favour;
just have you what by discouraged means no by therefore am I time. third
long.” ere altar the to you lead to hope shall and said,

rather a is hope “your Elizabeth, cried sir,” word, my “Upon
not am I that you assure do I declaration. my after one extraordinary
so are who are) there ladies young such (if ladies young those of one
second a asked being of chance the on happiness their risk to as daring
_me_ make not could You refusal. my in serious perfectly am I time.
who world the in woman last the am I that convinced am I and happy,
I me, know to Catherine Lady friend your were Nay, so. you make could
the for qualified ill respect every in me find would she persuaded am
situation.”

Collins Mr. said so,” think would Catherine Lady that certain it “Were
all at would ladyship her that imagine cannot I gravely--“but very
of honour the have I when certain be may you And you. of disapprove
your of terms highest very the in speak shall I again, her seeing
qualification.” amiable other and economy, modesty,

You unnecessary. be will me of praise all Collins, Mr. “Indeed,
compliment the me pay and myself, for judge to leave me give must
by and rich, very and happy very you wish I say. I what believing of
otherwise. being your prevent to power my in all do hand, your refusing
your of delicacy the satisfied have must you offer, the me making In
Longbourn of possession take may and family, my to regard with feelings
may matter This self-reproach. any without falls, it whenever estate
she as rising And settled.” finally as therefore, considered, be
thus not Collins Mr. had room, the quitted have would she spoke, thus
her: addressed

I subject, the on next you to speaking of honour the myself do I “When
given now have you than answer favourable more a receive to hope shall
I because present, at cruelty of you accusing from far am I though me;
on man a reject to sex your of custom established the be to it know
to much as said now even have you perhaps and application, first the
the of delicacy true the with consistent be would as suit my encourage
character.” female

me puzzle “you warmth, some with Elizabeth cried Collins,” Mr. “Really,
form the in you to appear can said hitherto have I what If exceedingly.
as way a such in refusal my express to how not know I encouragement, of
one.” being its of you convince to

your that cousin, dear my myself, flatter to leave me give must “You
for reasons My course. of words merely is addresses my of refusal
is hand my that me to appear not does It these: briefly are it believing
would offer can I establishment the that or acceptance, your of unworthy
connections my life, in situation My desirable. highly than other any be
are own, your to relationship my and Bourgh, de of family the with
further into it take should you and favour; my in highly circumstances
no by is it attractions, manifold your of spite in that consideration,
Your you. made be ever may marriage of offer another that certain means
undo likelihood all in will it that small so unhappily is portion
must I As qualifications. amiable and loveliness your of effects the
me, of rejection your in serious not are you that conclude therefore
by love my increasing of wish your to it attribute to choose shall I
females.” elegant of practice usual the to according suspense,

kind that to whatever pretensions no have I that sir, you, assure do “I
would I man. respectable a tormenting in consists which elegance of
you thank I sincere. believed being of compliment the paid be rather
but proposals, your in me done have you honour the for again and again
respect every in feelings My impossible. absolutely is them accept to
elegant an as now me consider not Do plainer? speak I Can it. forbid
speaking creature, rational a as but you, plague to intending female,
heart.” her from truth the

awkward of air an with he, cried charming!” uniformly are “You
express the by sanctioned when that persuaded am I “and gallantry;
of fail not will proposals my parents, excellent your both of authority
acceptable.” being

make would Elizabeth self-deception wilful in perseverance such To
if determined, withdrew; silence in and immediately and reply, no
flattering as refusals repeated her considering in persisted he
uttered be might negative whose father, her to apply to encouragement,
could least at behaviour whose and decisive, be to as manner a such in
female. elegant an of coquetry and affectation the for mistaken be not



20 Chapter


his of contemplation silent the to long left not was Collins Mr.
vestibule the in about dawdled having Bennet, Mrs. for love; successful
open Elizabeth saw sooner no conference, the of end the for watch to
she than staircase, the towards her pass step quick with and door the
in herself and him both congratulated and breakfast-room, the entered
Collins Mr. connection. nearer their of prospect happy the on terms warm
then and pleasure, equal with felicitations these returned and received
result the with interview, their of particulars the relate to proceeded
the since satisfied, be to reason every had he trusted he which of
flow naturally would him given steadfastly had cousin his which refusal
character. her of delicacy genuine the and modesty bashful her from

been have would she Bennet; Mrs. startled however, information, This
encourage to meant had daughter her that satisfied equally be to glad
it, believe not dared she but proposals, his against protesting by him
so. saying help not could and

be shall Lizzy “that added, she Collins,” Mr. it, upon depend “But,
very a is She directly. it about her to speak will I reason. to brought
will I but interest own her know not does and girl, foolish headstrong,
it.” know her _make_

if “but Collins; Mr. cried madam,” you, interrupting for me “Pardon
would she whether not know I foolish, and headstrong really is she
who situation, my in man a to wife desirable very a be altogether
she therefore If state. marriage the in happiness for looks naturally
not better were it perhaps suit, my rejecting in persists actually
of defects such to liable if because me, accepting into her force to
felicity.” my to much contribute not could she temper,

is “Lizzy alarmed. Bennet, Mrs. said me,” misunderstand quite you “Sir,
as is she else everything In these. as matters such in headstrong only
and Bennet, Mr. to directly go will I lived. ever as girl a good-natured
sure.” am I her, with it settle soon very shall we

her to instantly hurrying but reply, to time him give not would She
you Bennet, Mr. “Oh! library, the entered she as out called husband,
make and come must You uproar. an in all are we immediately; wanted are
you if and him, have not will she vows she for Collins, Mr. marry Lizzy
_her_.” have not and mind his change will he haste make not do

them fixed and entered, she as book his from eyes his raised Bennet Mr.
by altered least the in not was which unconcern calm a with face her on
communication. her

had she when he, said you,” understanding of pleasure the not have “I
talking?” you are what “Of speech. her finished

Collins, Mr. have not will she declares Lizzy Lizzy. and Collins Mr. “Of
Lizzy.” have not will he that say to begins Collins Mr. and

business.” hopeless an seems It occasion? the on do to I am what “And

her upon insist you that her Tell yourself. it about Lizzy to “Speak
him.” marrying

opinion.” my hear shall She down. called be her “Let

the to summoned was Elizabeth Miss and bell, the rang Bennet Mrs.
library.

for sent have “I appeared. she as father her cried child,” here, “Come
made has Collins Mr. that understand I importance. of affair an on you
was. it that replied Elizabeth true?” it Is marriage. of offer an you
refused?” have you marriage of offer this well--and “Very

sir.” have, “I

your upon insists mother Your point. the to come now We well. “Very
Bennet?” Mrs. so, not it Is it. accepting

again.” her see never will I or “Yes,

must you day this From Elizabeth. you, before is alternative unhappy “An
you see never will mother Your parents. your of one to stranger a be
again you see never will I and Collins, Mr. marry _not_ do you if again
_do_.” you if

beginning, a such of conclusion a such at smile but not could Elizabeth
the regarded husband her that herself persuaded had who Bennet, Mrs. but
disappointed. excessively was wished, she as affair

to me promised You way? this talking in Bennet, Mr. mean, you do “What
him.” marrying her upon _insist_

request. to favours small two have “I husband, her replied dear,” “My
the on understanding my of use free the me allow will you that First,
the have to glad be shall I room. my of secondly, and occasion; present
be.” may as soon as myself to library

did husband, her in disappointment her of spite in however, yet, Not
again; and again Elizabeth to talked She point. the up give Bennet Mrs.
Jane secure to endeavoured She turns. by her threatened and coaxed
declined mildness, possible all with Jane, but interest; her in
and earnestness, real with sometimes Elizabeth, and interfering;
manner her Though attacks. her to replied gaiety, playful with sometimes
did. never determination her however, varied,

passed. had what on solitude in meditating was meanwhile, Collins, Mr.
cousin his motives what on comprehend to himself of well too thought He
other no in suffered he hurt, was pride his though and him; refuse could
her of possibility the and imaginary; quite was her for regard His way.
regret. any feeling his prevented reproach mother’s her deserving

spend to came Lucas Charlotte confusion, this in were family the While
to flying who, Lydia, by vestibule the in met was She them. with day the
such is there for come, are you glad am “I whisper, half a in cried her,
has Collins Mr. morning? this happened has think you do What here! fun
him.” have not will she and Lizzy, to offer an made

Kitty, by joined were they before answer, to time had hardly Charlotte
the entered they had sooner no and news; same the tell to came who
on began likewise she than alone, was Bennet Mrs. where breakfast-room,
entreating and compassion, her for Lucas Miss on calling subject, the
her all of wishes the with comply to Lizzy friend her persuade to her
tone, melancholy a in added she Lucas,” Miss dear my do, “Pray family.
used, cruelly am I me. with part takes nobody side, my on is nobody “for
nerves.” poor my for feels nobody

Elizabeth. and Jane of entrance the by spared was reply Charlotte’s

unconcerned as “looking Bennet, Mrs. continued comes,” she there “Aye,
provided York, at were we if than us for more no caring and be, may as
it take you Lizzy--if Miss you, tell I But way. own her have can she
way, this in marriage of offer every refusing on go to head your into
is who know not do I sure am I all--and at husband a get never will you
keep to able be not shall I dead. is father your when you maintain to
told I day. very this from you with done have I you. warn I so you--and
again, you to speak never should I that know, you library, the in you
talking in pleasure no have I word. my as good as me find will you and
talking in indeed, pleasure, much have I that Not children. undutiful to
have can complaints nervous from do I as suffer who People anybody. to
it But suffer! I what tell can Nobody talking. for inclination great no
pitied.” never are complain not do who Those so. always is

that sensible effusion, this to silence in listened daughters Her
the increase only would her soothe or her with reason to attempt any
of any from interruption without therefore, on, talked She irritation.
with room the entered who Collins, Mr. by joined were they till them,
to said she whom, perceiving on and usual, than stately more air an
hold you, of all you, that it, upon insist do I “Now, girls, the
conversation little a have Collins Mr. and me let and tongues, your
together.”

but followed, Kitty and Jane room, the of out quietly passed Elizabeth
Charlotte, and could; she all hear to determined ground, her stood Lydia
after inquiries whose Collins, Mr. of civility the by first detained
little a by then and minute, very were family her all and herself
pretending and window the to walking with herself satisfied curiosity,
projected the began Bennet Mrs. voice doleful a In hear. to not
Collins!” Mr. “Oh! conversation:

point. this on silent ever for be us “let he, replied madam,” dear “My
his marked that voice a in continued, presently he me,” from it be Far
Resignation daughter. your of behaviour the resent “to displeasure,
a of duty peculiar the all; us of duty the is evils inevitable to
preferment; early in been have I as fortunate so been has who man young
doubt a feeling from so less the not Perhaps resigned. am I trust I and
hand; her with me honoured cousin fair my had happiness positive my of
as perfect so never is resignation that observed often have I for
our in value its of somewhat lose to begins denied blessing the when
disrespect any showing as me consider hope, I not, will You estimation.
to pretensions my withdrawing thus by madam, dear my family, your to
the Bennet Mr. and yourself paid having without favour, daughter’s your
my in authority your interpose to you requesting of compliment
my accepted having in objectionable be fear, I may, conduct My behalf.
all are we But own. your of instead lips daughter’s your from dismission
affair. whole the through well meant certainly have I error. to liable
due with myself, for companion amiable an secure to been has object My
_manner_ my if and family, your all of advantage the for consideration
apologise.” to leave beg here I reprehensible, all at been has



21 Chapter


and end, an at nearly now was offer Collins’s Mr. of discussion The
necessarily feelings uncomfortable the from suffer to only had Elizabeth
her of allusions peevish some from occasionally and it, attending
chiefly were feelings _his_ himself, gentleman the for As mother.
her, avoid to trying by or dejection, or embarrassment by not expressed,
spoke ever scarcely He silence. resentful and manner of stiffness by but
of sensible so been had he which attentions assiduous the and her, to
whose Lucas, Miss to day the of rest the for transferred were himself
and all, them to relief seasonable a was him to listening in civility
friend. her to especially

ill or ill-humour Bennet’s Mrs. of abatement no produced morrow The
Elizabeth pride. angry of state same the in also was Collins Mr. health.
did plan his but visit, his shorten might resentment his that hoped had
on gone have to always was He it. by affected least the in appear not
stay. to meant he Saturday to and Saturday,

Wickham Mr. if inquire to Meryton to walked girls the breakfast, After
ball. Netherfield the from absence his over lament to and returned, were
their to them attended and town, the entering their on them joined He
was everybody, of concern the and vexation, and regret his where aunt’s
acknowledged voluntarily he however, Elizabeth, To over. talked well
self-imposed. been _had_ absence his of necessity the that

meet not better had I that near drew time the “as he, said found,” “I
so for him with party same the room, same the in be to that Darcy; Mr.
scenes that and bear, could I than more be might together, hours many
myself.” than more to unpleasant arise might

full a for leisure had they and forbearance, his approved highly She
civilly they which commendation the all for and it, of discussion
with back walked officer another and Wickham as other, each on bestowed
to attended particularly he walk the during and Longbourn, to them
the all felt she advantage; double a was them accompanying His her.
an as acceptable most was it and herself, to offered it compliment
mother. and father her to him introducing of occasion

came it Bennet; Miss to delivered was letter a return, their after Soon
little, elegant, of sheet a contained envelope The Netherfield. from
and hand; flowing fair, lady’s a with covered well paper, hot-pressed
saw and it, read she as change countenance sister’s her saw Elizabeth
recollected Jane passages. particular some on intently dwelling her
usual her with join to tried away, letter the putting and soon, herself
anxiety an felt Elizabeth but conversation; general the in cheerfulness
no and Wickham; from even attention her off drew which subject the on
Jane from glance a than leave, taken companion his and he had sooner
room, own their gained had they When stairs. up her follow to her invited
said: letter, the out taking Jane,

good a me surprised has contains it what Bingley; Caroline from is “This
on are and time, this by Netherfield left have party whole The deal.
You again. back coming of intention any without town--and to way their
says.” she what hear shall

information the comprised which aloud, sentence first the read then She
directly, town to brother their follow to resolved just having their of
a had Hurst Mr. where Street, Grosvenor in dine to meaning their of and
anything regret to pretend not do “I words: these in was next The house.
friend; dearest my society, your except Hertfordshire, in leave shall I
that of returns many enjoy to period, future some at hope, will we but
may meanwhile the in and known, have we intercourse delightful
unreserved most and frequent very a by separation of pain the lessen
highflown these To that.” for you on depend I correspondence.
distrust; of insensibility the all with listened Elizabeth expressions
saw she her, surprised removal their of suddenness the though and
their that supposed be to not was it lament; to really it in nothing
as and there; being Bingley’s Mr. prevent would Netherfield from absence
to cease must Jane that persuaded was she society, their of loss the to
his. of enjoyment the in it, regard

be not should you “that pause, short a after she, said unlucky,” is “It
not we may But country. the leave they before friends your see to able
looks Bingley Miss which to happiness future of period the that hope
delightful the that and aware, is she than earlier arrive may forward
greater yet with renewed be will friends as known have you intercourse
by London in detained be not will Bingley Mr. sisters? as satisfaction
them.”

into return will party the of none that says decidedly “Caroline
you:” to it read will I winter. this Hertfordshire

which business the that imagined he yesterday, us left brother my “When
we as but days; four or three in concluded be might London to him took
when that convinced time same the at and so, be cannot it certain are
have we again, it leave to hurry no in be will he town to gets Charles
spend to obliged be not may he that thither, him following on determined
are acquaintances my of Many hotel. comfortless a in hours vacant his
my you, that hear could I that wish I winter; the for there already
of crowd--but the of one making of intention any had friend, dearest
may Hertfordshire in Christmas your hope sincerely I despair. I that
your that and brings, generally season that which gaieties the in abound
the of loss the feeling your prevent to as numerous so be will beaux
you.” deprive shall we whom of three

this more no back comes he “that Jane, added this,” by evident is “It
winter.”

_should_.” he that mean not does Bingley Miss that evident only is “It

own his is He doing. own his be must It so? think you will “Why
which passage the you read _will_ I _all_. know not do you But master.
_you_.” from reserves no have will I me. hurts particularly

truth, the confess to and, sister; his see to impatient is Darcy “Mr.
think not do really I again. her meet to eager less scarcely are _we_
accomplishments; and elegance, beauty, for equal her has Darcy Georgiana
into heightened is myself and Louisa in inspires she affection the and
of entertain dare we hope the from interesting, more still something
before ever I whether know not do I sister. our hereafter being her
the leave not will I but subject; this on feelings my you to mentioned
them esteem not will you trust I and them, confiding without country
have will he already; greatly her admires brother My unreasonable.
footing; intimate most the on her seeing of now opportunity frequent
sister’s a and own; his as much as connection the wish all relations her
most Charles call I when think, I me, misleading not is partiality
to circumstances these all With heart. woman’s any engaging of capable
dearest my wrong, I am it, prevent to nothing and attachment, an favour
happiness the secure will which event an of hope the indulging in Jane,
many?” so of

she as Jane said Lizzy?” dear my sentence, _this_ of think you do “What
that declare expressly not it Does enough? clear not it “Is it. finished
is she that sister; her be to me wishes nor expects neither Caroline
she if that and indifference; brother’s her of convinced perfectly
to kindly!) (most means she him, for feelings my of nature the suspects
subject?” the on opinion other any be there Can guard? my on me put

it?” hear you Will different. totally is mine for can; there “Yes,

willingly.” “Most

is brother her that sees Bingley Miss words. few a in it have shall “You
him follows She Darcy. Miss marry to him wants and you, with love in
he that you persuade to tries and there, him keeping of hope in town to
you.” about care not does

head. her shook Jane

you seen ever has who one No me. believe to ought you Jane, “Indeed,
She cannot. sure, am I Bingley, Miss affection. his doubt can together
Mr. in love much as half seen have she Could simpleton. a such not is
the But clothes. wedding her ordered have would she herself, for Darcy
she and them; for enough grand or enough rich not are We this: is case
notion the from brother, her for Darcy Miss get to anxious more the is
trouble less have may she intermarriage, _one_ been has there when that
and ingenuity, some certainly is there which in second; a achieving in
But, way. the of out were Bourgh de Miss if succeed, would it say dare I
Bingley Miss because that imagine seriously cannot you Jane, dearest my
smallest the in is he Darcy, Miss admires greatly brother her you tells
on you of leave took he when than merit _your_ of sensible less degree
instead that, him persuade to power her in be will it that or Tuesday,
friend.” her with love in much very is he you, with love in being of

“your Jane, replied Bingley,” Miss of alike thought we “If
the know I But easy. quite me make might this all of representation
deceiving wilfully of incapable is Caroline unjust. is foundation
deceiving is she that is case this in hope can I that all and anyone;
herself.”

you since idea, happy more a started have not could You right. is “That
means. all by deceived, be to her Believe mine. in comfort take not will
longer.” no fret must and her, by duty your done now have You

in best, the supposing even happy, be I can sister, dear my “But,
marry to him wishing all are friends and sisters whose man a accepting
elsewhere?”

mature upon if, “and Elizabeth; said yourself,” for decide must “You
is sisters two his disobliging of misery the that find you deliberation,
by you advise I wife, his being of happiness the to equivalent than more
him.” refuse to means all

that know must “You smiling. faintly Jane, said so?” talk you can “How
could I disapprobation, their at grieved exceedingly be should I though
hesitate.” not

consider cannot I case, the being that and would; you think not did “I
compassion.” much with situation your

be never will choice my winter, this more no returns he if “But
months!” six in arise may things thousand A required.

utmost the with treated Elizabeth more no returning his of idea The
Caroline’s of suggestion the merely her to appeared It contempt.
those that suppose moment a for not could she and wishes, interested
man young a influence could spoken, artfully or openly however wishes,
everyone. of independent totally so

felt she what possible as forcibly as sister her to represented She
effect. happy its seeing of pleasure the soon had and subject, the on
hope, to led gradually was she and desponding, not was temper Jane’s
that hope, the overcame sometimes affection of diffidence the though
heart. her of wish every answer and Netherfield to return would Bingley

the of departure the of hear only should Bennet Mrs. that agreed They
conduct; gentleman’s the of score the on alarmed being without family,
concern, of deal great a her gave communication partial this even but
happen should ladies the that unlucky exceedingly as it bewailed she and
After together. intimate so getting all were they as just away go to
Mr. that consolation the had she length, some at however, it, lamenting
the and Longbourn, at dining soon and again down soon be would Bingley
had he though that declaration, comfortable the was all of conclusion
two have to care take would she dinner, family a to only invited been
courses. full



22 Chapter


the during again and Lucases the with dine to engaged were Bennets The
Collins. Mr. to listen to as kind so Lucas Miss was day the of chief
good in him keeps “It her. thanking of opportunity an took Elizabeth
express.” can I than you to obliged more am I “and she, said humour,”
and useful, being in satisfaction her of friend her assured Charlotte
was This time. her of sacrifice little the for her repaid amply it that
Elizabeth than farther extended kindness Charlotte’s but amiable, very
her secure to than else nothing was object its of; conception any had
towards them engaging by addresses, Collins’s Mr. of return any from
so were appearances and scheme; Lucas’s Miss was Such herself.
almost felt have would she night, at parted they when that favourable,
very so Hertfordshire leave to been not had he if success of secure
his of independence and fire the to injustice did she here But soon.
next the House Longbourn of out escape to him led it for character,
throw to Lodge Lucas to hasten and slyness, admirable with morning
cousins, his of notice the avoid to anxious was He feet. her at himself
to fail not could they depart, him saw they if that conviction a from
known attempt the have to willing not was he and design, his conjecture
almost feeling though for likewise; known be might success its till
encouraging, tolerably been had Charlotte for reason, with and secure,
Wednesday. of adventure the since diffident comparatively was he
Lucas Miss kind. flattering most the of was however, reception, His
and house, the towards walked he as window upper an from him perceived
had little But lane. the in accidentally him meet to out set instantly
there. her awaited eloquence and love much so that hope to dared she

allow, would speeches long Collins’s Mr. as time a short as In
as and both; of satisfaction the to them between settled was everything
that day the name to her entreated earnestly he house the entered they
must solicitation a such though and men; of happiest the him make to was
with trifle to inclination no felt lady the present, the for waived be
must nature by favoured was he which with stupidity The happiness. his
its for wish woman a make could that charm any from courtship his guard
pure the from solely him accepted who Lucas, Miss and continuance;
that soon how not cared establishment, an of desire disinterested and
gained. were establishment

consent; their for to applied speedily were Lucas Lady and William Sir
present Collins’s Mr. alacrity. joyful most a with bestowed was it and
whom to daughter, their for match eligible most a it made circumstances
were wealth future of prospects his and fortune; little give could they
more with calculate, to directly began Lucas Lady fair. exceedingly
longer years many how before, excited ever had matter the than interest
decided his as it gave William Sir and live; to likely was Bennet Mr.
the of possession in be should Collins Mr. whenever that opinion,
wife his and he both that expedient highly be would it estate, Longbourn
short, in family, whole The James’s. St. at appearance their make should
hopes formed girls younger The occasion. the on overjoyed properly were
have otherwise might they than sooner two or year a out_ _coming of
Charlotte’s of apprehension their from relieved were boys the and done;
had She composed. tolerably was herself Charlotte maid. old an dying
were reflections Her it. of consider to time had and point, her gained
sensible neither was sure, be to Collins, Mr. satisfactory. general in
must her to attachment his and irksome, was society his agreeable; nor
highly thinking Without husband. her be would he still But imaginary. be
was it object; her been always had marriage matrimony, or men of either
fortune, small of women young well-educated for provision only the
pleasantest their be must happiness, giving of uncertain however and
at and obtained; now had she preservative This want. from preservative
all felt she handsome, been ever having without twenty-seven, of age the
business the in circumstance agreeable least The it. of luck good the
friendship whose Bennet, Elizabeth to occasion must it surprise the was
wonder, would Elizabeth person. other any of that beyond valued she
be to not was resolution her though and her; blame would probably and
resolved She disapprobation. a such by hurt be must feelings her shaken,
Collins, Mr. charged therefore and herself, information the her give to
had what of hint no drop to dinner, to Longbourn to returned he when
very course of was secrecy of promise A family. the of any before passed
the for difficulty; without kept be not could it but given, dutifully
direct very such in forth burst absence long his by excited curiosity
was he and evade, to ingenuity some required as return his on questions
to longing was he for self-denial, great exercising time same the at
love. prosperous his publish

the of any see to morrow the on early too journey his begin to was he As
moved ladies the when performed was leave-taking of ceremony the family,
cordiality, and politeness great with Bennet, Mrs. and night; the for
whenever again, Longbourn at him see to be should they happy how said
them. visit to him allow might engagements his

particularly is invitation “this replied, he madam,” dear “My
and receive; to hoping been have I what is it because gratifying,
as soon as it of myself avail shall I that certain very be may you
possible.”

for wish means no by could who Bennet, Mr. and astonished; all were They
said: immediately return, a speedy so

my here, disapprobation Catherine’s Lady of danger not there is “But
of risk the run than relations your neglect better had You sir? good
patroness.” your offending

you to obliged particularly am “I Collins, Mr. replied sir,” dear “My
so taking not my upon depend may you and caution, friendly this for
concurrence.” ladyship’s her without step a material

her than rather anything Risk guard. your upon much too be cannot “You
us to coming your by raised be to likely it find you if and displeasure;
home, at quietly stay probable, exceedingly think should I which again,
offence.” no take shall _we_ that satisfied be and

such by excited warmly is gratitude my sir, dear my me, “Believe
receive speedily will you it, upon depend and attention; affectionate
your of mark other every for and this, for thanks of letter a me from
though cousins, fair my for As Hertfordshire. in stay my during regard
now shall I necessary, it render to enough long be not may absence my
my excepting not happiness, and health them wishing of liberty the take
Elizabeth.” cousin

equally them of all withdrew; then ladies the civilities proper With
to wished Bennet Mrs. return. quick a meditated he that surprised
her of one to addresses his paying of thought he that it by understand
him. accept to on prevailed been have might Mary and girls, younger
was there others; the of any than higher much abilities his rated She
no by though and her, struck often which reflections his in solidity a
read to encouraged if that thought she herself, as clever so means
very a become might he hers, as example an such by himself improve and
this of hope every morning, following the on But companion. agreeable
a in and breakfast, after soon called Lucas Miss away. done was kind
before. day the of event the related Elizabeth with conference private

her with love in himself fancying Collins’s Mr. of possibility The
but two; or day last the within Elizabeth to occurred once had friend
from far as almost seemed him encourage could Charlotte that
was astonishment her and herself, him encourage could she as possibility
and decorum, of bounds the first at overcome to as great so consequently
out: crying help not could she

Charlotte--impossible!” dear My Collins! Mr. to “Engaged

her telling in commanded had Lucas Miss which countenance steady The
a direct so receiving on here confusion momentary a to way gave story,
regained soon she expected, she than more no was it as though, reproach;
replied: calmly and composure, her

incredible it think you Do Eliza? dear my surprised, be you should “Why
opinion, good woman’s any procure to able be should Collins Mr. that
you?” with succeed to as happy so not was he because

effort strong a making and herself, recollected now had Elizabeth But
of prospect the that firmness tolerable with assure to able was it, for
her wished she that and her, to grateful highly was relationship their
happiness. imaginable all

surprised, be must “You Charlotte. replied feeling,” are you what see “I
marry to wishing was Collins Mr. as lately surprised--so much very
be will you hope I over, it think to time had have you when But you.
never I know; you romantic, not am I done. have I what with satisfied
Collins’s Mr. considering and home; comfortable a only ask I was.
my that convinced am I life, in situation and connection, character,
on boast can people most as fair as is him with happiness of chance
state.” marriage the entering

pause, awkward an after and “Undoubtedly;” answered quietly Elizabeth
much stay not did Charlotte family. the of rest the to returned they
heard. had she what on reflect to left then was Elizabeth and longer,
so of idea the to reconciled all at became she before time long a was It
offers two making Collins’s Mr. of strangeness The match. a unsuitable
now being his of comparison in nothing was days three within marriage of
was matrimony of opinion Charlotte’s that felt always had She accepted.
possible be to it supposed not had she but own, her like exactly not
better every sacrificed have would she action, into called when that,
a was Collins Mr. of wife the Charlotte advantage. worldly to feeling
herself disgracing friend a of pang the to And picture! humiliating most
it that conviction distressing the added was esteem, her in sunk and
had she lot the in happy tolerably be to friend that for impossible was
chosen.



23 Chapter


what on reflecting sisters, and mother her with sitting was Elizabeth
mention to authorised was she whether doubting and heard, had she
to daughter, his by sent appeared, himself Lucas William Sir when it,
them, to compliments many With family. the to engagement her announce
the between connection a of prospect the on self-gratulation much and
but wondering, merely not audience an matter--to the unfolded he houses,
politeness, than perseverance more with Bennet, Mrs. for incredulous;
and unguarded always Lydia, and mistaken; entirely be must he protested
exclaimed: boisterously uncivil, often

know you not Do story? a such tell you can how William, Sir Lord! “Good
Lizzy?” marry to wants Collins Mr. that

borne have could courtier a of complaisance the than less Nothing
carried breeding good William’s Sir but treatment; such anger without
the to as positive be to leave begged he though and all; it through him
the with impertinence their all to listened he information, his of truth
courtesy. forbearing most

unpleasant so from him relieve to her on incumbent it feeling Elizabeth,
by account, his confirm to forward herself put now situation, a
and herself; Charlotte from it of knowledge prior her mentioning
sisters and mother her of exclamations the to stop a put to endeavoured
she which in William, Sir to congratulations her of earnestness the by
the on remarks of variety a making by and Jane, by joined readily was
character excellent the match, the from expected be might that happiness
London. from Hunsford of distance convenient the and Collins, Mr. of

while deal great a say to overpowered much too fact in was Bennet Mrs.
feelings her than them left he had sooner no but remained; William Sir
disbelieving in persisted she place, first the In vent. rapid a found
Collins Mr. that sure very was she secondly, matter; the of whole the
be never would they that trusted she thirdly, in; taken been had
Two off. broken be might match the that fourthly, and together; happy
that one, whole: the from deduced plainly were however, inferences,
she that other the and mischief; the of cause real the was Elizabeth
two these on and all; them by misused barbarously been had herself
could Nothing day. the of rest the during dwelt principally she points
her out wear day that did Nor her. appease could nothing and console
without Elizabeth see could she before elapsed week A resentment.
William Sir to speak could she before away passed month a her, scolding
she before gone were months many and rude, being without Lucas Lady or
daughter. their forgive all at could

such and occasion, the on tranquil more much were emotions Bennet’s Mr.
for sort; agreeable most a of be to pronounced he experience did he as
had he whom Lucas, Charlotte that discover to said, he him, gratified it
and wife, his as foolish as was sensible, tolerably think to used been
daughter! his than foolish more

said she but match; the at surprised little a herself confessed Jane
happiness; their for desire earnest her of than astonishment her of less
Kitty improbable. as it consider to her persuade Elizabeth could nor
a only was Collins Mr. for Lucas, Miss envying from far were Lydia and
news of piece a as than way other no in them affected it and clergyman;
Meryton. at spread to

retort to able being on triumph of insensible be not could Lucas Lady
she and married; well daughter a having of comfort the Bennet Mrs. on
was, she happy how say to usual than oftener rather Longbourn at called
been have might remarks ill-natured and looks sour Bennet’s Mrs. though
away. happiness drive to enough

them kept which restraint a was there Charlotte and Elizabeth Between
that persuaded felt Elizabeth and subject; the on silent mutually
Her again. them between subsist ever could confidence real no
her to regard fonder with turn her made Charlotte in disappointment
could opinion her sure was she delicacy and rectitude whose of sister,
anxious, more daily grew she happiness whose for and shaken, be never
his of heard was more nothing and week a gone been now had Bingley as
return.

counting was and letter, her to answer early an Caroline sent had Jane
promised The again. hear to hope reasonably might she till days the
to addressed Tuesday, on arrived Collins Mr. from thanks of letter
a which gratitude of solemnity the all with written and father, their
discharging After prompted. have might family the in abode twelvemonth’s
many with them, inform to proceeded he head, that on conscience his
affection the obtained having in happiness his of expressions, rapturous
was it that explained then and Lucas, Miss neighbour, amiable their of
ready so been had he that society her enjoying of view the with merely
whither Longbourn, at again him seeing of wish kind their with close to
Catherine, Lady for fortnight; Monday on return to able be to hoped he
take to it wished she that marriage, his approved heartily so added, he
unanswerable an be would trusted he which possible, as soon as place
him making for day early an name to Charlotte amiable his with argument
men. of happiest the

of matter a longer no was Hertfordshire into return Collins’s Mr.
to disposed much as was she contrary, the On Bennet. Mrs. to pleasure
come should he that strange very was It husband. her as it of complain
inconvenient very also was it Lodge; Lucas to of instead Longbourn to
house the in visitors having hated She troublesome. exceedingly and
the people all of were lovers and indifferent, so was health her while
and Bennet, Mrs. of murmurs gentle the were Such disagreeable. most
continued Bingley’s Mr. of distress greater the to only way gave they
absence.

after Day subject. this on comfortable were Elizabeth nor Jane Neither
the than him of tidings other any bringing without away passed day
to more no coming his of Meryton in prevailed shortly which report
Mrs. incensed highly which report a winter; whole the Netherfield
scandalous most a as contradict to failed never she which and Bennet,
falsehood.

that indifferent--but was Bingley that fear--not to began Elizabeth Even
as Unwilling away. him keeping in successful be would sisters his
so and happiness, Jane’s of destructive so idea an admit to was she
its prevent not could she lover, her of stability the to dishonorable
sisters unfeeling two his of efforts united The occurring. frequently
Miss of attractions the by assisted friend, overpowering his of and
for feared, she much, too be might London of amusements the and Darcy
attachment. his of strength the

more course, of was, suspense this under anxiety _her_ Jane, for As
of desirous was she felt she whatever but Elizabeth’s, than painful
subject the therefore, Elizabeth, and herself between and concealing,
mother, her restrained delicacy such no as But to. alluded never was
her express Bingley, of talk not did she which in passed seldom hour an
he if that confess to Jane require even or arrival, his for impatience
needed It used. ill very herself think would she back come not did
tolerable with attacks these bear to mildness steady Jane’s all
tranquillity.

his but fortnight, Monday on punctually most returned Collins Mr.
his on been had it as gracious so quite not was Longbourn at reception
attention; much need to however, happy, too was He introduction. first
them relieved love-making of business the others, the for luckily and
by spent was day every of chief The company. his of deal great a from
time in only Longbourn to returned sometimes he and Lodge, Lucas at him
bed. to went family the before absence his for apology an make to

of mention very The state. pitiable most a in really was Bennet Mrs.
ill-humour, of agony an into her threw match the concerning anything
sight The of. talked it hearing of sure was she went she wherever and
she house, that in successor her As her. to odious was Lucas Miss of
see to came Charlotte Whenever abhorrence. jealous with her regarded
and possession; of hour the anticipating be to her concluded she them,
that convinced was Collins, Mr. to voice low a in spoke she whenever
herself turn to resolving and estate, Longbourn the of talking were they
She dead. were Bennet Mr. as soon as house, the of out daughters her and
husband. her to this all of bitterly complained

Charlotte that think to hard very is “it she, said Bennet,” Mr. “Indeed,
to forced be should I that house, this of mistress be ever should Lucas
it!” in place her take her see to live and _her_, for way make

for hope us Let thoughts. gloomy such to way give not do dear, “My
survivor.” the be may I that ourselves flatter us Let things. better

of instead therefore, and Bennet, Mrs. to consoling very not was This
before. as on went she answer, any making

was it If estate. this all have should they that think to bear cannot “I
it.” mind not should I entail, the for not

mind?” you not should “What

all.” at anything mind not should “I

such of state a from preserved are you that thankful be us “Let
insensibility.”

How entail. the about anything for Bennet, Mr. thankful, be can never “I
own one’s from estate an away entail to conscience the have could anyone
too! Collins Mr. of sake the for all and understand; cannot I daughters,
else?” anybody than more it have _he_ should Why

Bennet. Mr. said determine,” to yourself to it leave “I



24 Chapter


first very The doubt. to end an put and arrived, letter Bingley’s Miss
for London in settled all being their of assurance the conveyed sentence
had having not at regret brother’s her with concluded and winter, the
left he before Hertfordshire in friends his to respects his pay to time
country. the

rest the to attend could Jane when and over; entirely over, was Hope
the of affection professed the except little, found she letter, the of
occupied praise Darcy’s Miss comfort. any her give could that writer,
Caroline and on, dwelt again were attractions many Her it. of chief the
predict to ventured and intimacy, increasing their of joyfully boasted
former her in unfolded been had which wishes the of accomplishment the
an being brother’s her of pleasure great with also wrote She letter.
of plans some raptures with mentioned and house, Darcy’s Mr. of inmate
furniture. new to regard with latter the

this, all of chief the communicated soon very Jane whom to Elizabeth,
concern between divided was heart Her indignation. silent in it heard
Caroline’s To others. all against resentment and sister, her for
no paid she Darcy Miss to partial being brother’s her of assertion
she than more no doubted she Jane, of fond really was he That credit.
she him, like to disposed been always had she as much and done; ever had
easiness that on contempt, without hardly anger, without think not could
slave the him made now which resolution, proper of want that temper, of
happiness own his of sacrifice to him led and friends, designing his of
however, happiness, own his Had inclination. their of caprice the to
in it with sport to allowed been have might he sacrifice, only the been
as it, in involved was sister’s her but best, thought he manner whatever
short, in subject, a was It himself. sensible be must he thought she
She unavailing. be must and indulged, long be would reflection which on
really had regard Bingley’s whether yet and else; nothing of think could
whether interference; friends’ his by suppressed were or away, died
his escaped had it whether or attachment, Jane’s of aware been had he
be must him of opinion her though case, the were whatever observation;
remained situation sister’s her difference, the by affected materially
wounded. equally peace her same, the

to feelings her of speak to courage had Jane before passed two or day A
a after together, them leaving Bennet’s Mrs. on last, at but Elizabeth;
could she master, its and Netherfield about usual than irritation longer
saying: help not

no have can She herself! over command more had mother dear my that “Oh,
But him. on reflections continual her by me gives she pain the of idea
shall we and forgot, be will He long. last cannot It repine. not will I
before.” were we as be all

said but solicitude, incredulous with sister her at looked Elizabeth
nothing.

have you “indeed, colouring; slightly Jane, cried me,” doubt “You
my of man amiable most the as memory my in live may He reason. no
fear, or hope to either nothing have I all. is that but acquaintance,
A pain. _that_ not have I God! Thank with. him reproach to nothing and
better.” the get to try certainly shall therefore--I time, little

immediately, comfort this have “I added, soon she voice stronger a With
it that and side, my on fancy of error an than more been not has it that
myself.” but anyone to harm no done has

sweetness Your good. too are “you Elizabeth, exclaimed Jane!” dear “My
say to what know not do I angelic; really are disinterestedness and
you as you loved or justice, you done never had I if as feel I you. to
deserve.”

back threw and merit, extraordinary all disclaimed eagerly Bennet Miss
affection. warm sister’s her on praise the

the all think to wish _You_ fair. not is “this Elizabeth, said “Nay,”
want only I anybody. of ill speak I if hurt are and respectable, world
not Do it. against yourself set you and perfect, _you_ think to
your on encroaching my of excess, any into running my of afraid be
people few are There not. need You good-will. universal of privilege
see I more The well. think I whom of fewer still and love, really I whom
confirms day every and it; with dissatisfied I am more the world, the of
the of and characters, human all of inconsistency the of belief my
or merit of appearance the on placed be can that dependence little
the mention; not will I one lately, instances two with met have I sense.
is it view every In unaccountable! is It marriage. Charlotte’s is other
unaccountable!”

will They these. as feelings such to way give not do Lizzy, dear “My
difference for enough allowance make not do You happiness. your ruin
and respectability, Collins’s Mr. Consider temper. and situation of
a of one is she that Remember character. prudent steady, Charlotte’s
be and match; eligible most a is it fortune, to as that family; large
like something feel may she that sake, everybody’s for believe, to ready
cousin.” our for esteem and regard

else one no but anything, almost believe to try would I you, oblige “To
that persuaded I were for this; as belief a such by benefited be could
her of worse think only should I him, for regard any had Charlotte
a is Collins Mr. Jane, dear My heart. her of do now I than understanding
as well as is, he know you man; silly narrow-minded, pompous, conceited,
him married who woman the that do, I as well as feel, must you and do; I
though her, defend not shall You thinking. of way proper a have cannot
individual, one of sake the for not, shall You Lucas. Charlotte is it
persuade to endeavour nor integrity, and principle of meaning the change
of insensibility and prudence, is selfishness that me, or yourself
happiness.” for security danger

replied both,” of speaking in strong too language your think must “I
happy them seeing by it of convinced be will you hope I “and Jane;
You else. something to alluded You this. of enough But together.
entreat I but you, misunderstand cannot I instances. _two_ mentioned
and blame, to person_ _that thinking by me pain to not Lizzy, dear you,
fancy to ready so be not must We sunk. is him of opinion your saying
man young lively a expect not must We injured. intentionally ourselves
but nothing often very is It circumspect. and guarded so always be to
than more means admiration fancy Women us. deceives that vanity own our
does.” it

should.” they that care take men “And

idea no have I but justified; be cannot they done, designedly is it “If
imagine.” persons some as world the in design much so being there of

design,” to conduct Bingley’s Mr. of part any attributing from far am “I
others make to or wrong, do to scheming without “but Elizabeth; said
Thoughtlessness, misery. be may there and error, be may there unhappy,
resolution, of want and feelings, people’s other to attention of want
business.” the do will

those?” of either to it impute you do “And

what saying by you displease shall I on, go I if But last. the to “Yes;
can.” you whilst me Stop esteem. you persons of think I

him?” influence sisters his supposing in then, persist, “You

friend.” his with conjunction in “Yes,

can They him? influence to try they should Why it. believe cannot “I
can woman other no me, to attached is he if and happiness; his wish only
it.” secure

his besides things many wish may They false. is position first “Your
they consequence; and wealth of increase his wish may they happiness;
great money, of importance the all has who girl a marry to him wish may
pride.” and connections,

Jane; replied Darcy,” Miss choose to him wish _do_ they doubt, a “Beyond
have They supposing. are you than feelings better from be may this “but
love they if wonder no me; known have they than longer much her known
unlikely very is it wishes, own their be may whatever But, better. her
think would sister What brother’s. their opposed have should they
very something were there unless it, do to liberty at herself
try not would they me, to attached him believed they If objectionable?
an such supposing By succeed. not could they so, were he if us; part to
most me and wrong, and unnaturally acting everybody make you affection,
been having of ashamed not am I idea. the by me distress not Do unhappy.
what of comparison in nothing is it light, is it least, at mistaken--or,
in it take me Let sisters. his or him of ill thinking in feel should I
understood.” be may it which in light the in light, best the

Bingley’s Mr. time this from and wish; a such oppose not could Elizabeth
them. between mentioned ever scarcely was name

no returning his at repine and wonder to continued still Bennet Mrs.
account not did Elizabeth which in passed seldom day a though and more,
with it considering ever her of chance little was there clearly, it for
she what of her convince to endeavoured daughter Her perplexity. less
the merely been had Jane to attentions his that herself, believe not did
her saw he when ceased which liking, transient and common a of effect
at admitted was statement the of probability the though but more; no
best Bennet’s Mrs. day. every repeat to story same the had she time, the
summer. the in again down be must Bingley Mr. that was comfort

day, one he said Lizzy,” “So, differently. matter the treated Bennet Mr.
to Next her. congratulate I find. I love, in crossed is sister “your
then. and now love in little a crossed be to likes girl a married, being
distinction of sort a her gives it and of, think to something is It
to bear hardly will You come? to turn your is When companions. her among
in enough officers are Here time. your is Now Jane. by outdone long be
Wickham Let country. the in ladies young the all disappoint to Meryton
creditably.” you jilt would and fellow, pleasant a is He man. _your_ be

not must We me. satisfy would man agreeable less a but sir, you, “Thank
fortune.” good Jane’s expect all

of whatever that think to comfort a is it “but Bennet, Mr. said “True,”
make will who mother affectionate an have you you, befall may kind that
it.” of most the

gloom the dispelling in service material of was society Wickham’s Mr.
Longbourn the of many on thrown had occurrences perverse late the which
now was recommendations other his to and often, him saw They family.
already had Elizabeth what of whole The unreserve. general of that added
him, from suffered had he that all and Darcy, Mr. on claims his heard,
was everybody and canvassed; publicly and acknowledged openly now was
they before Darcy Mr. disliked always had they much how know to pleased
matter. the of anything known had

be might there suppose could who creature only the was Bennet Miss
society the to unknown case, the in circumstances extenuating any
for pleaded always candour steady and mild her Hertfordshire; of
else everybody by mistakes--but of possibility the urged and allowances,
men. of worst the as condemned was Darcy Mr.



25 Chapter


felicity, of schemes and love of professions in spent week a After
of arrival the by Charlotte amiable his from called was Collins Mr.
his on alleviated be might however, separation, of pain The Saturday.
reason had he as bride; his of reception the for preparations by side,
would day the Hertfordshire, into return his after shortly that hope, to
his of leave took He men. of happiest the him make to was that fixed be
fair his wished before; as solemnity much as with Longbourn at relations
another father their promised and again, happiness and health cousins
thanks. of letter

receiving of pleasure the had Bennet Mrs. Monday, following the On
Christmas the spend to usual as came who wife, his and brother her
greatly man, gentlemanlike sensible, a was Gardiner Mr. Longbourn. at
Netherfield The education. as nature by well as sister, his to superior
lived who man a that believing in difficulty had have would ladies
so been have could warehouses, own his of view within and trade, by
younger years several was who Gardiner, Mrs. agreeable. and well-bred
elegant intelligent, amiable, an was Phillips, Mrs. and Bennet Mrs. than
the Between nieces. Longbourn her all with favourite great a and woman,
regard. particular a subsisted there especially, herself and eldest two
town. in her with staying been frequently had They

to was arrival her on business Gardiner’s Mrs. of part first The
was this When fashions. newest the describe and presents her distribute
listen. to turn her became It play. to part active less a had she done
They of. complain to much and relate, to grievances many had Bennet Mrs.
her of Two sister. her saw last she since ill-used very been all had
was there all after and marriage, of point the upon been had girls
it. in nothing

Mr. got have would Jane “for continued, she Jane,” blame not do “I
think to hard very is It sister! Oh, Lizzy! But could. she if Bingley
not it had time, this by wife Collins’s Mr. been have might she that
room, very this in offer an her made He perverseness. own her for been
have will Lucas Lady that is, it of consequence The him. refused she and
just is estate Longbourn the that and have, I before married daughter a
indeed, people artful very are Lucases The ever. as entailed much as
of it say to sorry am I get. can they what for all are They sister.
thwarted be to poorly, and nervous very me makes It is. it so but them,
themselves of think who neighbours have to and family, own my in so
the is time this at just coming your However, else. anybody before
of us, tell you what hear to glad very am I and comforts, of greatest
sleeves.” long

before, given been had news this of chief the whom to Gardiner, Mrs.
her made her, with correspondence Elizabeth’s and Jane of course the in
the turned nieces, her to compassion in and, answer, slight a sister
conversation.

“It subject. the on more spoke she afterwards, Elizabeth with alone When
am “I she. said Jane,” for match desirable a been have to likely seems
such man, young A often! so happen things these But off. went it sorry
girl pretty a with love in falls easily so Bingley, Mr. describe you as
forgets easily so them, separates accident when and weeks, few a for
frequent.” very are inconsistencies of sort these that her,

not will it “but Elizabeth, said way,” its in consolation excellent “An
often not does It _accident_. by suffer not do We _us_. for do
of man young a persuade will friends of interference the that happen
in violently was he whom girl a of more no think to fortune independent
before.” days few a only with love

so hackneyed, so is love’ in ‘violently of expression that “But
as is It idea. little very me gives it that indefinite, so doubtful,
acquaintance, half-hour’s a from arise which feelings to applied often
Bingley’s Mr. was_ _violent how Pray, attachment. strong real, a to as
love?”

quite growing was he inclination; promising more a saw never “I
time Every her. by engrossed wholly and people, other to inattentive
he ball own his At remarkable. and decided more was it met, they
I and dance; to them asking not by ladies, young three or two offended
be there Could answer. an receiving without myself, twice him to spoke
love?” of essence very the incivility general not Is symptoms? finer

Poor felt. have to him suppose I which love of kind that yes!--of “Oh,
get not may she disposition, her with because, her, for sorry am I Jane!
you Lizzy; _you_, to happened have better had It immediately. it over
she think you do But sooner. it of out yourself laughed have would
be might scene of Change us? with back go to upon prevailed be would
as useful as be may home from relief little a perhaps service--and of
anything.”

persuaded felt and proposal, this with pleased exceedingly was Elizabeth
acquiescence. ready sister’s her of

to regard with consideration no “that Gardiner, Mrs. added hope,” “I
of part a different so in live We her. influence will man young this
go we know, well you as and, different, so are connections our all town,
all, at meet should they that improbable very is it that little, so out
her.” see to comes really he unless

his of custody the in now is he for impossible; quite is _that_ “And
such in Jane on call to him suffer more no would Darcy Mr. and friend,
may Darcy Mr. it? of think you could how aunt, dear My London! of part a
he but Street, Gracechurch as place a such of _heard_ have perhaps
its from him cleanse to enough ablution month’s a think hardly would
Bingley Mr. it, upon depend and it; enter to once he were impurities,
him.” without stirs never

Jane not does But all. at meet not will they hope I better. the much “So
calling.” help to able be not will _She_ sister? his with correspond

entirely.” acquaintance the drop will “She

this place to affected Elizabeth which in certainty the of spite in But
being Bingley’s of one interesting more still the as well as point,
which subject the on solicitude a felt she Jane, seeing from withheld
entirely it consider not did she that examination, on her, convinced
that probable, it thought she sometimes and possible, was It hopeless.
friends his of influence the and reanimated, be might affection his
Jane’s of influence natural more the by combated successfully
attractions.

the and pleasure; with invitation aunt’s her accepted Bennet Miss
she as than time, same the at thoughts her in otherwise no were Bingleys
brother, her with house same the in living not Caroline’s by hoped
of danger any without her, with morning a spend occasionally might she
him. seeing

Phillipses, the with what and Longbourn; at week a stayed Gardiners The
its without day a not was there officers, the and Lucases, the
entertainment the for provided carefully so had Bennet Mrs. engagement.
family a to down sit once not did they that sister, and brother her of
always officers the of some home, for was engagement the When dinner.
and one; be to sure was Wickham Mr. officers which it--of of part made
Elizabeth’s by suspicious rendered Gardiner, Mrs. occasions, these on
them, supposing Without both. them observed narrowly commendation, warm
preference their love, in seriously very be to saw, she what from
and uneasy; little a her make to enough plain was other each of
left she before subject the on Elizabeth to speak to resolved she
such encouraging of imprudence the her to represent and Hertfordshire,
attachment. an

pleasure, affording of means one had Wickham Gardiner, Mrs. To
ago, years dozen a or ten About powers. general his with unconnected
very that in time considerable a spent had she marriage, her before
many therefore, had, They belonged. he which to Derbyshire of part
since there little been had Wickham though and common; in acquaintances
fresher her give to power his in yet was it father, Darcy’s of death the
of way the in been had she than friends former her of intelligence
procuring.

by Darcy Mr. late the known and Pemberley, seen had Gardiner Mrs.
subject inexhaustible an was consequently Here well. perfectly character
minute the with Pemberley of recollection her comparing In discourse. of
of tribute her bestowing in and give, could Wickham which description
both delighting was she possessor, late its of character the on praise
Darcy’s Mr. present the with acquainted made being On herself. and him
gentleman’s that of some remember to tried she him, of treatment
and it, with agree might which lad a quite when disposition reputed
Fitzwilliam Mr. heard having recollected she that last at confident was
boy. ill-natured proud, very a as of spoken formerly Darcy



26 Chapter


given kindly and punctually was Elizabeth to caution Gardiner’s Mrs.
after alone; her to speaking of opportunity favourable first the on
on: went thus she thought, she what her telling honestly

because merely love in fall to Lizzy, girl, a sensible too are “You
speaking of afraid not am I therefore, and, it; against warned are you
involve not Do guard. your on be you have would I Seriously, openly.
want the which affection an in him involve to endeavour or yourself
against say to nothing have I imprudent. very so make would fortune of
he fortune the had he if and man; young interesting most a is he _him_;
you is, it as But better. do not could you think should I have, to ought
all we and sense, have You you. with away run fancy your let not must
and resolution _your_ on depend would father Your it. use to you expect
father.” your disappoint not must You sure. am I conduct, good

indeed.” serious being is this aunt, dear “My

likewise.” serious be to you engage to hope I and “Yes,

of care take will I alarm. any under be not need you then, “Well,
I if me, with love in be not shall He too. Wickham Mr. of and myself,
it.” prevent can

now.” serious not are you “Elizabeth,

with love in not am I present At again. try will I pardon, your beg “I
comparison, all beyond is, he But not. am certainly I no, Wickham; Mr.
to attached really becomes he if saw--and ever I man agreeable most the
imprudence the see I not. should he that better be will it believe me--I
does me of opinion father’s My Darcy! Mr. abominable _that_ Oh! it. of
My it. forfeit to miserable be should I and honour, greatest the me
I aunt, dear my short, In Wickham. Mr. to partial is however, father,
but unhappy; you of any making of means the be to sorry very be should
people young affection, is there where that day every see we since
into entering from fortune of want immediate by withheld seldom are
many so than wiser be to promise I can how other, each with engagements
it that know to even I am how or tempted, am I if fellow-creatures my of
not is therefore, you, promise can I that All resist? to wisdom be would
first his myself believe to hurry a in be not will I hurry. a in be to
short, In wishing. be not will I him, with company in am I When object.
best.” my do will I

very so here coming his discourage you if well as be will it “Perhaps
him.” inviting of mother your _remind_ not should you least, At often.

“very smile: conscious a with Elizabeth said day,” other the did I “As
imagine not do But _that_. from refrain to me in wise be will it true,
been has he that account your on is It often. so here always is he that
the to as ideas mother’s my know You week. this invited frequently so
my upon and really, But friends. her for company constant of necessity
hope I now and wisest; the be to think I what do to try will I honour,
satisfied.” are you

for her thanked having Elizabeth and was, she that her assured aunt Her
advice of instance wonderful a parted; they hints, her of kindness the
resented. being without point, a such on given being

quitted been had it after soon Hertfordshire into returned Collins Mr.
Lucases, the with abode his up took he as but Jane; and Gardiners the by
was marriage His Bennet. Mrs. to inconvenience great no was arrival his
think to as resigned far so length at was she and approaching, fast now
that tone, ill-natured an in say, to repeatedly even and inevitable, it
day, wedding the be to was Thursday happy.” be might they “_wished_ she
she when and visit; farewell her paid Lucas Miss Wednesday on and
and ungracious mother’s her of ashamed Elizabeth, leave, take to rose
her accompanied herself, affected sincerely and wishes, good reluctant
said: Charlotte together, downstairs went they As room. the of out

Eliza.” often, very you from hearing on depend shall “I

shall.” certainly you “_That_

me?” see and come you Will you. ask to favour another have I “And

Hertfordshire.” in hope, I meet, often shall “We

to therefore, me, Promise time. some for Kent leave to likely not am “I
Hunsford.” to come

the in pleasure little foresaw she though refuse, not could Elizabeth
visit.

I “and Charlotte, added March,” in me to coming are Maria and father “My
as be will you Eliza, Indeed, party. the of be to consent will you hope
them.” of either as welcome

from Kent for off set bridegroom and bride the place; took wedding The
on hear, to or say, to much as had everybody and door, church the
their and friend; her from heard soon Elizabeth usual. as subject the
that been; ever had it as frequent and regular as was correspondence
never could Elizabeth impossible. was unreserved equally be should it
over, was intimacy of comfort the all that feeling without her address
the for was it correspondent, a as slacken to not determined though and
letters first Charlotte’s was. what than rather been, had what of sake
be but not could there eagerness; of deal good a with received were
would she how home, new her of speak would she how know to curiosity
to herself pronounce dare would she happy how and Catherine, Lady like
Charlotte that felt Elizabeth read, were letters the when though, be;
She foreseen. have might she as exactly point every on herself expressed
nothing mentioned and comforts, with surrounded seemed cheerfully, wrote
and neighbourhood, furniture, house, The praise. not could she which
most was behaviour Catherine’s Lady and taste, her to all were roads,
and Hunsford of picture Collins’s Mr. was It obliging. and friendly
wait must she that perceived Elizabeth and softened; rationally Rosings
rest. the know to there visit own her for

their announce to sister her to lines few a written already had Jane
it hoped Elizabeth again, wrote she when and London; in arrival safe
Bingleys. the of something say to power her in be would

impatience as rewarded well as was letter second this for impatience Her
or seeing either without town in week a been had Jane is. generally
that supposing by however, it, for accounted She Caroline. from hearing
been accident some by had Longbourn from friend her to letter last her
lost.

the of part that into to-morrow going “is continued, she aunt,” “My
Street.” Grosvenor in calling of opportunity the take shall I and town,

Bingley. Miss seen had she and paid, was visit the when again wrote She
very was she “but words, her were spirits,” in Caroline think not did “I
coming my of notice no her giving for me reproached and me, see to glad
reached never had letter last my therefore, right, was I London. to
much so but well, was He course. of brother, their after inquired I her.
that found I him. saw ever scarcely they that Darcy Mr. with engaged
was visit My her. see could I wish I dinner. to expected was Darcy Miss
shall I say dare I out. going were Hurst Mrs. and Caroline as long, not
here.” soon them see

that her convinced It letter. this over head her shook Elizabeth
town. in being sister’s her Bingley Mr. to discover could only accident

to endeavoured She him. of nothing saw Jane and away, passed weeks Four
be longer no could she but it; regret not did she that herself persuade
morning every home at waiting After inattention. Bingley’s Miss to blind
the her, for excuse fresh a evening every inventing and fortnight, a for
more, yet and stay, her of shortness the but appear; last at did visitor
no herself deceive to Jane allow would manner her of alteration the
will sister her to occasion this on wrote she which letter The longer.
felt. she what prove

her in triumphing of incapable be sure, am I will, Lizzy dearest “My
been have to myself confess I when expense, my at judgement, better
sister, dear my But, me. for regard Bingley’s Miss in deceived entirely
I if obstinate me think not do right, you proved has event the though
was confidence my was, behaviour her what considering that, assert still
for reason her comprehend all at not do I suspicion. your as natural as
to were circumstances same the if but me; with intimate be to wishing
not did Caroline again. deceived be should I sure am I again, happen
I did line, a not note, a not and yesterday; till visit my return
that evident very was it come, did she When meantime. the in receive
not for apology, formal slight, a made she it; in pleasure no had she
was and again, me see to wishing of word a not said before, calling
was I away went she when that creature, a altered so respect every in
pity, I longer. no acquaintance the continue to resolved perfectly
out me singling in wrong very was She her. blaming help cannot I though
on began intimacy to advance every that say safely can I did; she as
acting been has she that feel must she because her, pity I But side. her
the is brother her for anxiety that sure very am I because and wrong,
know _we_ though and farther; myself explain not need I it. of cause
easily will it it, feels she if yet needless, quite be to anxiety this
to is he as dear deservedly so and me; to behaviour her for account
and natural is behalf his on feel must she anxiety whatever sister, his
now, fears such any having her at however, wonder, but cannot I amiable.
ago. long met, have must we me, about cared all at had he if because,
said she something from certain, am I town, in being my of knows He
she if as talking, of manner her by seem, would it yet and herself;
I Darcy. Miss to partial really is he that herself persuade to wanted
should I harshly, judging of afraid not were I If it. understand cannot
duplicity of appearance strong a is there that say to tempted almost be
thought, painful every banish to endeavour will I But this. all in
the and affection, happy--your me make will what of only think and
very you from hear me Let aunt. and uncle dear my of kindness invariable
Netherfield to returning never his of something said Bingley Miss soon.
better had We certainty. any with not but house, the up giving of again,
accounts pleasant such have you that glad extremely am I it. mention not
and William Sir with them, see to go Pray Hunsford. at friends our from
etc.” there.--Yours, comfortable very be will you sure am I Maria.

she as returned spirits her but pain; some Elizabeth gave letter This
least. at sister the by duped, be longer no would Jane that considered
not would She over. absolutely now was brother the from expectation All
on sunk character His attentions. his of renewal a for wish even
possible a as well as him, for punishment a as and it; of review every
Mr. marry soon really might he hoped seriously she Jane, to advantage
abundantly him make would she account, Wickham’s by as sister, Darcy’s
away. thrown had he what regret

promise her of Elizabeth reminded time this about Gardiner Mrs.
Elizabeth and information; required and gentleman, that concerning
to than aunt her to contentment give rather might as send to such had
over, were attentions his subsided, had partiality apparent His herself.
to enough watchful was Elizabeth else. one some of admirer the was he
pain. material without it of write and it see could she but all, it see
satisfied was vanity her and touched, slightly but been had heart Her
fortune had choice, only his been have would _she_ that believing with
most the was pounds thousand ten of acquisition sudden The it. permitted
himself rendering now was he whom to lady young the of charm remarkable
than case this in perhaps clear-sighted less Elizabeth, but agreeable;
independence. of wish his for him with quarrel not did Charlotte’s, in
to able while and natural; more be could contrary, the on Nothing,
was she her, relinquish to struggles few a him cost it that suppose
very could and both, for measure desirable and wise a it allow to ready
happy. him wish sincerely

the relating after and Gardiner; Mrs. to acknowledged was this All
that aunt, dear my convinced, now am “I on: went thus she circumstances,
pure that experienced really I had for love; in much been never have I
and name, very his detest present at should I passion, elevating and
cordial only not are feelings my But evil. of manner all him wish
find cannot I King. Miss towards impartial even are they _him_; towards
to unwilling least the in am I that or all, at her hate I that out
My this. all in love no be can There girl. of sort good very a her think
more a be should certainly I though and effectual; been has watchfulness
love in distractedly I were acquaintances my all to object interesting
insignificance. comparative my regret I that say cannot I him, with
take Lydia and Kitty dearly. too purchased be sometimes may Importance
the in young are They do. I than heart to more much defection his
that conviction mortifying the to open yet not and world, the of ways
plain.” the as well as on live to something have must men young handsome



27 Chapter


otherwise and family, Longbourn the in these than events greater no With
and dirty sometimes Meryton, to walks the beyond little by diversified
take to was March away. pass February and January did cold, sometimes
of seriously very thought first at not had She Hunsford. to Elizabeth
plan the on depending was found, soon she Charlotte, but thither; going
pleasure greater with herself it consider to learned gradually she and
seeing of desire her increased had Absence certainty. greater as well as
There Collins. Mr. of disgust her weakened and again, Charlotte
such and mother a such with as, and scheme, the in novelty was
change little a faultless, be not could home sisters, uncompanionable
her give moreover would journey The sake. own its for unwelcome not was
have would she near, drew time the as short, in and, Jane; at peep a
smoothly, on went however, Everything, delay. any for sorry very been
was She sketch. first Charlotte’s to according settled finally was and
improvement The daughter. second his and William Sir accompany to
became plan the and time, in added was London in night a spending of
be. could plan as perfect

her, miss certainly would who father, her leaving in was pain only The
he that going, her liked little so point, the to came it when who, and
letter. her answer to promised almost and him, to write to her told

on friendly; perfectly was Wickham Mr. and herself between farewell The
that forget him make not could pursuit present His more. even side his
the attention, his deserve to and excite to first the been had Elizabeth
manner his in and admired; be to first the pity, to and listen to first
of her reminding enjoyment, every her wishing adieu, her bidding of
their trusting and Bourgh, de Catherine Lady in expect to was she what
there coincide, always everybody--would of opinion her--their of opinion
to her attach ever must felt she which interest an solicitude, a was
that, convinced him from parted she and regard; sincere most a with him
amiable the of model her be always must he single, or married whether
pleasing. and

her make to kind a of not were day next the fellow-travellers Her
a Maria, daughter his and Lucas, William Sir agreeable. less him think
say to nothing had himself, as empty-headed as but girl, good-humoured
much as about with to listened were and hearing, worth be could that
but absurdities, loved Elizabeth chaise. the of rattle the as delight
of new nothing her tell could He long. too William’s Sir known had she
were civilities his and knighthood; and presentation his of wonders the
information. his like out, worn

early so it began they and miles, twenty-four only of journey a was It
Gardiner’s Mr. to drove they As noon. by Street Gracechurch in be to as
when arrival; their watching window drawing-room a at was Jane door,
Elizabeth, and them, welcome to there was she passage the entered they
and healthful it see to pleased was face, her in earnestly looking
girls, and boys little of troop a were stairs the On ever. as lovely
to them allow not would appearance cousin’s their for eagerness whose
seen not had they as shyness, whose and drawing-room, the in wait
and joy was All lower. coming their prevented twelvemonth, a for her
and bustle in morning the away; pleasantly most passed day The kindness.
theatres. the of one at evening the and shopping,

her was object first Their aunt. her by sit to contrived then Elizabeth
to reply in hear, to astonished than grieved more was she and sister;
her support to struggled always Jane though that inquiries, minute her
however, reasonable, was It dejection. of periods were there spirits,
the her gave Gardiner Mrs. long. continue not would they that hope to
and Street, Gracechurch in visit Bingley’s Miss of also particulars
and Jane between times different at occurring conversations repeated
the up given heart, her from had, former the that proved which herself,
acquaintance.

and desertion, Wickham’s on niece her rallied then Gardiner Mrs.
well. so it bearing on her complimented

I King? Miss is girl of sort “what added, she Elizabeth,” dear my “But
mercenary.” friend our think to sorry be should

affairs, matrimonial in difference the is what aunt, dear my “Pray,
end, discretion does Where motive? prudent the and mercenary the between
me, marrying his of afraid were you Christmas Last begin? avarice and
get to trying is he because now, and imprudent; be would it because
is he that out find to want you pounds, thousand ten only with girl a
mercenary.”

know shall I is, King Miss girl of sort what me tell only will you “If
think.” to what

her.” of harm no know I believe. I girl, of kind good very a is “She

death grandfather’s her till attention smallest the not her paid he “But
fortune.” this of mistress her made

_my_ gain to him for allowable not were it If he? should “No--why
for be there could occasion what money, no had I because affections
equally was who and about, care not did he whom girl a to love making
poor?”

her towards attentions his directing in indelicacy an seems there “But
event.” this after soon so

elegant those all for time not has circumstances distressed in man “A
it, to object not does _she_ If observe. may people other which decorums
_we_?” should why

being her shows only It _him_. justify not does objecting not “_Her_
feeling.” or herself--sense something in deficient

be shall _He_ choose. you as it “have Elizabeth, cried “Well,”
foolish.” be shall _she_ and mercenary,

know, you sorry, be should I choose. _not_ do I what is that Lizzy, “No,
Derbyshire.” in long so lived has who man young a of ill think to

in live who men young of opinion poor very a have I all, is that if “Oh!
not are Hertfordshire in live who friends intimate their and Derbyshire;
to-morrow going am I Heaven! Thank all. them of sick am I better. much
has who quality, agreeable one not has who man a find shall I where
ones only the are men Stupid him. recommend to sense nor manner neither
all.” after knowing, worth

disappointment.” of strongly savours speech that Lizzy; care, “Take

the had she play, the of conclusion the by separated were they Before
in aunt and uncle her accompany to invitation an of happiness unexpected
summer. the in taking proposed they which pleasure of tour a

Gardiner, Mrs. said us,” carry shall it far how determined not have “We
Lakes.” the to perhaps, “but,

her and Elizabeth, to agreeable more been have could scheme No
dear, my “Oh, grateful. and ready most was invitation the of acceptance
You felicity! what delight! “what cried, rapturously she aunt,” dear
What spleen. and disappointment to Adieu vigour. and life fresh me give
transport of hours what Oh! mountains? and rocks to men young are
other like be not shall it return, _do_ we when And spend! shall we
We anything. of idea accurate one give to able being without travellers,
seen. have we what recollect _will_ gone--we have we where know _will_
our in together jumbled be not shall rivers and mountains, Lakes,
scene, particular any describe to attempt we when nor imaginations;
_our_ Let situation. relative its about quarreling begin we will
of generality the of those than insupportable less be effusions first
travellers.”



28 Chapter


to interesting and new was journey day’s next the in object Every
had she for enjoyment; of state a in were spirits her and Elizabeth;
health, her for fear all banish to as well so looking sister her seen
delight. of source constant a was tour northern her of prospect the and

in was eye every Hunsford, to lane the for road high the left they When
view. in it bring to expected turning every and Parsonage, the of search
Elizabeth side. one on boundary their was Park Rosings of palings The
inhabitants. its of heard had she that all of recollection the at smiled

the to sloping garden The discernible. was Parsonage the length At
hedge, laurel the and pales, green the it, in standing house the road,
Charlotte and Collins Mr. arriving. were they declared everything
which gate small the at stopped carriage the and door, the at appeared
of smiles and nods the amidst house, the to walk gravel short a by led
rejoicing chaise, the of out all were they moment a In party. whole the
the with friend her welcomed Collins Mrs. other. each of sight the at
with satisfied more and more was Elizabeth and pleasure, liveliest
saw She received. affectionately so herself found she when coming
marriage; his by altered not were manners cousin’s her that instantly
some her detained he and been, had it what just was civility formal his
her all after inquiries his satisfy and hear to gate the at minutes
the out pointing his than delay other no with then, were They family.
they as soon as and house; the into taken entrance, the of neatness
ostentatious with time, second a them welcomed he parlour, the in were
wife’s his all repeated punctually and abode, humble his to formality
refreshment. of offers

help not could she and glory; his in him see to prepared was Elizabeth
its room, the of proportion good the displaying in that fancying in
her, to particularly himself addressed he furniture, its and aspect
But him. refusing in lost had she what feel her make to wishing if as
to able not was she comfortable, and neat seemed everything though
at wonder with looked rather and repentance, of sigh any by him gratify
companion. a such with air an cheerful so have could she that friend her
be reasonably might wife his which of anything said Collins Mr. When
her turned involuntarily she unseldom, not was certainly which ashamed,
but blush; faint a discern could she twice or Once Charlotte. on eye
to enough long sitting After hear. not did wisely Charlotte general in
to sideboard the from room, the in furniture of article every admire
had that all of and journey, their of account an give to fender, the
the in stroll a take to them invited Collins Mr. London, in happened
of cultivation the to and out, laid well and large was which garden,
most his of one was garden this in work To himself. attended he which
countenance of command the admired Elizabeth and pleasures; respectable
and exercise, the of healthfulness the of talked Charlotte which with
way the leading Here, possible. as much as it encouraged she owned
an them allowing scarcely and walk, cross and walk every through
out pointed was view every for, asked he praises the utter to interval
the number could He behind. entirely beauty left which minuteness a with
in were there trees many how tell could and direction, every in fields
which or garden, his which views the all of But clump. distant most the
the with compared be to were none boast, could kingdom or country the
bordered that trees the in opening an by afforded Rosings, of prospect
handsome a was It house. his of front the opposite nearly park the
ground. rising on situated well building, modern

meadows; two his round them led have would Collins Mr. garden, his From
white a of remains the encounter to shoes having not ladies, the but
Charlotte him, accompanied William Sir while and back; turned frost,
pleased, well extremely house, the over friend and sister her took
husband’s her without it showing of opportunity the have to probably,
everything and convenient; and built well but small, rather was It help.
which of consistency and neatness a with arranged and up fitted was
be could Collins Mr. When credit. the all Charlotte gave Elizabeth
by and throughout, comfort great of air an really was there forgotten,
often be must he supposed Elizabeth it, of enjoyment evident Charlotte’s
forgotten.

It country. the in still was Catherine Lady that learnt already had She
joining Collins Mr. when dinner, at were they while again of spoken was
observed: in,

Catherine Lady seeing of honour the have will you Elizabeth, Miss “Yes,
will you say not need I and church, at Sunday ensuing the on Bourgh de
I and condescension, and affability all is She her. with delighted be
notice her of portion some with honoured be will you but not doubt
she saying in hesitation any scarcely have I over. is service when
she which with invitation every in Maria sister my and you include will
is Charlotte dear my to behaviour Her here. stay your during us honours
allowed never are and week, every twice Rosings at dine We charming.
I us. for ordered regularly is carriage ladyship’s Her home. walk to
several.” has she for carriages, ladyship’s her of one say, _should_

added indeed,” woman sensible respectable, very a is Catherine “Lady
neighbour.” attentive most a “and Charlotte,

of sort the is She say. I what exactly is that dear, my true, “Very
deference.” much too with regard cannot one whom woman

news, Hertfordshire over talking in chiefly spent was evening The
closed, it when and written; been already had what again telling and
upon meditate to had chamber, her of solitude the in Elizabeth,
guiding, in address her understand to contentment, of degree Charlotte’s
it that acknowledge to and husband, her with, bearing in composure and
visit her how anticipate to also had She well. very done all was
vexatious the employments, usual their of tenor quiet the pass, would
with intercourse their of gaieties the and Collins, Mr. of interruptions
all. it settled soon imagination lively A Rosings.

ready getting room her in was she as day, next the of middle the About
in house whole the speak to seemed below noise sudden a walk, a for
running somebody heard she moment, a listening after and, confusion;
opened She her. after loudly calling and hurry, violent a in stairs up
with breathless who, place, landing the in Maria met and door the
out-- cried agitation,

for dining-room, the into come and haste make pray Eliza! dear my “Oh,
Make is. it what you tell not will I seen! be to sight a such is there
moment.” this down come and haste,

more, nothing her tell would Maria vain; in questions asked Elizabeth
in lane, the fronted which dining-room, the into ran they down and
the at phaeton low a in stopping ladies two was It wonder; this of quest
gate. garden

pigs the that least at expected “I Elizabeth. cried all?” this is “And
her and Catherine Lady but nothing is here and garden, the into got were
daughter.”

not is “it mistake, the at shocked quite Maria, said dear,” my “La!
them; with lives who Jenkinson, Mrs. is lady old The Catherine. Lady
little a quite is She her. at look Only Bourgh. de Miss is other the
small?” and thin so be could she that thought have would Who creature.

wind. this all in doors of out Charlotte keep to rude abominably is “She
in?” come not she does Why

favours of greatest the is It does. ever hardly she says Charlotte “Oh,
in.” comes Bourgh de Miss when

“She ideas. other with struck Elizabeth, said appearance,” her like “I
will She well. very him for do will she Yes, cross. and sickly looks
wife.” proper very a him make

conversation in gate the at standing both were Charlotte and Collins Mr.
was diversion, high Elizabeth’s to William, Sir and ladies; the with
greatness the of contemplation earnest in doorway, the in stationed
that looked Bourgh de Miss whenever bowing constantly and him, before
way.

and on, drove ladies the said; be to more nothing was there length At
two the saw sooner no Collins Mr. house. the into returned others the
which fortune, good their on them congratulate to began he than girls
asked was party whole the that know them letting by explained Charlotte
day. next the Rosings at dine to



29 Chapter


complete. was invitation, this of consequence in triumph, Collins’s Mr.
wondering his to patroness his of grandeur the displaying of power The
his and himself towards civility her see them letting of and visitors,
opportunity an that and for; wished had he what exactly was wife,
Lady of instance an such was soon, so given be should it doing of
enough. admire to how not knew he as condescension, Catherine’s

by surprised all at been have not should I “that he, said confess,” “I
at evening the spend and tea drink to Sunday on us asking ladyship’s her
it that affability, her of knowledge my from expected, rather I Rosings.
Who this? as attention an such foreseen have could who But happen. would
there dine to invitation an receive should we that imagined have could
immediately so party) whole the including moreover, invitation, (an
arrival!” your after

William, Sir replied happened,” has what at surprised less the am “I
which are, really great the of manners the what of knowledge that “from
such court, the About acquire. to me allowed has life in situation my
uncommon.” not are breeding elegant of instances

their but morning next or day whole the of talked was anything Scarcely
what in them instructing carefully was Collins Mr. Rosings. to visit
and servants, many so rooms, such of sight the that expect, to were they
them. overpower wholly not might dinner, a splendid so

Elizabeth-- to said he toilette, the for separating were ladies the When

Lady apparel. your about cousin, dear my uneasy, yourself make not “Do
which us in dress of elegance that requiring from far is Catherine
on put to merely you advise would I daughter. her and herself becomes
occasion no is rest--there the to superior is clothes your of whatever
you of worse the think not will Catherine Lady more. anything for
rank of distinction the have to likes She dressed. simply being for
preserved.”

different their to times three or two came he dressing, were they While
much very Catherine Lady as quick, being their recommend to doors,
of accounts formidable Such dinner. her for waiting kept be to objected
Lucas Maria frightened quite living, of manner her and ladyship, her
her to forward looked she and company, to used little been had who
done had father her as apprehension much as with Rosings at introduction
James’s. St. at presentation his to

a half about of walk pleasant a had they fine, was weather the As
and prospects; its and beauty its has park Every park. the across mile
such in be not could she though with, pleased be to much saw Elizabeth
but was and inspire, to scene the expected Collins Mr. as raptures
the of front in windows the of enumeration his by affected slightly
originally had altogether glazing the what of relation his and house,
Bourgh. de Lewis Sir cost

every was alarm Maria’s hall, the to steps the ascended they When
calm. perfectly look not did William Sir even and increasing, moment
Lady of nothing heard had She her. fail not did courage Elizabeth’s
or talents extraordinary any from awful her spoke that Catherine
thought she rank or money of stateliness mere the and virtue, miraculous
trepidation. without witness could she

a with out, pointed Collins Mr. which of entrance-hall, the From
they ornaments, finished the and proportion fine the air, rapturous
Lady where room the to ante-chamber, an through servants the followed
ladyship, Her sitting. were Jenkinson Mrs. and daughter, her Catherine,
had Collins Mrs. as and them; receive to arose condescension, great with
should introduction of office the that husband her with it settled
those of any without manner, proper a in performed was it hers, be
necessary. thought have would he which thanks and apologies

completely so was William Sir James’s, St. at been having of spite In
courage just but had he that him, surrounding grandeur the by awed
word; a saying without seat his take and bow, low very a make to enough
edge the on sat senses, her of out almost frightened daughter, his and
herself found Elizabeth look. to way which knowing not chair, her of
her before ladies three the observe could and scene, the to equal quite
strongly-marked with woman, large tall, a was Catherine Lady composedly.
not was air Her handsome. been have once might which features,
her make to as such them receiving of manner her was nor conciliating,
by formidable rendered not was She rank. inferior their forget visitors
tone, a authoritative so in spoken was said she whatever but silence;
to immediately Wickham Mr. brought and self-importance, her marked as
she altogether, day the of observation the from and mind; Elizabeth’s
represented. he what exactly be to Catherine Lady believed

deportment and countenance whose in mother, the examining after When,
the on eyes her turned she Darcy, Mr. of resemblance some found soon she
her at astonishment Maria’s in joined have almost could she daughter,
any face nor figure in neither was There small. so and thin so being
her sickly; and pale was Bourgh de Miss ladies. the between likeness
very spoke she and insignificant; were plain, not though features,
appearance whose in Jenkinson, Mrs. to voice, low a in except little,
listening in engaged entirely was who and remarkable, nothing was there
before direction proper the in screen a placing and said, she what to
eyes. her

to windows the of one to sent all were they minutes, few a sitting After
beauties, its out point to them attending Collins Mr. view, the admire
worth better much was it that them informing kindly Catherine Lady and
summer. the in at looking

and servants the all were there and handsome, exceedingly was dinner The
had he as and, promised; had Collins Mr. which plate of articles the all
her by table, the of bottom the at seat his took he foretold, likewise
furnish could life that felt he if as looked and desire, ladyship’s
delighted with praised and ate, and carved, He greater. nothing
Sir by then and him by first commended, was dish every and alacrity;
son-in-law his whatever echo to recovered enough now was who William,
bear. could Catherine Lady wondered Elizabeth which manner a in said,
and admiration, excessive their by gratified seemed Catherine Lady But
proved table the on dish any when especially smiles, gracious most gave
Elizabeth conversation. much supply not did party The them. to novelty a
seated was she but opening, an was there whenever speak to ready was
in engaged was whom of former Bourgh--the de Miss and Charlotte between
all her to word a not said latter the and Catherine, Lady to listening
little how watching in employed chiefly was Jenkinson Mrs. dinner-time.
fearing and dish, other some try to her pressing ate, Bourgh de Miss
the and question, the of out speaking thought Maria indisposed. was she
admire. and eat but nothing did gentlemen

to little was there drawing-room, the to returned ladies the When
any without did she which talk, Catherine Lady hear to but done be
every on opinion her delivering in, came coffee till intermission
to used not was she that proved as manner, a decisive so in subject
domestic Charlotte’s into inquired She controverted. judgement her have
as advice of deal great a her gave minutely, and familiarly concerns
be to ought everything how her told all; them of management the to
the to as her instructed and hers, as family a small so in regulated
was nothing that found Elizabeth poultry. her and cows her of care
an with her furnish could which attention, lady’s great this beneath
discourse her of intervals the In others. to dictating of occasion
and Maria to questions of variety a addressed she Collins, Mrs. with
knew she connections whose of latter, the to especially but Elizabeth,
genteel, very a was Collins Mrs. to observed she who and least, the
sisters many how times, different at her, asked She girl. of kind pretty
of any whether herself, than younger or older were they whether had, she
they where handsome, were they whether married, be to likely were them
been had what and kept, father her carriage what educated, been had
of impertinence the all felt Elizabeth name? maiden mother’s her
then Catherine Lady composedly. very them answered but questions her
observed,

your For think. I Collins, Mr. on entailed is estate father’s “Your
no see I otherwise but it; of glad am “I Charlotte, to turning sake,”
thought not was It line. female the from estates entailing for occasion
Miss sing, and play you Do family. Bourgh’s de Lewis Sir in necessary
Bennet?”

little.” “A

Our you. hear to happy be shall we other or time then--some “Oh!
it try shall to----You superior probably one, capital a is instrument
sing?” and play sisters your Do day. some

does.” them of “One

Miss The learned. have to all ought You learn? all you not did “Why
Do yours. as income an good so not has father their and play, all Webbs
draw?” you

all.” at not “No,

you?” of none “What,

one.” “Not

mother Your opportunity. no had you suppose I But strange. very is “That
masters.” of benefit the for spring every town to you taken have should

London.” hates father my but objection, no had have would mother “My

you?” left governess your “Has

governess.” any had never “We

home at up brought daughters Five possible? that was How governess! “No
must mother Your thing. a such of heard never I governess! a without
education.” your to slave a quite been have

been not had that her assured she as smiling help hardly could Elizabeth
case. the

you governess, a Without you? to attended who you? taught who “Then,
neglected.” been have must

as us of such but were; we believe I families, some with “Compared
to encouraged always were We means. the wanted never learn to wished
be to chose who Those necessary. were that masters the all had and read,
might.” certainly idle,

had I if and prevent, will governess a what is that but doubt; no “Aye,
engage to strenuously most her advised have should I mother, your known
steady without education in done be to is nothing that say always I one.
is It it. give can governess a but nobody and instruction, regular and
that in supplying of means the been have I families many how wonderful
nieces Four out. placed well person young a get to glad always am I way.
and means; my through situated delightfully most are Jenkinson Mrs. of
person, young another recommended I that day other the but was it
quite are family the and me, to mentioned accidentally merely was who
Metcalf’s Lady of you tell I did Collins, Mrs. her. with delighted
‘Lady treasure. a Pope Miss finds She me? thank to yesterday calling
your of any Are treasure.’ a me given have ‘you she, said Catherine,’
Bennet?” Miss out, sisters younger

all.” ma’am, “Yes,

The second. the only you And odd! Very once? at out five all What, “All!
sisters younger Your married! are ones elder the before out ones younger
young?” very be must

be to young full is _she_ Perhaps sixteen. not is youngest my “Yes,
upon hard very be would it think I ma’am, really, But company. in much
and society of share their have not should they that sisters, younger
to inclination or means the have not may elder the because amusement,
youth of pleasures the to right a good as has last-born The early. marry
would it think I motive! a _such_ on back kept be to And first. the as
mind.” of delicacy or affection sisterly promote to likely very be not

decidedly very opinion your give “you ladyship, her said word,” my “Upon
age?” your is what Pray, person. a young so for

“your smiling, Elizabeth, replied up,” grown sisters younger three “With
it.” own to me expect hardly can ladyship

answer; direct a receiving not at astonished quite seemed Catherine Lady
ever had who creature first the be to herself suspected Elizabeth and
impertinence. dignified much so with trifle to dared

not need you therefore sure, am I twenty, than more be cannot “You
age.” your conceal

one-and-twenty.” not am “I

card-tables the over, was tea and them, joined had gentlemen the When
sat Collins Mrs. and Mr. and William, Sir Catherine, Lady placed. were
the cassino, at play to chose Bourgh de Miss as and quadrille; to down
her up make to Jenkinson Mrs. assisting of honour the had girls two
was syllable a Scarcely stupid. superlatively was table Their party.
Jenkinson Mrs. when except game, the to relate not did that uttered
or cold, too or hot too being Bourgh’s de Miss of fears her expressed
the at passed more deal great A light. little too or much too having
mistakes the speaking--stating generally was Catherine Lady table. other
Collins Mr. herself. of anecdote some relating or others, three the of
her thanking said, ladyship her everything to agreeing in employed was
many. too won he thought he if apologising and won, he fish every for
anecdotes with memory his storing was He much. say not did William Sir
names. noble and

chose, they as long as played had daughter her and Catherine Lady When
Collins, Mrs. to offered was carriage the up, broken were tables the
gathered then party The ordered. immediately and accepted gratefully
were they weather what determine Catherine Lady hear to fire the round
by summoned were they instructions these From morrow. the on have to
Mr. on thankfulness of speeches many with and coach; the of arrival the
soon As departed. they William’s Sir on bows many as and side Collins’s
cousin her by on called was Elizabeth door, the from driven had they as
for which, Rosings, at seen had she that all of opinion her give to
her But was. really it than favourable more made she sake, Charlotte’s
satisfy means no by could trouble, some her costing though commendation,
praise ladyship’s her take to obliged soon very was he and Collins, Mr.
hands. own his into



30 Chapter


long was visit his but Hunsford, at week a only stayed William Sir
settled, comfortably most being daughter’s his of him convince to enough
not were as neighbour a such and husband a such possessing her of and
his devoted Collins Mr. them, with was William Sir While with. met often
but country; the him showing and gig, his in out him driving to morning
employments, usual their to returned family whole the away, went he when
her of more see not did they that find to thankful was Elizabeth and
breakfast between time the of chief the for alteration, the by cousin
in or garden the in work at either him by passed now was dinner and
book-room, own his in window the of out looking and writing, and reading
backwards. was sat ladies the which in room The road. the fronted which
prefer not should Charlotte that wondered rather first at had Elizabeth
a had and room, sized better a was it use; common for dining-parlour the
excellent an had friend her that saw soon she but aspect; pleasant more
been have undoubtedly would Collins Mr. for did, she what for reason
and lively; equally one in sat they had apartment, own his in less much
arrangement. the for credit Charlotte gave she

and lane, the in nothing distinguish could they drawing-room the From
went carriages what of knowledge the for Collins Mr. to indebted were
phaeton, her in by drove Bourgh de Miss especially often how and along,
happened it though of, them inform to coming failed never he which
and Parsonage, the at stopped unfrequently not She day. every almost
ever scarcely was but Charlotte, with conversation minutes’ few a had
out. get to upon prevailed

and Rosings, to walk not did Collins Mr. which in passed days few Very
likewise; go to necessary it think not did wife his which in many not
livings family other be might there that recollected Elizabeth till and
many so of sacrifice the understand not could she of, disposed be to
ladyship, her from call a with honoured were they then and Now hours.
during room the in passing was that observation her escaped nothing and
work, their at looked employments, their into examined She visits. these
arrangement the with fault found differently; it do to them advised and
she if and negligence; in housemaid the detected or furniture; the of
finding of sake the for only it do to seemed refreshment, any accepted
family. her for large too were meat of joints Collins’s Mrs. that out

in not was lady great this though that perceived, soon Elizabeth
magistrate active most a was she county, the of peace the of commission
her to carried were which of concerns minutest the parish, own her in
to disposed were cottagers the of any whenever and Collins; Mr. by
the into forth sallied she poor, too or discontented, quarrelsome, be
scold and complaints, their silence differences, their settle to village
plenty. and harmony into them

week; a twice about repeated was Rosings at dining of entertainment The
one only being there and William, Sir of loss the for allowing and,
counterpart the was entertainment such every evening, the in card-table
living of style the as few, were engagements other Their first. the of
This, reach. Collins’s Mr. beyond was general in neighbourhood the in
time her spent she whole the upon and Elizabeth, to evil no was however,
with conversation pleasant of half-hours were there enough; comfortably
had she that year of time the for fine so was weather the and Charlotte,
she where and walk, favourite Her doors. of out enjoyment great often
was Catherine, Lady on calling were others the while went frequently
was there where park, the of side that edged which grove open the along
and herself, but value to seemed one no which path, sheltered nice a
curiosity. Catherine’s Lady of reach the beyond felt she where

away. passed soon visit her of fortnight first the way, quiet this In
an bring to was it preceding week the and approaching, was Easter
be must circle a small so in which Rosings, at family the to addition
was Darcy Mr. that arrival her after soon heard had Elizabeth important.
not were there though and weeks, few a of course the in there expected
would coming his prefer, not did she whom acquaintances her of many
and parties, Rosings their in at look to new comparatively one furnish
him on designs Bingley’s Miss hopeless how seeing in amused be might she
evidently was he whom for cousin, his to behaviour his by were,
greatest the with coming his of talked who Catherine, Lady by destined
and admiration, highest the of terms in him of spoke satisfaction,
by seen frequently been already had he that find to angry almost seemed
herself. and Lucas Miss

walking was Collins Mr. for Parsonage; the at known soon was arrival His
Lane, Hunsford into opening lodges the of view within morning whole the
his making after and it, of assurance earliest the have to order in
great the with home hurried Park, the into turned carriage the as bow
his pay to Rosings to hastened he morning following the On intelligence.
for them, require to Catherine Lady of nephews two were There respects.
of son younger the Fitzwilliam, Colonel a him with brought had Darcy Mr.
when party, the all of surprise great the to and, ----, Lord uncle his
seen had Charlotte him. accompanied gentlemen the returned, Collins Mr.
running immediately and road, the crossing room, husband’s her from them
adding: expect, might they honour an what girls the told other, the into

would Darcy Mr. civility. of piece this for Eliza, you, thank may “I
me.” upon wait to soon so come have never

compliment, the to right all disclaim to time scarcely had Elizabeth
shortly and door-bell, the by announced was approach their before
Fitzwilliam, Colonel room. the entered gentlemen three the afterwards
and person in but handsome, not thirty, about was way, the led who
been had he as just looked Darcy Mr. gentleman. the truly most address
usual his with compliments, his Hertfordshire--paid in look to used
her toward feelings his be might whatever and Collins, Mrs. to reserve,
merely Elizabeth composure. of appearance every with her met friend,
word. a saying without him to curtseyed

the with directly conversation into entered Fitzwilliam Colonel
but pleasantly; very talked and man, well-bred a of ease and readiness
and house the on observation slight a addressed having after cousin, his
anybody. to speaking without time some for sat Collins, Mrs. to garden
of inquire to as awakened far so was civility his however, length, At
usual the in him answered She family. her of health the after Elizabeth
added: pause, moment’s a after and way,

never you Have months. three these town in been has sister eldest “My
there?” her see to happened

see to wished she but had; never he that sensible perfectly was She
between passed had what of consciousness any betray would he whether
he as confused little a looked he thought she and Jane, and Bingleys the
The Bennet. Miss meet to as fortunate so been never had he that answered
went afterwards soon gentlemen the and farther, no pursued was subject
away.



31 Chapter


Parsonage, the at admired much very were manners Fitzwilliam’s Colonel
pleasures the to considerably add must he that felt all ladies the and
they before however, days, some was It Rosings. at engagements their of
the in visitors were there while thither--for invitation any received
Easter-day, till not was it and necessary; be not could they house,
by honoured were they that arrival, gentlemen’s the after week a almost
to church leaving on asked merely were they then and attention, an such
little very seen had they week last the For evening. the in there come
the at called had Fitzwilliam Colonel daughter. her or Catherine Lady of
seen had they Darcy Mr. but time, the during once than more Parsonage
church. at only

joined they hour proper a at and course, of accepted was invitation The
received ladyship Her drawing-room. Catherine’s Lady in party the
so means no by was company their that plain was it but civilly, them
fact, in was, she and else; nobody get could she when as acceptable
Darcy, to especially them, to speaking nephews, her by engrossed almost
room. the in person other any to than more much

a was anything them; see to glad really seemed Fitzwilliam Colonel
had friend pretty Collins’s Mrs. and Rosings; at him to relief welcome
and her, by himself seated now He much. very fancy his caught moreover
staying and travelling of Hertfordshire, and Kent of agreeably so talked
so half been never had Elizabeth that music, and books new of home, at
much so with conversed they and before; room that in entertained well
herself, Catherine Lady of attention the draw to as flow, and spirit
turned repeatedly and soon been had eyes _His_ Darcy. Mr. of as well as
a after ladyship, her that and curiosity; of look a with them towards
not did she for acknowledged, openly more was feeling, the shared while,
out: call to scruple

talking are you it is What Fitzwilliam? saying, are you that is “What
is.” it what hear me Let Bennet? Miss telling you are What of?

avoid to able longer no when he, said madam,” music, of speaking are “We
reply. a

I delight. my subjects all of is It aloud. speak pray Then music! “Of
music. of speaking are you if conversation the in share my have must
enjoyment true more have who suppose, I England, in people few are There
learnt, ever had I If taste. natural better a or myself, than music of
health her if Anne, would so And proficient. great a been have should I
performed have would she that confident am I apply. to her allowed had
Darcy?” on, get Georgiana does How delightfully.

proficiency. sister’s his of praise affectionate with spoke Darcy Mr.

Lady said her,” of account good a such hear to glad very am “I
excel to expect cannot she that me, from her tell pray “and Catherine;
deal.” good a practice not does she if

advice. such need not does she “that replied, he madam,” you, assure “I
constantly.” very practises She

write next I when and much; too done be cannot It better. the much “So
often I account. any on it neglect to not her charge shall I her, to
without acquired be to is music in excellence no that ladies young tell
she that times, several Bennet Miss told have I practice. constant
Mrs. though and more; practises she unless well really play never will
told often have I as welcome, very is she instrument, no has Collins
Mrs. in pianoforte the on play and day, every Rosings to come to her,
part that in know, you way, nobody’s in be would She room. Jenkinson’s
house.” the of

made and ill-breeding, aunt’s his of ashamed little a looked Darcy Mr.
answer. no

having of Elizabeth reminded Fitzwilliam Colonel over, was coffee When
He instrument. the to directly down sat she and him; to play to promised
then and song, a half to listened Catherine Lady her. near chair a drew
away walked latter the till nephew; other her to before, as talked,
pianoforte the towards deliberation usual his with making and her, from
performer’s fair the of view full a command to as so himself stationed
first the at and doing, was he what saw Elizabeth countenance.
said: and smile, arch an with him to turned pause, convenient

hear to state this all in coming by Darcy, Mr. me, frighten to mean “You
There well. so play _does_ sister your though alarmed be not will I me?
the at frightened be to bear can never that me about stubbornness a is
intimidate to attempt every at rises always courage My others. of will
me.”

not could you “because replied, he mistaken,” are you say not shall “I
have I and you; alarming of design any entertain to me believe really
find you that know to enough long acquaintance your of pleasure the had
are fact in which opinions professing occasionally in enjoyment great
own.” your not

to said and herself, of picture this at heartily laughed Elizabeth
of notion pretty very a you give will cousin “Your Fitzwilliam, Colonel
unlucky particularly am I say. I word a believe to not you teach and me,
part a in character, real my expose to able so person a with meeting in
of degree some with off myself pass to hoped had I where world the of
all mention to you in ungenerous very is it Darcy, Mr. Indeed, credit.
to leave me give Hertfordshire--and, in disadvantage my to knew you that
such and retaliate, to me provoking is it too--for impolitic very say,
hear.” to relations your shock will as out come may things

smilingly. he, said you,” of afraid not am “I

Colonel cried of,” him accuse to have you what hear me let “Pray
strangers.” among behaves he how know to like should “I Fitzwilliam.

dreadful. very something for yourself prepare then--but hear shall “You
know, must you Hertfordshire, in him seeing ever my of time first The
danced He did? he think you do what ball, this at ball--and a at was
certain my to and, scarce; were gentlemen though dances, four only
a of want in down sitting was lady young one than more knowledge,
fact.” the deny cannot you Darcy, Mr. partner.

assembly the in lady any knowing of honour the time that at not had “I
party.” own my beyond

Colonel Well, ball-room. a in introduced be ever can nobody and “True;
orders.” your wait fingers My next? play I do what Fitzwilliam,

an sought I had better, judged have should “I Darcy, said “Perhaps,”
strangers.” to myself recommend to ill-qualified am I but introduction;

still Elizabeth, said this?” of reason the cousin your ask we “Shall
and sense of man a why him ask we “Shall Fitzwilliam. Colonel addressing
recommend to qualified ill is world, the in lived has who and education,
strangers?” to himself

to applying “without Fitzwilliam, said question,” your answer can “I
trouble.” the himself give not will he because is It him.

Darcy, said possess,” people some which talent the not have certainly “I
cannot I before. seen never have I those with easily conversing “of
their in interested appear or conversation, of tone their catch
done.” see often I as concerns,

the in instrument this over move not “do Elizabeth, said fingers,” “My
same the not have They do. women’s many so see I which manner masterly
I then But expression. same the produce not do and rapidity, or force
the take not will I fault--because own my be to it supposed always have
as fingers _my_ believe not do I that not is It practising. of trouble
execution.” superior of woman’s other any as capable

your employed have You right. perfectly are “You said, and smiled Darcy
can you hearing of privilege the to admitted one No better. much time
strangers.” to perform us of neither We wanting. anything think

know to out called who Catherine, Lady by interrupted were they Here
again. playing began immediately Elizabeth of. talking were they what
said minutes, few a for listening after and, approached, Catherine Lady
Darcy: to

and more, practised she if amiss all at play not would Bennet “Miss
notion good very a has She master. London a of advantage the have could
have would Anne Anne’s. to equal not is taste her though fingering, of
learn.” to her allowed health her had performer, delightful a been

his to assented he cordially how see to Darcy at looked Elizabeth
she could other any at nor moment that at neither but praise; cousin’s
Miss to behaviour his of whole the from and love; of symptom any discern
have might he that Bingley, Miss for comfort this derived she Bourgh de
relation. his been she had _her_, marry to likely as just been

mixing performance, Elizabeth’s on remarks her continued Catherine Lady
received Elizabeth taste. and execution on instructions many them with
the of request the at and, civility, of forbearance the all with them
was carriage ladyship’s her till instrument the at remained gentlemen,
home. all them take to ready



32 Chapter


Jane to writing and morning, next the herself by sitting was Elizabeth
village, the into business on gone were Maria and Collins Mrs. while
a of signal certain the door, the at ring a by startled was she when
to unlikely not it thought she carriage, no heard had she As visitor.
her away putting was apprehension that under and Catherine, Lady be
questions, impertinent all escape might she that letter half-finished
and Darcy, Mr. surprise, great very her to and, opened, door the when
room. the entered only, Darcy Mr.

his for apologised and alone, her finding on too astonished seemed He
were ladies the all understood had he that know her letting by intrusion
within. be to

made, were Rosings after inquiries her when and down, sat then They
absolutely was It silence. total into sinking of danger in seemed
emergence this in and something, of think to therefore, necessary,
and Hertfordshire, in last him seen had she _when_ recollecting
hasty their of subject the on say would he what know to curious feeling
observed: she departure,

Darcy! Mr. November, last Netherfield quitted all you suddenly very “How
you see to Bingley Mr. to surprise agreeable most a been have must It
day the but went he right, recollect I if for, soon; so him after all
London?” left you when hope, I well, were sisters his and He before.

you.” thank I so, “Perfectly

short a after and, answer, other no receive to was she that found She
added: pause

ever of idea much not has Bingley Mr. that understood have I think “I
again?” Netherfield to returning

spend may he that probable is it but so; say him heard never have “I
and friends, many has He future. the in there time his of little very
continually are engagements and friends when life of time a at is
increasing.”

for better be would it Netherfield, at little but be to means he “If
we then for entirely, place the up give should he that neighbourhood the
did Bingley Mr. perhaps, But, there. family settled a get possibly might
as neighbourhood the of convenience the for much so house the take not
same the on it quit or it keep to him expect must we and own, his for
principle.”

as up it give to were he “if Darcy, said surprised,” be not should “I
offers.” purchase eligible any as soon

his of longer talking of afraid was She answer. no made Elizabeth
the leave to determined now was say, to else nothing having and, friend;
him. to subject a finding of trouble

comfortable very a seems “This with, began soon and hint, the took He
Mr. when it to deal great a did believe, I Catherine, Lady house.
Hunsford.” to came first Collins

her bestowed have not could she sure am I did--and she believe “I
object.” grateful more a on kindness

wife.” a of choice his in fortunate very be to appears Collins “Mr.

one with met having his in rejoice well may friends his indeed, “Yes,
made have or him, accepted have would who women sensible few very the of
understanding--though excellent an has friend My had. they if happy him
the as Collins Mr. marrying her consider I that certain not am I
a in and however, happy, perfectly seems She did. ever she thing wisest
her.” for match good very a certainly is it light prudential

a easy so within settled be to her for agreeable very be must “It
friends.” and family own her of distance

miles.” fifty nearly is It it? call you do distance, easy “An

day’s a half than more Little road? good of miles fifty is what “And
distance.” easy _very_ a it call I Yes, journey.

_advantages_ the of one as distance the considered have never should “I
Collins Mrs. said have never should “I Elizabeth. cried match,” the of
family.” her _near_ settled was

beyond Anything Hertfordshire. to attachment own your of proof a is “It
far.” appear would suppose, I Longbourn, of neighbourhood very the

she fancied Elizabeth which smile of sort a was there spoke he As
and Jane of thinking be to her supposing be must he understood;
answered: she as blushed she and Netherfield,

her near too settled be not may woman a that say to mean not do “I
many on depend and relative, be must near the and far The family.
of expenses the make to fortune is there Where circumstances. varying
the not is that But evil. no becomes distance unimportant, travelling
not but income, comfortable a have Collins Mrs. and Mr. _here_. case
my persuaded am I journeys--and frequent of allow will as one a such
_half_ than less under family her _near_ herself call not would friend
distance.” present the

cannot “_You_ said, and her, towards little a chair his drew Darcy Mr.
have cannot _You_ attachment. local strong very such to right a have
Longbourn.” at always been

of change some experienced gentleman The surprised. looked Elizabeth
and table, the from newspaper a took chair, his back drew he feeling;
voice: colder a in said, it, over glancing

Kent?” with pleased you “Are

side either on ensued, country the of subject the on dialogue short A
Charlotte of entrance the by to end an put soon concise--and and calm
surprised tete-a-tete The walk. her from returned just sister, her and
intruding his occasioned had which mistake the related Darcy Mr. them.
saying without longer minutes few a sitting after and Bennet, Miss on
away. went anybody, to much

was he as soon as Charlotte, said this?” of meaning the be can “What
never would he or you, with love in be must he Eliza, dear, “My gone.
way.” familiar this in us called have

likely, very seem not did it silence, his of told Elizabeth when But
various after and case; the be to wishes, Charlotte’s to even
from proceed to visit his suppose only last at could they conjectures,
probable more the was which do, to anything finding of difficulty the
there doors Within over. were sports field All year. of time the from
cannot gentlemen but billiard-table, a and books, Catherine, Lady was
the or Parsonage, the of nearness the in and doors; within be always
the it, in lived who people the of or it, to walk the of pleasantness
thither walking of period this from temptation a found cousins two
sometimes morning, the of times various at called They day. every almost
their by accompanied then and now and together, sometimes separately,
he because came Fitzwilliam Colonel that all them to plain was It aunt.
recommended course of which persuasion a society, their in pleasure had
in satisfaction own her by reminded was Elizabeth and more; still him
her of her, of admiration evident his by as well as him, with being
saw she them, comparing in though, and Wickham; George favourite former
manners, Fitzwilliam’s Colonel in softness captivating less was there
mind. informed best the have might he believed she

difficult more was it Parsonage, the to often so came Darcy Mr. why But
there sat frequently he as society, for be not could It understand. to
speak, did he when and lips; his opening without together minutes ten
sacrifice choice--a of than rather necessity of effect the seemed it
really appeared seldom He himself. to pleasure a not propriety, to
Colonel him. of make to what not knew Collins Mrs. animated.
was he that proved stupidity, his at laughing occasionally Fitzwilliam’s
told have not could him of knowledge own her which different, generally
effect the change this believed have to liked would she as and her;
herself set she Eliza, friend her love that of object the and love, of
at were they whenever him watched She out. it find to work to seriously
He success. much without but Hunsford; to came he whenever and Rosings,
that of expression the but deal, great a friend her at looked certainly
often she but gaze, steadfast earnest, an was It disputable. was look
it sometimes and it, in admiration much were there whether doubted
mind. of absence but nothing seemed

his of possibility the Elizabeth to suggested twice or once had She
Mrs. and idea; the at laughed always Elizabeth but her, to partial being
of danger the from subject, the press to right it think not did Collins
her in for disappointment; in end only might which expectations raising
would dislike friend’s her all that doubt, a of not admitted it opinion
power. her in be to him suppose could she if vanish,


marrying her planned sometimes she Elizabeth, for schemes kind her In
he man; pleasant most the comparison beyond was He Fitzwilliam. Colonel
but, eligible; most was life in situation his and her, admired certainly
patronage considerable had Darcy Mr. advantages, these counterbalance to
all. at none have could cousin his and church, the in



33 Chapter


park, the within ramble her in Elizabeth, did once than More
the of perverseness the all felt She Darcy. Mr. meet unexpectedly
to and, brought, was else one no where him bring should that mischance
that first at him inform to care took again, happening ever its prevent
time, second a occur could it How hers. of haunt favourite a was it
like seemed It third. a even and did, it Yet odd! very was therefore,
was it occasions these on for penance, voluntary a or ill-nature, wilful
away, then and pause awkward an and inquiries formal few a merely not
He her. with walk and back turn to necessary it thought actually he but
talking of trouble the herself give she did nor deal, great a said never
third their of course the in her struck it but much; listening of or
questions--about unconnected odd some asking was he that rencontre
her and walks, solitary of love her Hunsford, at being in pleasure her
of speaking in that and happiness; Collins’s Mrs. and Mr. of opinion
to seemed he house, the understanding perfectly not her and Rosings
staying be would she again Kent into came she whenever that expect
Colonel have he Could it. imply to seemed words His too. _there_
must he anything, meant he if supposed, She thoughts? his in Fitzwilliam
distressed It quarter. that in arise might what to allusion an mean
the in gate the at herself find to glad quite was she and little, a her
Parsonage. the opposite pales

letter, last Jane’s perusing in walked, she as day one engaged was She
in written not had Jane that proved which passages some on dwelling and
saw she Darcy, Mr. by surprised again being of instead when, spirits,
the away Putting her. meeting was Fitzwilliam Colonel that up looking on
said: she smile, a forcing and immediately letter

way.” this walked ever you that before know not did “I

generally I “as replied, he park,” the of tour the making been have “I
Are Parsonage. the at call a with it close to intend and year, every do
farther?” much going you

moment.” a in turned have should I “No,

Parsonage the towards walked they and turn, did she accordingly And
together.

she. said Saturday?” on Kent leave certainly you “Do

He disposal. his at am I But again. off it put not does Darcy “Yes--if
pleases.” he as just business the arranges

least at has he arrangement, the in himself please to able not if “And
seems who anybody know not do I choice. of power great the in pleasure
Darcy.” Mr. than likes he what doing of power the enjoy to more

Fitzwilliam. Colonel replied well,” very way own his have to likes “He
it having of means better has he that only is It do. all we so “But
speak I poor. are others many and rich, is he because others, many than
and self-denial to inured be must know, you son, younger A feelingly.
dependence.”

of little very know can earl an of son younger the opinion, my “In
and self-denial of known ever you have what seriously, Now either.
going from money of want by prevented been you have When dependence?
for?” fancy a had you anything procuring or chose, you wherever

have I that say cannot I perhaps questions--and home are “These
greater of matters in But nature. that of hardships many experienced
where marry cannot sons Younger money. of want from suffer may I weight,
like.” they

often very they think I which fortune, of women like they where “Unless
do.”

many not are there and dependent, too us make expense of habits “Our
to attention some without marry to afford can who life of rank my in
money.”

the at coloured she and me?” for “meant Elizabeth, thought this,” “Is
what pray, “And tone, lively a in said herself, recovering but, idea;
is brother elder the Unless son? younger earl’s an of price usual the is
pounds.” thousand fifty above ask not would you suppose I sickly, very

interrupt To dropped. subject the and style, same the in her answered He
passed, had what with affected her fancy him make might which silence a
said: afterwards soon she

of sake the for chiefly him with down you brought cousin your imagine “I
a secure to marry, not does he wonder I disposal. his at someone having
well as does sister his perhaps, But, kind. that of convenience lasting
he what do may he care, sole his under is she as and, present, the for
her.” with likes

must he which advantage an is “that Fitzwilliam, Colonel said “No,”
Darcy.” Miss of guardianship the in him with joined am I me. with divide

your Does make? you do guardians of sort what pray And indeed? you “Are
a sometimes are age her of ladies Young trouble? much you give charge
she spirit, Darcy true the has she if and manage, to difficult little
way.” own her have to like may

manner the and earnestly; her at looking him observed she spoke she As
to likely Darcy Miss supposed she why her asked immediately he which in
other or somehow had she that her convinced uneasiness, any them give
replied: directly She truth. the near pretty got

dare I and her; of harm any heard never I frightened. be not need “You
a is She world. the in creatures tractable most the of one is she say
and Hurst Mrs. acquaintance, my of ladies some with favourite great very
them.” know you that say you heard have I think I Bingley. Miss

man--he gentlemanlike pleasant a is brother Their little. a them know “I
Darcy’s.” of friend great a is

Mr. to kind uncommonly is Darcy “Mr. drily; Elizabeth said yes,” “Oh!
him.” of care of deal prodigious a takes and Bingley,

in him of care take _does_ Darcy believe really I Yes, him! of “Care
in me told he that something From care. wants most he where points those
to indebted much very Bingley think to reason have I hither, journey our
that suppose to right no have I for pardon, his beg to ought I But him.
conjecture.” all was It meant. person the was Bingley

mean?” you it is “What

known, generally be to wish not could Darcy which circumstance a is “It
an be would it family, lady’s the to round get to were it if because
thing.” unpleasant

it.” mentioning not my upon depend may “You

be to it supposing for reason much not have I that remember “And
himself congratulated he that this: merely was me told he What Bingley.
most a of inconveniences the from friend a saved lately having on
other any or names mentioning without but marriage, imprudent
believing from Bingley be to it suspected only I and particulars,
from and sort, that of scrape a into get to man young of kind the him
summer.” last of whole the together been have to them knowing

interference?” this for reasons you give Darcy Mr. “Did

the against objections strong very some were there that understood “I
lady.”

them?” separate to use he did arts what “And

“He smiling. Fitzwilliam, said arts,” own his of me to talk not did “He
you.” told now have I what me told only

with swelling heart her on, walked and answer, no made Elizabeth
she why her asked Fitzwilliam little, a her watching After indignation.
thoughtful. so was

“Your she. said me,” telling been have you what of thinking am “I
judge?” the be to he was Why feelings. my suit not does conduct cousin’s

officious?” interference his call to disposed rather are “You

his of propriety the on decide to had Darcy Mr. right what see not do “I
to was he alone, judgement own his upon why, or inclination, friend’s
happy. be to was friend his manner what in direct and determine
the of none know we “as herself, recollecting continued, she But,”
supposed be to not is It him. condemn to fair not is it particulars,
case.” the in affection much was there that

a is it “but Fitzwilliam, said surmise,” unnatural an not is “That
sadly.” very triumph cousin’s my of honour the of lessening

picture a just so her to appeared it but jestingly; spoken was This
and answer, an with herself trust not would she that Darcy, Mr. of
indifferent on talked conversation the changing abruptly therefore,
room, own her into shut There, Parsonage. the reached they until matters
interruption without think could she them, left visitor their as soon as
other any that supposed be to not was It heard. had she that all of
There connected. was she whom with those than meant be could people
have could Darcy Mr. whom over men _two_ world the in exist not could
measures the in concerned been had he That influence. boundless such
had she but doubted; never had she Jane and Bingley separate to taken
arrangement and design principal the Bingley Miss to attributed always
was _he_ him, mislead not did however, vanity, own his If them. of
had Jane that all of cause, the were caprice and pride his cause, the
while a for ruined had He suffer. to continued still and suffered,
the in heart generous affectionate, most the for happiness of hope every
inflicted. have might he evil an lasting how say could one no and world;

Colonel were lady,” the against objections strong very some were “There
her were, probably objections strong those and words; Fitzwilliam’s
in was who another and attorney, country a was who uncle one having
London. in business

of possibility no be could “there exclaimed, she herself,” Jane “To
understanding is!--her she as goodness and loveliness all objection;
Neither captivating. manners her and improved, mind her excellent,
some with though who, father, my against urged be anything could
and disdain, not need himself Darcy Mr. abilities has peculiarities,
of thought she When reach.” never probably will he which respectability
allow not would she but little; a way gave confidence her mother, her
whose Darcy, Mr. with weight material had _there_ objections any that
of want the from wound deeper a receive would convinced, was she pride,
sense; of want their from than connections, friend’s his in importance
governed partly been had he that last, at decided, quite was she and
Mr. retaining of wish the by partly and pride, of kind worst this by
sister. his for Bingley

a on brought occasioned, subject the which tears and agitation The
to added that, evening, the towards worse much so grew it and headache;
her attend to not her determined it Darcy, Mr. see to unwillingness her
Collins, Mrs. tea. drink to engaged were they where Rosings, to cousins
much as and go to her press not did unwell, really was she that seeing
Collins Mr. but her; pressing from husband her prevented possible as
rather being Catherine’s Lady of apprehension his conceal not could
home. at staying her by displeased



34 Chapter


herself exasperate to intending if as Elizabeth, gone, were they When
the employment her for chose Darcy, Mr. against possible as much as
her since her to written had Jane which letters the all of examination
any there was nor complaint, actual no contained They Kent. in being
suffering. present of communication any or occurrences, past of revival
that of want a was there each, of line every almost in and all, in But
which, and style, her characterise to used been had which cheerfulness
kindly and itself with ease at mind a of serenity the from proceeding
Elizabeth clouded. ever scarcely been had everyone, towards disposed
an with uneasiness, of idea the conveying sentence every noticed
Darcy’s Mr. perusal. first the on received hardly had it which attention
her gave inflict, to able been had he misery what of boast shameful
consolation some was It sufferings. sister’s her of sense keener a
the after day the on end to was Rosings to visit his that think to
should she fortnight a than less in that greater, still a next--and,
of recovery the to contribute to enabled and again, Jane with be herself
do. could affection that all by spirits, her

that remembering without Kent leaving Darcy’s of think not could She
clear it made had Fitzwilliam Colonel but him; with go to was cousin his
not did she was, he as agreeable and all, at intentions no had he that
him. about unhappy be to mean

the of sound the by roused suddenly was she point, this settling While
its of idea the by fluttered little a were spirits her and door-bell,
in late called before once had who himself, Fitzwilliam Colonel being
her. after particularly inquire to come now might and evening, the
differently very were spirits her and banished, soon was idea this But
the into walk Darcy Mr. saw she amazement, utter her to when, affected,
her after inquiry an began immediately he manner hurried an In room.
better. were she that hearing of wish a to visit his imputing health,
and moments, few a for down sat He civility. cold with him answered She
but surprised, was Elizabeth room. the about walked up, getting then
her towards came he minutes, several of silence a After word. a not said
began: thus and manner, agitated an in

be not will feelings My do. not will It struggled. have I vain “In
love and admire I ardently how you tell to me allow must You repressed.
you.”

coloured, stared, She expression. beyond was astonishment Elizabeth’s
encouragement; sufficient considered he This silent. was and doubted,
her, for felt long had and felt, he that all of avowal the and
besides feelings were there but well; spoke He followed. immediately
the on eloquent more not was he and detailed; be to heart the of those
inferiority--of her of sense His pride. of than tenderness of subject
always had which obstacles family the degradation--of a being its
to due seemed which warmth a with on dwelt were inclination, to opposed
his recommend to unlikely very was but wounding, was he consequence the
suit.

to insensible be not could she dislike, deeply-rooted her of spite In
did intentions her though and affection, man’s a such of compliment the
to was he pain the for sorry first at was she instant, an for vary not
she language, subsequent his by resentment to roused till, receive;
to herself compose to however, tried, She anger. in compassion all lost
with concluded He done. have should he when patience, with him answer
spite in which, attachment that of strength the her to representing
with and conquer; to impossible found had he endeavours, his all of
of acceptance her by rewarded be now would it that hope his expressing
doubt no had he that see easily could she this, said he As hand. his
but anxiety, and apprehension of _spoke_ He answer. favourable a of
could circumstance a Such security. real expressed countenance his
her into rose colour the ceased, he when and, farther, exasperate only
said: she and cheeks,

to mode established the believe, I is, it this, as cases such “In
however avowed, sentiments the for obligation of sense a express
should obligation that natural is It returned. be may they unequally
I But you. thank now would I gratitude, _feel_ could I if and felt, be
certainly have you and opinion, good your desired never have cannot--I
to pain occasioned have to sorry am I unwillingly. most it bestowed
be will hope I and however, done, unconsciously most been has It anyone.
prevented long have me, tell you which, feelings The duration. short of
in difficulty little have can regard, your of acknowledgment the
explanation.” this after it overcoming

fixed eyes his with mantelpiece the against leaning was who Darcy, Mr.
than resentment less no with words her catch to seemed face, her on
disturbance the and anger, with pale became complexion His surprise.
the for struggling was He feature. every in visible was mind his of
believed he till lips his open not would and composure, of appearance
feelings Elizabeth’s to was pause The it. attained have to himself
said: he calmness, forced of voice a with length, At dreadful.

expecting! of honour the have to am I which reply the all is this “And
at _endeavour_ little so with why, informed be to wish perhaps, might, I
importance.” small of is it But rejected. thus am I civility,

desire a evident so with “why she, replied inquire,” well as might “I
me liked you that me tell to chose you me, insulting and offending of
character? your against even and reason, your against will, your against
have I But uncivil? _was_ I if incivility, for excuse some this not Was
against decided feelings my not Had have. I know You provocations. other
you do favourable, been even they had or indifferent, been they you--had
has who man the accept to me tempt would consideration any that think
most a of happiness the ever, for perhaps ruining, of means the been
sister?” beloved

emotion the but colour; changed Darcy Mr. words, these pronounced she As
she while her interrupt to attempting without listened he and short, was
continued:

can motive No you. of ill think to world the in reason every have “I
not, dare You _there_. acted you part ungenerous and unjust the excuse
means only the not if principal, the been have you that deny, cannot you
the of censure the to one exposing other--of each from them dividing of
for derision its to other the and instability, and caprice for world
acutest the of misery in both them involving and hopes, disappointed
kind.”

listening was he that indignation slight no with saw and paused, She
remorse. of feeling any by unmoved wholly him proved which air an with
incredulity. affected of smile a with her at looked even He

repeated. she it?” done have you that deny you “Can

denying of wish no have “I replied: then he tranquillity assumed With
your from friend my separate to power my in everything did I that
been have I _him_ Towards success. my in rejoice I that or sister,
myself.” towards than kinder

reflection, civil this noticing of appearance the disdained Elizabeth
her. conciliate to likely it was nor escape, not did meaning its but

dislike my which “on continued, she affair,” this merely not is it “But
was you of opinion my place taken had it before Long founded. is
received I which recital the in unfolded was character Your decided.
to have you can what subject, this On Wickham. Mr. from ago months many
yourself? defend here you can friendship of act imaginary what In say?
others?” upon impose here you can misrepresentation what under or

Darcy, said concerns,” gentleman’s that in interest eager an take “You
colour. heightened a with and tone, tranquil less a in

an feeling help can been, have misfortunes his what knows that “Who
him?” in interest

misfortunes his “yes, contemptuously; Darcy repeated misfortunes!” “His
indeed.” great been have

reduced have “You energy. with Elizabeth cried infliction,” your of “And
have You poverty. poverty--comparative of state present his to him
for designed been have to know must you which advantages the withheld
independence that of life his of years best the deprived have You him.
this! all done have You desert. his than due his less no was which
and contempt with misfortune his of mention the treat can you yet and
ridicule.”

room, the across steps quick with walked he as Darcy, cried this,” “And
me! hold you which in estimation the is This me! of opinion your “is
this to according faults, My fully. so it explaining for you thank I
in stopping he, added perhaps,” But indeed! heavy are calculation,
been have might offenses “these her, towards turning and walk, his
the of confession honest my by hurt been pride your not had overlooked,
These design. serious any forming my prevented long had that scruples
greater with I, had suppressed, been have might accusations bitter
of belief the into you flattered and struggles, my concealed policy,
by reason, by inclination; unalloyed unqualified, by impelled being my
abhorrence. my is sort every of disguise But everything. by reflection,
and natural were They related. I feelings the of ashamed I am Nor
your of inferiority the in rejoice to me expect you Could just.
whose relations, of hope the on myself congratulate connections?--to
own?” my beneath decidedly so is life in condition

to tried she yet moment; every angry more growing herself felt Elizabeth
said: she when composure with speak to utmost the

your of mode the that suppose you if Darcy, Mr. mistaken, are “You
concern the me spared it as than way, other any in me affected declaration
more a in behaved you had you, refusing in felt have might I which
manner.” gentlemanlike

continued: she and nothing, said he but this, at start him saw She

that way possible any in hand your of offer the made have not could “You
it.” accept to me tempted have would

an with her at looked he and obvious; was astonishment his Again
on: went She mortification. and incredulity mingled of expression

say--of almost may I moment, first the beginning--from very the “From
fullest the with me impressing manners, your you, with acquaintance my
of disdain selfish your and conceit, your arrogance, your of belief
of groundwork the form to as such were others, of feelings the
a immovable so built have events succeeding which on disapprobation
the were you that felt I before month a you known not had I and dislike;
marry.” to on prevailed be ever could I whom world the in man last

your comprehend perfectly I madam. enough, quite said have “You
been. have own my what of ashamed be to only now have and feelings,
best my accept and time, your of much so up taken having for me Forgive
happiness.” and health your for wishes

him heard Elizabeth and room, the left hastily he words these with And
house. the quit and door front the open moment next the

how not knew She great. painfully now was mind, her of tumult The
for cried and down sat weakness actual from and herself, support to
passed, had what on reflected she as astonishment, Her half-an-hour.
of offer an receive should she That it. of review every by increased was
for her with love in been have should he That Darcy! Mr. from marriage
of spite in her marry to wish to as love in much So months! many so
marrying friend’s his prevent him made had which objections the all
his in force equal with least at appear must which and sister, her
inspired have to gratifying was It incredible! almost case--was own
abominable his pride, his But affection. an strong so unconsciously
to respect with done had he what of avowal shameless pride--his
could he though acknowledging, in assurance unpardonable Jane--his
Mr. mentioned had he which in manner unfeeling the and it, justify not
soon deny, to attempted not had he whom towards cruelty his Wickham,
for had attachment his of consideration the which pity the overcame
the till reflections agitated very in continued She excited. moment a
to was she unequal how feel her made carriage Catherine’s Lady of sound
room. her to away her hurried and observation, Charlotte’s encounter



35 Chapter


meditations and thoughts same the to morning next the awoke Elizabeth
the from recover yet not could She eyes. her closed length at had which
anything of think to impossible was it happened; had what of surprise
after soon resolved, she employment, for indisposed totally and, else;
proceeding was She exercise. and air in herself indulge to breakfast,
Darcy’s Mr. of recollection the when walk, favourite her to directly
park, the entering of instead and her, stopped there coming sometimes
The turnpike-road. the from farther led which lane, the up turned she
one passed soon she and side, one on boundary the still was paling park
ground. the into gates the of

was she lane, the of part that along times three or two walking After
and gates the at stop to morning, the of pleasantness the by tempted,
had Kent in passed now had she which weeks five The park. the into look
the to adding was day every and country, the in difference great a made
walk, her continuing of point the on was She trees. early the of verdure
which grove of sort the within gentleman a of glimpse a caught she when
Mr. being its of fearful and, way; that moving was he park; the edged
now was advanced who person the But retreating. directly was she Darcy,
pronounced eagerness, with forward stepping and her, see to enough near
though called, herself hearing on but away; turned had She name. her
the towards again moved she Darcy, Mr. be to it proved which voice a in
letter, a out holding and, also, it reached time that by had He gate.
composure, haughty of look a with said, took, instinctively she which
you. meeting of hope the in time some grove the in walking been have “I
a with then, And letter?” that reading of honour the me do you Will
sight. of out soon was and plantation, the into again turned bow, slight

curiosity, strongest the with but pleasure, of expectation no With
wonder, increasing still her to and, letter, the opened Elizabeth
written letter-paper, of sheets two containing envelope an perceived
likewise was itself envelope The hand. close very a in through, quite
dated was It it. began then she lane, the along way her Pursuing full.
follows:-- as was and morning, the in o’clock eight at Rosings, from

apprehension the by letter, this receiving on madam, alarmed, not “Be
those of renewal or sentiments those of repetition any containing its of
any without write I you. to disgusting so night last were which offers
wishes on dwelling by myself, humbling or you, paining of intention
the and forgotten; soon too be cannot both, of happiness the for which,
occasion, must letter this of perusal the and formation the which effort
written be to it required character my not had spared, been have should
demand I which with freedom the pardon therefore, must, You read. and
I but unwillingly, it bestow will know, I feelings, your attention; your
justice. your of it demand

equal of means no by and nature, different very a of offenses “Two
was, mentioned first The charge. my to laid night last you magnitude,
Bingley Mr. detached had I either, of sentiments the of regardless that,
various of defiance in had, I that other, the and sister, your from
immediate the ruined humanity, and honour of defiance in claims,
and Wilfully Wickham. Mr. of prospects the blasted and prosperity
acknowledged the youth, my of companion the off thrown have to wantonly
other any scarcely had who man young a father, my of favourite
expect to up brought been had who and patronage, our on than dependence
young two of separation the which to depravity, a be would exertion, its
could weeks, few a only of growth the be could affection whose persons,
last was which blame that of severity the from But comparison. no bear
hope shall I circumstance, each respecting bestowed, liberally so night
actions my of account following the when secured, future the in be to
which them, of explanation the in If, read. been has motives their and
which feelings relating of necessity the under am I myself, to due is
necessity The sorry. am I that say only can I yours, to offensive be may
absurd. be would apology further and obeyed, be must

with common in saw, I before Hertfordshire, in long been not had “I
young other any to sister elder your preferred Bingley that others,
dance the of evening the till not was it But country. the in woman
serious a feeling his of apprehension any had I that Netherfield at
I while ball, that At before. love in him seen often had I attachment.
Sir by acquainted, made first was I you, with dancing of honour the had
to attentions Bingley’s that information, accidental Lucas’s William
marriage. their of expectation general a to rise given had sister your
could alone time the which of event, certain a as it of spoke He
behaviour friend’s my observed I moment that From undecided. be
Miss for partiality his that perceive then could I and attentively;
also I sister Your him. in witnessed ever had I what beyond was Bennet
ever, as engaging and cheerful, open, were manners and look Her watched.
convinced remained I and regard, peculiar of symptom any without but
attentions his received she though that scrutiny, evening’s the from
of participation any by them invite not did she pleasure, with
been have must _I_ here, mistaken been not have _you_ If sentiment.
latter the make must sister your of knowledge superior Your error. in
inflict to error such by misled been have I if so, be it If probable.
not shall I But unreasonable. been not has resentment your her, on pain
and countenance sister’s your of serenity the that assert, to scruple
conviction a observer acute most the given have might as such was air
be to likely not was heart her temper, her amiable however that,
is indifferent her believing of desirous was I That touched. easily
decisions and investigation my that say to venture will I certain--but
believe not did I fears. or hopes my by influenced usually not are
impartial on it believed I it; wished I because indifferent be to her
the to objections My reason. in it wished I as truly as conviction,
have to acknowledged night last I which those merely not were marriage
of want the case; own my in aside, put to passion of force utmost the
But me. to as friend my to evil an great so be not could connection
still though which, causes repugnance; of causes other were there
had I instances, both in degree equal an to existing and existing,
before immediately not were they because forget, to endeavoured myself
your of situation The briefly. though stated, be must causes These me.
that to comparison in nothing was objectionable, though family, mother’s
by betrayed uniformly almost so frequently, so propriety of want total
your by even occasionally and sisters, younger three your by herself,
concern your amidst But you. offend to me pains It me. Pardon father.
this at displeasure your and relations, nearest your of defects the for
to that, consider to consolation you give it let them, of representation
censure, like the of share any avoid to as so yourselves conducted have
than sister, elder your and you on bestowed generally less no praise is
say only will I both. of disposition and sense the to honourable is it
parties all of opinion my evening, that passed what from that farther
led have could which heightened inducement every and confirmed, was
unhappy most a esteemed I what from friend my preserve to before, me
as following, day the on London, for Netherfield left He connection.
returning. soon of design the with remember, certain, am I you,

uneasiness sisters’ His explained. be to now is acted I which part “The
was feeling of coincidence our own; my with excited equally been had
in lost be to was time no that sensible alike and, discovered, soon
in directly him joining on resolved shortly we brother, their detaching
office the in engaged readily I there went--and accordingly We London.
I choice. a such of evils certain the friend my to out pointing of
remonstrance this however But, earnestly. them enforced and described,
suppose not do I determination, his delayed or staggered have might
been not it had marriage, the prevented have ultimately would it that
your of giving, in not hesitated I that assurance the by seconded
his return to her believed before had He indifference. sister’s
great has Bingley But regard. equal with not if sincere, with affection
his on than judgement my on dependence stronger a with modesty, natural
was himself, deceived had he that therefore, him, convince To own.
into returning against him persuade To point. difficult very no
the scarcely was given, been had conviction that when Hertfordshire,
There much. thus done having for myself blame cannot I moment. a of work
not do I which on affair whole the in conduct my of part one but is
the adopt to condescended I that is it satisfaction; with reflect
in being sister’s your him from conceal to as far so art of measures
her but Bingley; Miss to known was it as myself, it knew I town.
without met have might they That it. of ignorant yet even is brother
me to appear not did regard his but probable; perhaps is consequence ill
this Perhaps danger. some without her see to him for extinguished enough
it and however, done, is it me; beneath was disguise this concealment,
no say, to more nothing have I subject this On best. the for done was
it feelings, sister’s your wounded have I If offer. to apology other
to may me governed which motives the though and done unknowingly was
condemn to learnt yet not have I insufficient, appear naturally very you
them.

injured having of accusation, weighty more other, that to respect “With
his of whole the you before laying by it refute only can I Wickham, Mr.
I me accused _particularly_ has he what Of family. my with connection
more summon can I relate, shall I what of truth the of but ignorant; am
veracity. undoubted of witness one than

many for had who man, respectable very a of son the is Wickham “Mr.
good whose and estates, Pemberley the all of management the years
to father my inclined naturally trust his of discharge the in conduct
his godson, his was who Wickham, George on and him; to service of be
at him supported father My bestowed. liberally therefore was kindness
his as assistance, important Cambridge--most at afterwards and school,
have would wife, his of extravagance the from poor always father, own
only not was father My education. gentleman’s a him give to unable been
he engaging; always were manners whose society, man’s young this of fond
be would church the hoping and him, of opinion highest the also had
is it myself, for As it. in him for provide to intended profession, his
different very a in him of think to began first I since years many many,
was he which principle, of want propensities--the vicious The manner.
escape not could friend, best his of knowledge the from guard to careful
himself, with age same the nearly of man young a of observation the
Mr. which moments, unguarded in him seeing of opportunities had who and
degree what pain--to you give shall I again Here have. not could Darcy
Wickham Mr. which sentiments the be may whatever But tell. can only you
from me prevent not shall nature their of suspicion a created, has
motive. another even adds character--it real his unfolding

to attachment his and ago; years five about died father excellent “My
particularly he will his in that steady, so last the to was Wickham Mr.
manner best the in advancement his promote to me, to it recommended
a that desired orders, took he if allow--and might profession his that
There vacant. became it as soon as his be might living family valuable
long not did father own His pounds. thousand one of legacy a also was
Wickham Mr. events, these from year a half within and mine, survive
orders, taking against resolved finally having that, me inform to wrote
more some expect to him for unreasonable it think not should I hoped he
he which by preferment, the of lieu in advantage, pecuniary immediate
studying of added, he intention, some had He benefited. be not could
would pounds thousand one of interest the that aware be must I and law,
believed than wished, rather I therein. support insufficient very a be
to accede to ready perfectly was rate, any at but, sincere; be to him
the clergyman; a be to not ought Wickham Mr. that knew I proposal. his
assistance to claim all resigned settled--he soon therefore was business
to situation a in be ever could he that possible it were church, the in
connection All pounds. thousand three return in accepted and it, receive
him invite to him of ill too thought I dissolved. now seemed us between
chiefly he believe I town In town. in society his admit or Pemberley, to
free now being and pretence, mere a was law the studying his but lived,
dissipation. and idleness of life a was life his restraint, all from
the of decease the on but him; of little heard I years three about For
to applied he him, for designed been had which living the of incumbent
assured he circumstances, His presentation. the for letter by again me
He bad. exceedingly were it, believing in difficulty no had I and me,
absolutely now was and study, unprofitable most a law the found had
in living the to him present would I if ordained, being on resolved
was he as doubt, little be could there trusted he which question--of
not could I and for, provide to person other no had I that assured well
blame hardly will You intentions. father’s revered my forgotten have
every resisting for or entreaty, this with comply to refusing for me
of distress the to proportion in was resentment His it. to repetition
me of abuse his in violent as doubtless was he circumstances--and his
every period this After myself. to reproaches his in as others to
But not. know I lived he How dropped. was acquaintance of appearance
notice. my on obtruded painfully most again was he summer last

myself, forget to wish would I which circumstance a mention now must “I
unfold to me induce should present the than less obligation no which and
your of doubt no feel I much, thus said Having being. human any to
to left was junior, my years ten than more is who sister, My secrecy.
myself. and Fitzwilliam, Colonel nephew, mother’s my of guardianship the
formed establishment an and school, from taken was she ago, year a About
presided who lady the with went she summer last and London; in her for
by undoubtedly Wickham, Mr. went also thither and Ramsgate; to it, over
him between acquaintance prior a been have to proved there for design;
and deceived; unhappily most were we character whose in Younge, Mrs. and
Georgiana, to himself recommended far so he aid, and connivance her by
to kindness his of impression strong a retained heart affectionate whose
and love, in herself believe to persuaded was she that child, a as her
her be must which fifteen, but then was She elopement. an to consent to
owed I that add, to happy am I imprudence, her stating after and excuse;
two or day a unexpectedly them joined I herself. to it of knowledge the
the support to unable Georgiana, then and elopement, intended the before
as to up looked almost she whom brother a offending and grieving of idea
and felt I what imagine may You me. to whole the acknowledged father, a
prevented feelings and credit sister’s my for Regard acted. I how
place the left who Wickham, Mr. to wrote I but exposure; public any
Mr. charge. her from removed course of was Younge Mrs. and immediately,
which fortune, sister’s my unquestionably was object chief Wickham’s
of hope the that supposing help cannot I but pounds; thousand thirty is
have would revenge His inducement. strong a was me on himself revenging
indeed. complete been

have we which in event every of narrative faithful a is madam, “This,
as it reject absolutely not do you if and together; concerned been
Mr. towards cruelty of henceforth me acquit hope, I will, you false,
he falsehood of form what under manner, what in not know I Wickham.
wondered be to perhaps not is success his but you; on imposed had
either, concerning everything of were previously you as Ignorant at.
in not certainly suspicion and power, your in be not could detection
inclination. your

but night; last you told not was this all why wonder possibly may “You
to ought or could what know to myself of enough master then not was I
more appeal can I related, here everything of truth the For revealed. be
our from who, Fitzwilliam, Colonel of testimony the to particularly
of one as more, still and, intimacy, constant and relationship near
acquainted unavoidably been has will, father’s my of executors the
_me_ of abhorrence your If transactions. these of particular every with
by prevented be cannot you valueless, assertions _my_ make should
be may there that and cousin; my in confiding from cause same the
some find to endeavour shall I him, consulting of possibility the
the of course the in hands your in letter this putting of opportunity
you. bless God add, only will I morning.

DARCY” “FITZWILLIAM



36 Chapter


to it expect not did letter, the her gave Darcy Mr. when Elizabeth, If
of all at expectation no formed had she offers, his of renewal a contain
eagerly how supposed be well may it were, they as such But contents. its
excited. they emotion of contrariety a what and them, through went she
did amazement With defined. be to scarcely were read she as feelings Her
power; his in be to apology any believed he that understand first she
explanation no have could he that persuaded, she was steadfastly and
strong a With conceal. not would shame of sense just a which give, to
what of account his began she say, might he everything against prejudice
hardly which eagerness an with read She Netherfield. at happened had
the what knowing of impatience from and comprehension, of power her left
of sense the to attending of incapable was bring, might sentence next
she insensibility sister’s her of belief His eyes. her before one the
worst the real, the of account his and false; be to resolved instantly
doing of wish any have to angry too her made match, the to objections
satisfied which done had he what for regret no expressed He justice. him
and pride all was It haughty. but penitent, not was style his her;
insolence.

Wickham--when Mr. of account his by succeeded was subject this when But
which, events of relation a attention clearer somewhat with read she
which and worth, his of opinion cherished every overthrow must true, if
himself--her of history own his to affinity an alarming so bore
definition. of difficult more and painful acutely more yet were feelings
wished She her. oppressed horror, even and apprehension, Astonishment,
false! be must “This exclaiming, repeatedly entirely, it discredit to
had she when falsehood!”--and grossest the be must This be! cannot This
the of anything knowing scarcely though letter, whole the through gone
not would she that protesting away, hastily it put two, or page last
again. it in look never would she that it, regard

on rest could that thoughts with mind, of state perturbed this In
letter the minute a half in do; not would it but on; walked she nothing,
she could, she as well as herself collecting and again, unfolded was
and Wickham, to related that all of perusal mortifying the began again
sentence. every of meaning the examine to as far so herself commanded
what exactly was family Pemberley the with connection his of account The
though Darcy, Mr. late the of kindness the and himself; related had he
own his with well equally agreed extent, its known before not had she
the to came she when but other; the confirmed recital each far So words.
living the of said had Wickham What great. was difference the will,
was it words, very his recalled she as and memory, her in fresh was
the or side one on duplicity gross was there that feel to not impossible
did wishes her that herself flattered she moments, few a for and, other;
the attention, closest the with re-read and read she when But err. not
pretensions all resigning Wickham’s of following immediately particulars
three as sum a considerable so lieu in receiving his of living, the to
down put She hesitate. to forced she was again pounds, thousand
be to meant she what with circumstance every weighed letter, the
with statement--but each of probability the on impartiality--deliberated
read she Again assertion. only was it sides both On success. little
had she which affair, the that clearly more proved line every but on;
to as represent so could contrivance any that impossible it believed
a of capable was infamous, than less it in conduct Darcy’s Mr. render
whole. the throughout blameless entirely him make must which turn

at lay to not scrupled he which profligacy general and extravagance The
could she as so, more the her; shocked exceedingly charge, Wickham’s Mr.
his before him of heard never had She injustice. its of proof no bring
the at engaged had he which in Militia, ----shire the into entrance
town, in accidentally him meeting on who, man young the of persuasion
life of way former his Of acquaintance. slight a renewed there had
As himself. told he what but Hertfordshire in known been had nothing
had she power, her in been information had character, real his to
had manner and voice, countenance, His inquiring. of wish a felt never
tried She virtue. every of possession the in once at him established
of trait distinguished some goodness, of instance some recollect to
of attacks the from him rescue might that benevolence, or integrity
those for atone virtue, of predominance the by least, at or Darcy; Mr.
Darcy Mr. what class to endeavour would she which under errors casual
But continuance. years’ many of vice and idleness the as described had
before instantly him see could She her. befriended recollection such no
more no remember could she but address; and air of charm every in her,
and neighbourhood, the of approbation general the than good substantial
After mess. the in him gained had powers social his which regard the
to continued more once she while, considerable a point this on pausing
Miss on designs his of followed, which story the alas! But, read.
Colonel between passed had what from confirmation some received Darcy,
was she last at and before; morning the only herself and Fitzwilliam
Fitzwilliam Colonel to particular every of truth the for referred
his of information the received previously had she whom himself--from
no had she character whose and affairs, cousin’s his all in concern near
to applying on resolved almost had she time one At question. to reason
and application, the of awkwardness the by checked was idea the but him,
never would Darcy Mr. that conviction the by banished wholly length at
his of assured well been not had he if proposal, a such hazarded have
corroboration. cousin’s

conversation in passed had that everything remembered perfectly She
Phillips’s. Mr. at evening first their in herself, and Wickham between
_now_ was She memory. her in fresh still were expressions his of Many
and stranger, a to communications such of impropriety the with struck
putting of indelicacy the saw She before. her escaped had it wondered
professions his of inconsistency the and done, had he as forward himself
fear no having of boasted had he that remembered She conduct. his with
that but country, the leave might Darcy Mr. Darcy--that Mr. seeing of
ball Netherfield the avoided had he yet ground; his stand should _he_
Netherfield the till that, also remembered She week. next very the
but one no to story his told had he country, the quitted had family
discussed; everywhere been had it removal their after that but herself;
Darcy’s Mr. sinking in scruples no reserves, no then had he that
would father the for respect that her assured had he though character,
son. the exposing his prevent always

concerned! was he which in appear now everything did differently How
and solely views of consequence the now were King Miss to attentions His
longer no proved fortune her of mediocrity the and mercenary; hatefully
anything. at grasp to eagerness his but wishes, his of moderation the
had he motive; tolerable no had have now could herself to behaviour His
gratifying been had or fortune, her to regard with deceived been either
most had she believed she which preference the encouraging by vanity his
fainter grew favour his in struggle lingering Every shown. incautiously
not could she Darcy, Mr. of justification farther in and fainter; and
ago long had Jane, by questioned when Bingley, Mr. that allow but
as repulsive and proud that affair; the in blamelessness his asserted
their of course whole the in never, had she manners, his were
much them brought latterly had which acquaintance acquaintance--an
anything ways--seen his with intimacy of sort a her given and together,
him spoke that unjust--anything or unprincipled be to him betrayed that
was he connections own his among that habits; immoral or irreligious of
a as merit him allowed had Wickham even valued--that and esteemed
his of affectionately so speak him heard often had she that and brother,
his had that feeling; amiable _some_ of capable him prove to as sister
of violation a gross so them, represented Wickham Mr. what been actions
and world; the from concealed been have hardly could right everything
man amiable an such and it, of capable person a between friendship that
incomprehensible. was Bingley, Mr. as

Wickham nor Darcy neither Of herself. of ashamed absolutely grew She
prejudiced, partial, blind, been had she feeling without think she could
absurd.

myself prided have who “I, cried; she acted!” have I despicably “How
have who abilities! my on myself valued have who I, discernment! my on
gratified and sister, my of candour generous the disdained often
this is humiliating How mistrust! blameable or useless in vanity my
could I love, in been I Had humiliation! a just how Yet, discovery!
my been has love, not vanity, But blind! wretchedly more been have not
neglect the by offended and one, of preference the with Pleased folly.
courted have I acquaintance, our of beginning very the on other, the of
were either where away, reason driven and ignorance, and prepossession
myself.” knew never I moment this Till concerned.

line a in were thoughts her Bingley, to Jane Jane--from to herself From
explanation Darcy’s Mr. that recollection her to brought soon which
Widely again. it read she and insufficient, very appeared had _there_
that deny she could How perusal. second a of effect the was different
to obliged been had she which instance, one in assertions his to credit
her of unsuspicious totally be to himself declared He other? the in give
Charlotte’s what remembering help not could she and attachment; sister’s
his of justice the deny she could Neither been. always had opinion
were fervent, though feelings, Jane’s that felt She Jane. of description
air her in complacency constant a was there that and displayed, little
sensibility. great with united often not manner and

were family her which in letter the of part that to came she When
sense her reproach, merited yet mortifying, such of terms in mentioned
forcibly too her struck charge the of justice The severe. was shame of
as alluded particularly he which to circumstances the and denial, for
first his all confirming as and ball, Netherfield the at passed having
mind his on impression stronger a made have not could disapprobation,
hers. on than

soothed, It unfelt. not was sister her and herself to compliment The
been thus had which contempt the for her console not could it but
considered she as and family; her of rest the by self-attracted
nearest her of work the been fact in had disappointment Jane’s that
hurt be must both of credit the materially how reflected and relations,
she anything beyond depressed felt she conduct, of impropriety such by
before. known ever had

every to way giving hours, two for lane the along wandering After
probabilities, determining events, thought--re-considering of variety
and sudden so change a to could, she as well as herself, reconciling and
made absence, long her of recollection a and fatigue, important, so
wish the with house the entered she and home; return length at her
such repressing of resolution the and usual, as cheerful appearing of
conversation. for unfit her make must as reflections

each had Rosings from gentlemen two the that told immediately was She
take to minutes, few a for only Darcy, Mr. absence; her during called
least at them with sitting been had Fitzwilliam Colonel that leave--but
her after walk to resolving almost and return, her for hoping hour, an
concern _affect_ just but could Elizabeth found. be could she till
no was Fitzwilliam Colonel it. at rejoiced really she him; missing in
letter. her of only think could she object; an longer



37 Chapter


having Collins Mr. and morning, next the Rosings left gentlemen two The
was obeisance, parting his them make to lodges, the near waiting in been
very in appearing their of intelligence, pleasing the home bring to able
the after expected, be could as spirits tolerable as in and health, good
then he Rosings To Rosings. at through gone lately so scene melancholy
return his on and daughter; her and Catherine Lady console to hastened,
ladyship, her from message a satisfaction, great with back, brought
of desirous very her make to as dull so herself felt she that importing
her. with dine to all them having

had that, recollecting without Catherine Lady see not could Elizabeth
as her to presented been have time this by might she it, chosen she
her what of smile, a without think, she could nor niece; future her
how said? have she would “What been. have would indignation ladyship’s
herself. amused she which with questions were behaved?” have she would

assure “I party. Rosings the of diminution the was subject first Their
one no believe “I Catherine; Lady said exceedingly,” it feel I you,
particularly am I But do. I as much so friends of loss the feels
to attached much so be to them know and men, young these to attached
The are. always they so But go! to sorry excessively were They me!
Darcy but last; at just till tolerably spirits his rallied Colonel dear
His year. last than think, I more, acutely, most it feel to seemed
increases.” certainly Rosings to attachment

which here, in throw to allusion an and compliment, a had Collins Mr.
daughter. and mother the by on smiled kindly were

of out seemed Bennet Miss that dinner, after observed, Catherine Lady
that supposing by herself, by it for accounting immediately and spirits,
added: she soon, so again home go to like not did she

that beg and mother your to write must you case, the is that if “But
your of glad very be will Collins Mrs. longer. little a stay may you
sure.” am I company,

replied invitation,” kind your for ladyship your to obliged much am “I
town in be must I it. accept to power my in not is it “but Elizabeth,
Saturday.” next

expected I weeks. six only here been have will you rate, that at “Why,
There came. you before so Collins Mrs. told I months. two stay to you
certainly could Bennet Mrs. soon. so going your for occasion no be can
fortnight.” another for you spare

return.” my hurry to week last wrote He cannot. father my “But

Daughters can. mother your if you, spare may course of father your “Oh!
stay will you if And father. a to consequence much so of never are
as you of one take to power my in be will it complete, _month_ another
as and week; a for June, in early there going am I for London, as far
room good very be will there barouche-box, the to object not does Dawson
I cool, be to happen should weather the if indeed, you--and of one for
large.” you of neither are you as both, you taking to object not should

our by abide must we believe I but madam; kindness, all are “You
plan.” original

servant a send must you Collins, “Mrs. resigned. seemed Catherine Lady
idea the bear cannot I and mind, my speak always I know You them. with
improper. highly is It themselves. by post travelling women young two of
in dislike greatest the have I somebody. send to contrive must You
properly be always should women Young thing. of sort that to world the
my When life. in situation their to according attended, and guarded
her of point a made I summer, last Ramsgate to went Georgiana niece
of daughter the Darcy, Miss her. with go men-servants two having
with appeared have not could Anne, Lady and Pemberley, of Darcy, Mr.
those all to attentive excessively am I manner. different a in propriety
I Collins. Mrs. ladies, young the with John send must You things.
be really would it for it; mention to me to occurred it glad am
alone.” go them let to _you_ to discreditable

us.” for servant a send to is uncle “My

you glad very am I he? does man-servant, a keeps He uncle! Your “Oh!
horses? change you shall Where things. these of thinks who somebody have
be will you Bell, the at name my mention you If course. of Bromley, Oh!
to.” attended

journey, their respecting ask to questions other many had Catherine Lady
necessary, was attention herself, all them answer not did she as and
so mind a with or, her; for lucky be to believed Elizabeth which
be must Reflection was. she where forgotten have might she occupied,
it to way gave she alone, was she whenever hours; solitary for reserved
solitary a without by went day a not and relief; greatest the as
unpleasant of delight the all in indulge might she which in walk,
recollections.

She heart. by knowing soon of way fair a in was she letter Darcy’s Mr.
at were writer its towards feelings her and sentence; every studied
address, his of style the remembered she When different. widely times
unjustly how considered she when but indignation; of full still was she
against turned was anger her him, upbraided and condemned had she
compassion. of object the became feelings disappointed his and herself;
she but respect; character general his gratitude, excited attachment His
refusal, her repent moment a for she could nor him; approve not could
past own her In again. him see to ever inclination slightest the feel or
in and regret; and vexation of source constant a was there behaviour,
chagrin. heavier yet of subject a family, her of defects unhappy the
at laughing with contented father, Her remedy. of hopeless were They
his of giddiness wild the restrain to himself exert never would them,
right from far so manners with mother, her and daughters; youngest
frequently had Elizabeth evil. the of insensible entirely was herself,
Catherine of imprudence the check to endeavour an in Jane with united
indulgence, mother’s their by supported were they while but Lydia; and
weak-spirited, Catherine, improvement? of be there could chance what
always been had guidance, Lydia’s under completely and irritable,
would careless, and self-willed Lydia, and advice; their by affronted
While vain. and idle, ignorant, were They hearing. a them give scarcely
while and him; with flirt would they Meryton, in officer an was there
there going be would they Longbourn, of walk a within was Meryton
forever.

Darcy’s Mr. and concern; prevailing another was behalf Jane’s on Anxiety
opinion, good former her all to Bingley restoring by explanation,
proved was affection His lost. had Jane what of sense the heightened
any unless blame, all of cleared conduct his and sincere, been have to
How friend. his in confidence his of implicitness the to attach could
every in desirable so situation a of that, thought the was then grievous
had Jane happiness, for promising so advantage, with replete so respect,
family! own her of indecorum and folly the by deprived, been

Wickham’s of development the added was recollections these to When
had which spirits happy the that believed easily be may it character,
it make to as affected much so now were before, depressed been seldom
cheerful. tolerably appear to her for impossible almost

of week last the during frequent as were Rosings at engagements Their
spent was evening last very The first. at been had they as stay her
of particulars the into minutely inquired again ladyship her and there;
packing, of method best the to as directions them gave journey, their
right only the in gowns placing of necessity the on urgent so was and
the all undo to return, her on obliged, herself thought Maria that way,
afresh. trunk her pack and morning, the of work

them wished condescension, great with Catherine, Lady parted, they When
year; next again Hunsford to come to them invited and journey, good a
her out hold and curtsey to as far so herself exerted Bourgh de Miss and
both. to hand



38 Chapter


few a breakfast for met Collins Mr. and Elizabeth morning Saturday On
of opportunity the took he and appeared; others the before minutes
necessary. indispensably deemed he which civilities parting the paying

yet has Collins Mrs. “whether he, said Elizabeth,” Miss not, know “I
very am I but us; to coming in kindness your of sense her expressed
for thanks her receiving without house the leave not will you certain
We you. assure I felt, much been has company your of favour The it.
plain Our abode. humble our to anyone tempt to is there little how know
we little the and domestics, few and rooms small our living, of manner
like lady young a to dull extremely Hunsford make must world, the of see
condescension, the for grateful us believe will you hope I but yourself;
spending your prevent to power our in everything done have we that and
unpleasantly.” time your

She happiness. of assurances and thanks her with eager was Elizabeth
with being of pleasure the and enjoyment; great with weeks six spent had
_her_ make must received, had she attentions kind the and Charlotte,
smiling more a with and gratified, was Collins Mr. obliged. the feel
replied: solemnity

not time your passed have you that hear to pleasure great me gives “It
fortunately most and best; our done certainly have We disagreeably.
and, society, superior very to you introduce to power our in it having
the varying of means frequent the Rosings, with connection our from
Hunsford your that ourselves flatter may we think I scene, home humble
to regard with situation Our irksome. entirely been have cannot visit
advantage extraordinary of sort the indeed is family Catherine’s Lady
You are. we footing a what on see You boast. can few which blessing and
acknowledge must I truth In there. engaged are we continually how see
should I parsonage, humble this of disadvantages the all with that,
are they while compassion, of object an it in abiding anyone think not
Rosings.” at intimacy our of sharers

was he and feelings; his of elevation the for insufficient were Words
civility unite to tried Elizabeth while room, the about walk to obliged
sentences. short few a in truth and

into us of report favourable very a carry fact, in may, “You
will you that least at myself flatter I cousin. dear my Hertfordshire,
you Collins Mrs. to attentions great Catherine’s Lady so. do to able be
appear not does it trust I altogether and of; witness daily a been have
be will it point this on unfortunate--but an drawn has friend your that
Elizabeth, Miss dear my you, assure me let Only silent. be to well as
in felicity equal you wish cordially most heart my from can I that
of way one and mind one but have I and Charlotte dear My marriage.
of resemblance remarkable most a everything in is There thinking.
each for designed been have to seem We us. between ideas and character
other.”

was that where happiness great a was it that say safely could Elizabeth
believed firmly she that add, could sincerity equal with and case, the
to however, sorry, not was She comforts. domestic his in rejoiced and
sprang. they whom from lady the by interrupted them of recital the have
she But society! such to her leave to melancholy was it Charlotte! Poor
that regretting evidently though and open; eyes her with it chosen had
Her compassion. for ask to seem not did she go, to were visitors her
their all and poultry, her and parish her housekeeping, her and home
charms. their lost yet not had concerns, dependent

parcels the on, fastened were trunks the arrived, chaise the length At
affectionate an After ready. be to pronounced was it and within, placed
by carriage the to attended was Elizabeth friends, the between parting
her commissioning was he garden the down walked they as and Collins, Mr.
thanks his forgetting not family, her all to respects best his with
his and winter, the in Longbourn at received had he kindness the for
her handed then He unknown. though Gardiner, Mrs. and Mr. to compliments
closed, being of point the on was door the and followed, Maria in,
had they that consternation, some with them, reminded suddenly he when
Rosings. at ladies the for message any leave to forgotten hitherto

respects humble your have to wish course of will “you added, he “But,”
you to kindness their for thanks grateful your with them, to delivered
here.” been have you while

and shut, be to allowed then was door the objection; no made Elizabeth
off. drove carriage the

seems “it silence, minutes’ few a after Maria, cried gracious!” “Good
have things many how yet and came! first we since two or day a but
happened!”

sigh. a with companion her said indeed,” many great “A

twice! there tea drinking besides Rosings, at times nine dined have “We
tell!” to have shall I much How

conceal!” to have shall I much how “And privately, added Elizabeth

and alarm; any or conversation, much without performed was journey Their
Gardiner’s Mr. reached they Hunsford leaving their of hours four within
days. few a remain to were they where house,

her studying of opportunity little had Elizabeth and well, looked Jane
her of kindness the which engagements various the amidst spirits,
at and her, with home go to was Jane But them. for reserved had aunt
observation. for enough leisure be would there Longbourn

for even wait could she that meanwhile, effort, an without not was It
know To proposals. Darcy’s Mr. of sister her told she before Longbourn,
astonish exceedingly so would what revealing of power the had she that
own her of whatever gratify highly so time, same the at must, and Jane,
temptation a such was away, reason to able been yet not had she vanity
indecision of state the but conquered have could nothing as openness to
communicate; should she what of extent the to as remained she which in
hurried being of subject, the on entered once she if fear, her and
sister her grieve only might which Bingley of something repeating into
further.



39 Chapter


out set ladies young three the which in May, in week second the was It
Hertfordshire; in ----, of town the for Street Gracechurch from together
carriage Bennet’s Mr. where inn appointed the near drew they as and,
coachman’s the of token in perceived, quickly they them, meet to was
stairs. up dining-room a of out looking Lydia and Kitty both punctuality,
employed happily place, the in hour an above been had girls two These
and guard, on sentinel the watching milliner, opposite an visiting in
cucumber. and salad a dressing

set table a displayed triumphantly they sisters, their welcoming After
exclaiming, affords, usually larder inn an as meat cold such with out
surprise?” agreeable an this not Is nice? this not “Is

the us lend must you “but Lydia, added all,” you treat to mean we “And
showing Then, there.” out shop the at ours spent just have we for money,
think not do I bonnet. this bought have I here, purchases--“Look her
shall I not. as it buy well as might I thought I but pretty; very is it
any up it make can I if see and home, get I as soon as pieces to it pull
better.”

perfect with added, she ugly, as it abused sisters her when And
and shop; the in uglier much three or two were there but “Oh! unconcern,
I fresh, with it trim to satin prettier-coloured some bought have I when
what signify much not will it Besides, tolerable. very be will it think
they and Meryton, left have ----shire the after summer, this wears one
fortnight.” a in going are

satisfaction. greatest the with Elizabeth, cried indeed!” they “Are

to papa want so do I and Brighton; near encamped be to going are “They
scheme; delicious a such be would It summer! the for there all us take
to like would Mamma all. at anything cost hardly would say dare I and
shall we else summer miserable a what think Only things! all of too go
have!”

indeed, scheme delightful a be would “_that_ Elizabeth, thought “Yes,”
whole a and Brighton, Heaven! Good once. at us for do completely and
poor one by already overset been have who us, to soldiers, of campful
Meryton!” of balls monthly the and militia, of regiment

at down sat they as Lydia, said you,” for news some got have I “Now
about news--and news--capital excellent is It think? you do “What table.
like!” all we person certain a

need he told was waiter the and other, each at looked Elizabeth and Jane
said: and laughed, Lydia stay. not

the thought You discretion. and formality your like just is that “Aye,
worse hears often he say dare I cared! he if as hear, not must waiter
glad am I fellow! ugly an is he But say. to going am I than said things
for now but Well, life. my in chin long a such saw never I gone. is he
not? it is waiter, the for good too Wickham; dear about is it news; my
She you! for There’s King. Mary marrying Wickham’s of danger no is There
safe.” is Wickham stay. to gone Liverpool: at uncle her to down gone is

connection a from “safe Elizabeth; added safe!” is King Mary “And
fortune.” to as imprudent

him.” liked she if away, going for fool great a is “She

Jane. said side,” either on attachment strong no is there hope I “But

cared never he it, for answer will I _his_. on not is there sure am “I
freckled little nasty a such about could her--who about straws three
thing?”

such of incapable however that, think to shocked was Elizabeth
_sentiment_ the of coarseness the herself, _expression_ of coarseness
liberal! fancied and harboured had breast own her than other little was

was carriage the paid, ones elder the and ate, had all as soon As
their all with party, whole the contrivance, some after and ordered;
and Kitty’s of addition unwelcome the and parcels, and work-bags, boxes,
it. in seated were purchases, Lydia’s

my bought I glad am “I Lydia. cried in,” crammed all are we nicely “How
now Well, bandbox! another having of fun the for only is it if bonnet,
way the all laugh and talk and snug, and comfortable quite be us let
all you to happened has what hear us let place, first the in And home.
any had you Have men? pleasant any seen you Have away. went you since
husband a got have would you of one that hopes great in was I flirting?
declare. I soon, maid old an quite be will Jane back. came you before
not of be should I ashamed how Lord, three-and-twenty! almost is She
to so you wants Phillips aunt My three-and-twenty! before married being
Mr. taken have better had Lizzy says She think. can’t you husbands, get
Lord! it. in fun any been have would there think not do _I_ but Collins;
would I then and you; of any before married be to like should I how
piece good a such had we me! Dear balls. the all to about you chaperon
spend to were me and Kitty Forster’s. Colonel at day other the fun of
the in dance little a have to promised Forster Mrs. and there, day the
so and friends!) _such_ are me and Forster Mrs. bye, the (by evening;
Pen so and ill, was Harriet but come, to Harringtons two the asked she
We did? we think you do what then, and herself; by come to forced was
a for pass to purpose on clothes woman’s in Chamberlayne up dressed
Mrs. and Colonel but it, of knew soul a Not fun! what think only lady,
borrow to forced were we for aunt, my except me, and Kitty and Forster,
Denny, When looked! he well how imagine cannot you and gowns; her of one
they in, came men the of more three or two and Pratt, and Wickham, and
Mrs. did so and laughed! I how Lord! least. the in him know not did
suspect men the made _that_ And died. have should I thought I Forster.
matter.” the was what out found soon they then and something,

did jokes, good and parties their of histories of kinds such With
her amuse to endeavour additions, and hints Kitty’s by assisted Lydia,
she as little as listened Elizabeth Longbourn. to way the all companions
name. Wickham’s of mention frequent the escaping no was there but could,

Jane see to rejoiced Bennet Mrs. kind. most was home at reception Their
Bennet Mr. did dinner during once than more and beauty; undiminished in
Elizabeth: to voluntarily say

Lizzy.” back, come are you glad am “I

Lucases the all almost for large, was dining-room the in party Their
that subjects the were various and news; the hear and Maria meet to came
and welfare the after Maria, of inquiring was Lucas Lady them: occupied
one on engaged, doubly was Bennet Mrs. daughter; eldest her of poultry
sat who Jane, from fashions present the of account an collecting hand
younger the to all them retailing other, the on and, her, below way some
person’s, other any than louder rather voice a in Lydia, and Lucases;
who anybody to morning the of pleasures various the enumerating was
her. hear would

fun! such had we for us, with gone had you wish “I she, said Mary,” “Oh!
there pretended and blinds, the up drew I and Kitty along, went we As
Kitty if way, the all so gone have should I and coach; the in nobody was
behaved we think do I George, the to got we when and sick; been not had
cold nicest the with three other the treated we for handsomely, very
treated have would we gone, have would you if and world, the in luncheon
never we thought I fun! such was it away came we when then And too. you
then And laughter. of die to ready was I coach. the into got have should
that loud, so laughed and talked we home! way the all merry so were we
off!” miles ten us heard have might anybody

sister, dear my me, from it be “Far replied, gravely very Mary this To
the with congenial be doubtless would They pleasures! such depreciate to
for charms no have would they confess I But minds. female of generality
book.” a prefer infinitely should _me_--I

to listened seldom She word. a not heard Lydia answer this of But
all. at Mary to attended never and minute, a half than more for anybody

walk to girls the of rest the with urgent was Lydia afternoon the In
steadily Elizabeth but on; went everybody how see to and Meryton, to
could Bennets Miss the that said be not should It scheme. the opposed
officers. the of pursuit in were they before day a half home at be not
Mr. seeing dreaded She opposition. her for too reason another was There
The possible. as long as it avoid to resolved was and again, Wickham
beyond indeed was removal approaching regiment’s the of _her_ to comfort
hoped she gone, once go--and to were they fortnight a In expression.
account. his on her plague to more nothing be could there

Brighton the that found she before home at hours many been not had She
under was inn, the at hint a them given had Lydia which of scheme,
her that directly saw Elizabeth parents. her between discussion frequent
were answers his but yielding; of intention smallest the not had father
often though mother, her that equivocal, and vague so time same the at
last. at succeeding of despaired yet never had disheartened,



40 Chapter


could happened had what with Jane acquaint to impatience Elizabeth’s
every suppress to resolving length, at and overcome; be longer no
be to her preparing and concerned, was sister her which in particular
scene the of chief the morning next the her to related she surprised,
herself. and Darcy Mr. between

sisterly strong the by lessened soon was astonishment Bennet’s Miss
perfectly appear Elizabeth of admiration any made which partiality
was She feelings. other in lost shortly was surprise all and natural;
so manner a in sentiments his delivered have should Darcy Mr. that sorry
the for grieved she was more still but them; recommend to suited little
him. given have must refusal sister’s her which unhappiness

certainly “and she, said wrong,” was succeeding of sure so being “His
his increase must it much how consider but appeared; have to not ought
disappointment!”

has he but him; for sorry heartily am “I Elizabeth, replied “Indeed,”
me. for regard his away drive soon probably will which feelings, other
him?” refusing for however, me, blame not do You

no.” Oh, you! “Blame

Wickham?” of warmly so spoken having for me blame you “But

did.” you what saying in wrong were you that know not do “No--I

next very the happened what you tell I when it, know _will_ you “But
day.”

far as contents its of whole the repeating letter, the of spoke then She
Jane! poor for this was stroke a What Wickham. George concerned they as
that believing without world the through gone have willingly would who
here was as mankind, of race whole the in existed wickedness much so
though vindication, Darcy’s was Nor individual. one in collected
discovery. such for her consoling of capable feelings, her to grateful
and error, of probability the prove to labour she did earnestly Most
other. the involving without one the clear to seek

both make to able be will never “you Elizabeth; said do,” not will “This
satisfied be must you but choice, your Take anything. for good them of
just them; between merit of quantity a such but is There one. only with
shifting been has it late of and man; of sort good one make to enough
Darcy’s; all it believe to inclined am I part, my For much. pretty about
choose.” you as do shall you but

Jane. from extorted be could smile a before however, time, some was It

so “Wickham she. said shocked,” more been have I when know not do “I
only Lizzy, Dear Darcy! Mr. poor And belief. past almost is It bad! very
the with and disappointment! a Such suffered. have must he what consider
thing a such relate to having and too! opinion, ill your of knowledge
it feel must you sure am I distressing. too really is It sister! his of
so.”

so you seeing by away done all are compassion and regret my no, “Oh!
am I that justice, ample such him do will you know I both. of full
profusion Your indifferent. and unconcerned more moment every growing
will heart my longer, much him over lament you if and saving; me makes
feather.” a as light as be

his in goodness of expression an such is there Wickham! “Poor
manner!” his in gentleness and openness an such countenance!

those of education the in mismanagement great some was certainly “There
the all other the and goodness, the all got has One men. young two
it.” of appearance

you as it of _appearance_ the in deficient so Darcy Mr. thought never “I
do.” to used

dislike a decided so taking in clever uncommonly be to meant I yet “And
an such genius, one’s to spur a such is It reason. any without him, to
continually be may One kind. that of dislike a have to wit, for opening
laughing be always cannot one but just; anything saying without abusive
witty.” something on stumbling then and now without man a at

treat not could you sure am I letter, that read first you when “Lizzy,
now.” do you as matter the

And unhappy. say may I enough, uncomfortable was I not. could I “Indeed,
say and me comfort to Jane no felt, I what about to speak to one no with
I knew I as nonsensical and vain and weak very so been not had I that
you!” wanted I how Oh! had!

expressions strong very such used have should you that unfortunate “How
wholly appear _do_ they now for Darcy, Mr. to Wickham of speaking in
undeserved.”

most a is bitterness with speaking of misfortune the But “Certainly.
There encouraging. been had I prejudices the of consequence natural
I whether told be to want I advice. your want I which on point one is
understand general in acquaintances our make to not, ought or ought,
character.” Wickham’s

no be can there “Surely replied, then and little, a paused Bennet Miss
opinion?” your is What dreadfully. so him exposing for occasion

me authorised not has Darcy Mr. attempted. be to not ought it “That
particular every contrary, the On public. communication his make to
to possible as much as kept be to meant was sister his to relative
his of rest the to as people undeceive to endeavour I if and myself;
Darcy Mr. against prejudice general The me? believe will who conduct,
in people good the half of death the be would it that violent, so is
equal not am I light. amiable an in him place to attempt to Meryton
to signify not will it therefore and gone; be soon will Wickham it. to
out, found all be will it hence time Some is. really he what here anyone
At before. it knowing not in stupidity their at laugh may we then and
it.” about nothing say will I present

for him ruin might public made errors his have To right. quite are “You
to anxious and done, has he what for sorry perhaps, now, is He ever.
desperate.” him make not must We character. a re-establish

had She conversation. this by allayed was mind Elizabeth’s of tumult The
fortnight, a for her on weighed had which secrets the of two of rid got
wish might she whenever Jane, in listener willing a of certain was and
behind, lurking something still was there But either. of again talk to
other the relate not dared She disclosure. the forbade prudence which of
she sincerely how sister her to explain nor letter, Darcy’s Mr. of half
one no which in knowledge was Here friend. her by valued been had
perfect a than less nothing that sensible was she and partake; could
off throwing in her justify could parties the between understanding
very that “if she, said then,” “And mystery. of encumbrance last this
to able be merely shall I place, take ever should event improbable
The himself. manner agreeable more much a in tell may Bingley what tell
value!” its all lost has it till mine be cannot communication of liberty

real the observe to leisure at home, at settled being on now, was She
a cherished still She happy. not was Jane spirits. sister’s her of state
herself fancied even never Having Bingley. for affection tender very
attachment, first of warmth the all had regard her before, love in
first most than steadiness greater disposition, and age her from and,
remembrance, his value she did fervently so and boast; often attachments
her all and sense, good her all that man, other every to him prefer and
the check to requisite were friends, her of feelings the to attention
own her to injurious been have must which regrets those of indulgence
tranquillity. their and health

of _now_ opinion your is “what day, one Bennet Mrs. said Lizzy,” “Well,
speak to never determined am I part, my For Jane’s? of business sad this
But day. other the so Phillips sister my told I anybody. to again it of
is he Well, London. in him of anything saw Jane that out find cannot I
least the there’s suppose not do I man--and young undeserving very a
of talk no is There now. him getting ever her of world the in chance
of inquired have I and summer; the in again Netherfield to coming his
know.” to likely is who too, everybody,

more.” any Netherfield at live ever will he believe not do “I

I Though come. to him wants Nobody chooses. he as just is it well! “Oh
I her, was I if and ill; extremely daughter my used he say always shall
will Jane sure am I is, comfort my Well, it. with up put have not would
done.” has he what for sorry be will he then and heart; broken a of die

expectation, such any from comfort receive not could Elizabeth as But
answer. no made she

the so “and afterwards, soon mother, her continued Lizzy,” “Well,
hope only I well, Well, they? do comfortable, very live Collinses
an is Charlotte keep? they do table of sort what And last. will it
her as sharp as half is she If say. dare I manager, excellent
_their_ in extravagant nothing is There enough. saving is she mother,
say.” dare I housekeeping,

all.” at nothing “No,

will _they_ yes, Yes, it. upon depend management, good of deal great “A
distressed be never will _They_ income. their outrun to not care take
often they suppose, I so, And them! do it may good much Well, money. for
as it upon look They dead. is father your when Longbourn having of talk
happens.” that whenever say, dare I own, their quite

me.” before mention not could they which subject a was “It

they doubt no make I but had; they if strange been have would it “No;
an with easy be can they if Well, themselves. between it of talk often
be should I better. the much so own, their lawfully not is that estate
me.” on entailed only was that one having of ashamed



41 Chapter


was It began. second The gone. soon was return their of week first The
ladies young the all and Meryton, in stay regiment’s the of last the
almost was dejection The apace. drooping were neighbourhood the in
drink, eat, to able still were alone Bennets Miss elder The universal.
Very employments. their of course usual the pursue and sleep, and
and Kitty by insensibility this for reproached they were frequently
such comprehend not could who and extreme, was misery own whose Lydia,
family. the of any in hard-heartedness

they would do?” to we are What us? of become to is what Heaven! “Good
so, smiling be you can “How woe. of bitterness the in exclaim often
Lizzy?”

what remembered she grief; their all shared mother affectionate Their
years five-and-twenty occasion, similar a on endured herself had she
ago.

Colonel when together days two for cried “I she, said sure,” am “I
heart.” my broken have should I thought I away. went regiment Miller’s

Lydia. said _mine_,” break shall I sure am “I

Bennet. Mrs. observed Brighton!” to go but could one “If

so is papa But Brighton! to go but could one yes!--if “Oh,
disagreeable.”

forever.” up me set would sea-bathing little “A

good,” of deal great a _me_ do would it sure is Phillips aunt my “And
Kitty. added

through perpetually resounding lamentations of kind the were Such
sense all but them; by diverted be to tried Elizabeth House. Longbourn
Darcy’s Mr. of justice the anew felt She shame. in lost was pleasure of
his pardon to disposed much so been she had never and objections;
friend. his of views the in interference

she for away; cleared shortly was prospect Lydia’s of gloom the But
of colonel the of wife the Forster, Mrs. from invitation an received
a was friend invaluable This Brighton. to her accompany to regiment, the
humour good in resemblance A married. lately very and woman, young very
of out and other, each to Lydia and her recommended had spirits good and
_two_. intimate been had they acquaintance months’ _three_ their

Forster, Mrs. of adoration her occasion, this on Lydia of rapture The
scarcely are Kitty, of mortification the and Bennet, Mrs. of delight the
Lydia feelings, sister’s her to inattentive Wholly described. be to
everyone’s for calling ecstasy, restless in house the about flew
ever; than violence more with talking and laughing and congratulations,
fate her at repined parlour the in continued Kitty luckless the whilst
peevish. was accent her as unreasonable as terms in

Lydia,” as well as _me_ ask not should Forster Mrs. why see cannot “I
much as just have I friend. particular her _not_ am I “Though she, said
older.” years two am I for too, more and has, she as asked be to right

make to Jane and reasonable, her make to attempt Elizabeth did vain In
from far so was invitation this herself, Elizabeth for As resigned. her
she that Lydia, and mother her in as feelings same the her in exciting
sense common of possibility all of warrant death the as it considered
it were her make must step a such as detestable and latter; the for
her let to not father her advising secretly help not could she known,
general Lydia’s of improprieties the all him to represented She go.
of friendship the from derive could she advantage little the behaviour,
more yet being her of probability the and Forster, Mrs. as woman a such
must temptations the where Brighton, at companion a such with imprudent
said: then and attentively, her heard He home. at than greater be

public some in herself exposed has she until easy be never will “Lydia
so with it do to her expect never can we and other, or place
present the under as family her to inconvenience or expense little
circumstances.”

to disadvantage great very the “of Elizabeth, said aware,” were you “If
and unguarded Lydia’s of notice public the from arise must which all us
you sure am I it, from arisen already has which manner--nay, imprudent
affair.” the in differently judge would

away frightened she has “What, Bennet. Mr. repeated arisen?” “Already
Such down. cast be not do But Lizzy! little Poor lovers? your of some
absurdity little a with connected be to bear cannot as youths squeamish
who fellows pitiful of list the see me let Come, regret. a worth not are
folly.” Lydia’s by aloof kept been have

not is It resent. to injuries such no have I mistaken. are you “Indeed
Our complaining. now am I which evils, general of but particular, of
the by affected be must world the in respectability our importance,
mark which restraint all of disdain and assurance the volatility, wild
dear my you, If plainly. speak must I for me, Excuse character. Lydia’s
and spirits, exuberant her checking of trouble the take not will father,
of business the be to not are pursuits present her that her teaching of
character Her amendment. of reach the beyond be soon will she life, her
flirt determined most the be sixteen, at will, she and fixed, be will
the in too, flirt, a ridiculous; family her or herself made ever that
beyond attraction any without flirtation; of degree meanest and worst
emptiness and ignorance the from and, person; tolerable a and youth
universal that of portion any off ward to unable wholly mind, her of
danger this In excite. will admiration for rage her which contempt
Vain, leads. Lydia wherever follow will She comprehended. is also Kitty
you can father, dear my Oh! uncontrolled! absolutely and idle, ignorant,
wherever despised and censured be not will they that possible it suppose
the in involved often be not will sisters their that and known, are they
disgrace?”

and subject, the in was heart whole her that saw Bennet Mr.
reply: in said hand her taking affectionately

known are Jane and you Wherever love. my uneasy, yourself make not “Do
less to appear not will you and valued; and respected be must you
silly three--very say, may I of--or couple a having for advantage
to go not does Lydia if Longbourn at peace no have shall We sisters.
will and man, sensible a is Forster Colonel then. go, her Let Brighton.
an be to poor too luckily is she and mischief; real any of out her keep
importance less of be will she Brighton At anybody. to prey of object
find will officers The here. been has she than flirt common a as even
being her that therefore, hope, us Let notice. their worth better women
grow cannot she rate, any At insignificance. own her her teach may there
rest the for up her lock to us authorising without worse, degrees many
life.” her of

opinion own her but content; be to forced was Elizabeth answer this With
not was It sorry. and disappointed him left she and same, the continued
on dwelling by vexations her increase to however, nature, her in
fret to and duty, her performed having of confident was She them.
her of part no was anxiety, by them augment or evils, unavoidable over
disposition.

her with conference her of substance the known mother her and Lydia Had
their in expression found have hardly would indignation their father,
comprised Brighton to visit a imagination, Lydia’s In volubility. united
eye creative the with saw, She happiness. earthly of possibility every
officers. with covered bathing-place gay that of streets the fancy, of
them of scores to and tens to attention, of object the herself saw She
tents camp--its the of glories the all saw She unknown. present at
young the with crowded lines, of uniformity beauteous in forth stretched
she view, the complete to and, scarlet; with dazzling and gay, the and
six least at with flirting tenderly tent, a beneath seated herself saw
once. at officers

such and prospects such from her tear to sought sister her known she Had
have could They sensations? her been have would what these, as realities
same. the nearly felt have might who mother, her by only understood been
melancholy her for her consoled that all was Brighton to going Lydia’s
himself. there go to intending never husband’s her of conviction

raptures their and passed; had what of ignorant entirely were they But
leaving Lydia’s of day very the to intermission, little with continued,
home.

been Having time. last the for Wickham Mr. see to now was Elizabeth
pretty was agitation return, her since him with company in frequently
even had She so. entirely partiality former of agitations the over; well
delighted first had which gentleness very the in detect, to learnt
present his In weary. and disgust to sameness a and affectation an her,
displeasure, of source fresh a had she moreover, herself, to behaviour
which intentions those renewing of testified soon he inclination the for
after serve, only could acquaintance their of part early the marked had
in him for concern all lost She her. provoke to passed, since had what
frivolous and idle such of object the as selected thus herself finding
the feel but not could it, repressed steadily she while and gallantry;
whatever for and long, however that believing, his in contained reproof
gratified, be would vanity her withdrawn, been had attentions his cause,
renewal. their by time any at secured preference her and

dined, he Meryton, at remaining regiment’s the of day last very the On
Elizabeth was little so and Longbourn; at officers, the of other with
some making his on that humour, good in him from part to disposed
she Hunsford, at passed had time her which in manner the to as inquiry
three spent both having Darcy’s Mr. and Fitzwilliam’s Colonel mentioned
former. the with acquainted was he if him, asked and Rosings, at weeks

moment’s a with but alarmed; displeased, surprised, looked He
seen formerly had he that replied, smile, returning a and recollection
man, gentlemanlike very a was he that observing after and, often; him
favour. his in warmly was answer Her him. liked had she how her asked
added: afterwards soon he indifference of air an With

Rosings?” at was he say you did long “How

weeks.” three “Nearly

frequently?” him saw you “And

day.” every almost “Yes,

cousin’s.” his from different very are manners “His

acquaintance.” upon improves Darcy Mr. think I But different. very “Yes,

“And her. escape not did which look a with Wickham Mr. cried “Indeed!”
“Is tone, gayer a in added, he himself, checking But ask?--” I may pray,
civility of aught add to deigned he Has improves? he that address in it
lower a in continued he hope,” not dare I style?--for ordinary his to
essentials.” in improved is he “that tone, serious more and

much very is he believe, I essentials, “In Elizabeth. said no!” “Oh,
was.” ever he what

to whether knowing scarcely if as looked Wickham spoke, she While
a was There meaning. their distrust to or words, her over rejoice
apprehensive an with listen him made which countenance her in something
added: she while attention, anxious and

that mean not did I acquaintance, on improved he that said I “When
from that, but improvement, of state a in were manners his or mind his
understood.” better was disposition his better, him knowing

agitated and complexion heightened a in appeared now alarm Wickham’s
his off shaking till, silent, was he minutes few a for look;
of gentlest the in said and again, her to turned he embarrassment,
accents:

readily will Darcy, Mr. towards feeling my know well so who “You,
assume to enough wise is he that rejoice must I sincerely how comprehend
direction, that in pride, His right. is what of _appearance_ the even
only must it for others, many to himself, to not if service, of be may
only I by. suffered have I as misconduct foul such from him deter
been have imagine, I you, which to cautiousness of sort the that fear
good whose of aunt, his to visits his on adopted merely is alluding,
always has her of fear His awe. in much stands he judgement and opinion
be to is deal good a and together; were they when know, I operated,
I which Bourgh, de Miss with match the forwarding of wish his to imputed
heart.” at much very has he certain am

a by only answered she but this, at smile a repress not could Elizabeth
on her engage to wanted he that saw She head. the of inclination slight
indulge to humour no in was she and grievances, his of subject old the
his on _appearance_, the with passed evening the of rest The him.
distinguish to attempt further no with but cheerfulness, usual of side,
a possibly and civility, mutual with last at parted they and Elizabeth;
again. meeting never of desire mutual

Meryton, to Forster Mrs. with returned Lydia up, broke party the When
separation The morning. next the early out set to were they whence from
the was Kitty pathetic. than noisy rather was family her and her between
Mrs. envy. and vexation from weep did she but tears; shed who one only
daughter, her of felicity the for wishes good her in diffuse was Bennet
the miss not should she that injunctions her in impressive and
which possible--advice as much as herself enjoying of opportunity
in and to; attended well be would believe to reason every was there
more the farewell, bidding in herself Lydia of happiness clamorous the
heard. being without uttered were sisters her of adieus gentle



42 Chapter


could she family, own her from drawn all been opinion Elizabeth’s Had
domestic or felicity conjugal of opinion pleasing very a formed have not
appearance that and beauty, and youth by captivated father, Her comfort.
a married had give, generally beauty and youth which humour good of
in early very had mind illiberal and understanding weak whose woman
Respect, her. for affection real all to end an put marriage their
views his all and ever; for vanished had confidence and esteem,
of not was Bennet Mr. But overthrown. were happiness domestic of
own his which disappointment the for comfort seek to disposition a
often too which pleasures those of any in on, brought had imprudence
of fond was He vice. their or folly their for unfortunate the console
principal his arisen had tastes these from and books; of and country the
as than indebted, otherwise little very was he wife his To enjoyments.
not is This amusement. his to contributed had folly and ignorance her
his to owe to wish general in would man a which happiness of sort the
true the wanting, are entertainment of powers other where but wife;
given. are as such from benefit derive will philosopher

her of impropriety the to blind been never had however, Elizabeth,
but pain; with it seen always had She husband. a as behaviour father’s
of treatment affectionate his for grateful and abilities, his respecting
to and overlook, not could she what forget to endeavoured she herself,
obligation conjugal of breach continual that thoughts her from banish
own her of contempt the to wife his exposing in which, decorum and
so felt never had she But reprehensible. highly so was children,
so of children the attend must which disadvantages the now as strongly
arising evils the of aware fully so been ever nor marriage, a unsuitable
used, rightly which, talents, talents; of direction a ill-judged so from
even daughters, his of respectability the preserved have least at might
wife. his of mind the enlarging of incapable if

little found she departure Wickham’s over rejoiced had Elizabeth When
parties Their regiment. the of loss the in satisfaction for cause other
and mother a had she home at and before, than varied less were abroad
around everything of dullness the at repinings constant whose sister
Kitty though and, circle; domestic their over gloom real a threw them
disturbers the since sense, of degree natural her regain time in might
disposition whose from sister, other her removed, were brain her of
all in hardened be to likely was apprehended, be might evil greater
a as danger double such of situation a by assurance and folly her
what found, she therefore, whole, the Upon camp. a and watering-place
been had she which to event an that before, found sometimes been has
the all bring place, taking in not, did desire impatient with looking
to necessary consequently was It herself. promised had she satisfaction
have felicity--to actual of commencement the for period other some name
by and fixed, be might hopes and wishes her which on point other some
the for herself console anticipation, of pleasure the enjoying again
Lakes the to tour Her disappointment. another for prepare and present,
consolation best her was it thoughts; happiest her of object the now was
mother her of discontentedness the which hours uncomfortable the all for
the in Jane included have she could and inevitable; made Kitty and
perfect. been have would it of part every scheme,

for. wish to something have I “that she, thought fortunate,” is it “But
certain. be would disappointment my complete, arrangement whole the Were
my in regret of source ceaseless one me with carrying by here, But
of expectations my all have to hope reasonably may I absence, sister’s
can delight promises part every which of scheme A realised. pleasure
by off warded only is disappointment general and successful; be never
vexation.” peculiar little some of defence the

minutely very and often very write to promised she away went Lydia When
and expected, long always were letters her but Kitty; and mother her to
that than else little contained mother her to Those short. very always
officers such and such where library, the from returned just were they
as ornaments beautiful such seen had she where and them, attended had
which parasol, new a or gown, new a had she that wild; quite her made
a in off leave to obliged was but fully, more described have would she
to off going were they and her, called Forster Mrs. as hurry, violent
still was there sister, her with correspondence her from and camp; the
were longer, rather though Kitty, to letters her learnt--for be to less
public. made be to words the under lines of full too much

good health, absence, her of weeks three or fortnight first the After
wore Everything Longbourn. at reappear to began cheerfulness and humour,
came winter the for town in been had who families The aspect. happier a
Bennet Mrs. arose. engagements summer and finery summer and again, back
of middle the by and, serenity; querulous usual her to restored was
without Meryton enter to able be to as recovered much so was Kitty June,
by that hope Elizabeth make to as promise happy such of event an tears;
to not as reasonable tolerably so be might she Christmas following the
malicious and cruel some by unless, day, a once above officer an mention
in quartered be should regiment another Office, War the at arrangement
Meryton.

fast now was tour northern their of beginning the for fixed time The
letter a when it, of wanting was only fortnight a and approaching,
and commencement its delayed once at which Gardiner, Mrs. from arrived
from business by prevented be would Gardiner Mr. extent. its curtailed
again London in be must and July, in later fortnight a till out setting
so go to them for period a short too left that as and month, a within
with it see to least at or proposed, had they as much so see and far,
up give to obliged were they on, built had they comfort and leisure the
the to according and, tour, contracted more a substitute and Lakes, the
that In Derbyshire. than northwards farther no go to were plan, present
three their of chief the occupy to seen be to enough was there county
The attraction. strong peculiarly a had it Gardiner Mrs. to and weeks;
where and life, her of years some passed formerly had she where town
of object an great as probably was days, few a spend to now were they
Chatsworth, Matlock, of beauties celebrated the all as curiosity her
Peak. the or Dovedale,

seeing on heart her set had she disappointed; excessively was Elizabeth
it But enough. time been have might there thought still and Lakes, the
happy; be to temper her certainly satisfied--and be to business her was
again. right soon was all and

was It connected. ideas many were there Derbyshire of mention the With
its and Pemberley of thinking without word the see to her for impossible
impunity, with county his enter may “I she, said surely,” “But owner.
me.” perceiving his without spars petrified few a of it rob and

away pass to were weeks Four doubled. now was expectation of period The
Mr. and away, pass did they But arrival. aunt’s and uncle her before
at appear length at did children, four their with Gardiner, Mrs. and
two and old, years eight and six of girls two children, The Longbourn.
their of care particular the under left be to were boys, younger
and sense steady whose and favourite, general the was who Jane, cousin
every in them to attending for her adapted exactly temper of sweetness
them. loving and them, with playing them, way--teaching

the off set and Longbourn, at night one only stayed Gardiners The
amusement. and novelty of pursuit in Elizabeth with morning next
companions; of suitableness of certain--that was enjoyment One
bear to temper and health comprehended which suitableness a
affection pleasure--and every enhance to inconveniences--cheerfulness
were there if themselves among it supply might which intelligence, and
abroad. disappointments

Derbyshire, of description a give to work this of object the not is It
thither route their which through places remarkable the of any of nor
are etc. Birmingham, Kenilworth, Warwick, Blenheim, Oxford, lay;
present the all is Derbyshire of part small A known. sufficiently
Gardiner’s Mrs. of scene the Lambton, of town little the To concern.
acquaintance some learned lately had she where and residence, former
the all seen having after steps, their bent they remained, still
Lambton, of miles five within and country; the of wonders principal
not was It situated. was Pemberley that aunt her from found Elizabeth
In it. of out two or mile a than more nor road, direct their in
expressed Gardiner Mrs. before, evening the route their over talking
his declared Gardiner Mr. again. place the see to inclination an
approbation. her for to applied was Elizabeth and willingness,

heard have you which of place a see to like you not should love, “My
your of many so which with too, place, “a aunt; her said much?” so
you there, youth his all passed Wickham connected. are acquaintances
know.”

at business no had she that felt She distressed. was Elizabeth
She it. seeing for disinclination a assume to obliged was and Pemberley,
so over going after houses; great seeing of tired was she that own must
curtains. satin or carpets fine in pleasure no had really she many,

house fine a merely were it “If stupidity. her abused Gardiner Mrs.
but myself; it about care not should “I she, said furnished,” richly
the in woods finest the of some have They delightful. are grounds the
country.”

The acquiesce. not could mind her more--but no said Elizabeth
instantly place, the viewing while Darcy, Mr. meeting of possibility
and idea, very the at blushed She dreadful! be would It occurred.
such run to than aunt her to openly speak to better be would it thought
resolved finally she and objections; were there this against But risk. a
the to inquiries private her if resource, last the be could it that
answered. unfavourably were family the of absence

chambermaid the asked she night, at retired she when Accordingly,
its of name the was what place? fine very a not were Pemberley whether
for down were family the whether alarm, little no with and, proprietor?
her question--and last the followed negative welcome most A summer? the
of deal great a feel to leisure at was she removed, being now alarms
the revived was subject the when and herself; house the see to curiosity
and answer, readily could to, applied again was she and morning, next
dislike any really not had she that indifference, of air proper a with
go. to were they therefore, Pemberley, To scheme. the to



43 Chapter


of appearance first the for watched along, drove they as Elizabeth,
turned they length at when and perturbation; some with Woods Pemberley
flutter. high a in were spirits her lodge, the at in

They ground. of variety great contained and large, very was park The
through time some for drove and points, lowest its of one in it entered
extent. wide a over stretching wood beautiful a

admired and saw she but conversation, for full too was mind Elizabeth’s
for ascended gradually They view. of point and spot remarkable every
considerable a of top the at themselves found then and half-a-mile,
by caught instantly was eye the and ceased, wood the where eminence,
which into valley, a of side opposite the on situated House, Pemberley
stone handsome large, a was It wound. abruptness some with road the
of ridge a by backed and ground, rising on well standing building,
was importance natural some of stream a front, in and hills; woody high
banks Its appearance. artificial any without but greater, into swelled
She delighted. was Elizabeth adorned. falsely nor formal neither were
natural where or more, done had nature which for place a seen never had
were They taste. awkward an by counteracted little so been had beauty
that felt she moment that at and admiration; their in warm them of all
something! be might Pemberley of mistress be to

and, door; the to drove and bridge, the crossed hill, the descended They
of apprehension her all house, the of aspect nearer the examining while
been had chambermaid the lest dreaded She returned. owner its meeting
the into admitted were they place, the see to applying On mistaken.
to leisure had housekeeper, the for waited they as Elizabeth, and hall;
was. she where being her at wonder

less much woman, elderly respectable-looking a came; housekeeper The
They her. finding of notion any had she than civil, more and fine,
proportioned well large, a was It dining-parlour. the into her followed
went it, surveying slightly after Elizabeth, up. fitted handsomely room,
which wood, with crowned hill, The prospect. its enjoy to window a to
distance, the from abruptness increased receiving descended, had they
and good; was ground the of disposition Every object. beautiful a was
its on scattered trees the river, the scene, whole the on looked she
it, trace could she as far as valley, the of winding the and banks
taking were objects these rooms other into passed they As delight. with
be to beauties were there window every from but positions; different
to suitable furniture their and handsome, and lofty were rooms The seen.
of admiration with saw, Elizabeth but proprietor; its of fortune the
of less with fine; uselessly nor gaudy neither was it that taste, his
Rosings. of furniture the than elegance, real more and splendour,

With mistress! been have might “I she, thought place,” this of “And
of Instead acquainted! familiarly been have now might I rooms these
and own, my as them in rejoiced have might I stranger, a as them viewing
no,”--recollecting But aunt. and uncle my visitors as them to welcomed
to lost been have would aunt and uncle my be; never could herself--“that
them.” invite to allowed been have not should I me;

like very something from her saved recollection--it lucky a was This
regret.

really was master her whether housekeeper the of inquire to longed She
question the however, length At it. for courage the not had but absent,
Mrs. while alarm, with away turned she and uncle; her by asked was
with to-morrow, him expect we “But adding, was, he that replied Reynolds
own their that Elizabeth was rejoiced How friends.” of party large a
day! a delayed been circumstance any by not had journey

the saw and approached She picture. a at look to her called now aunt Her
miniatures, other several amongst suspended, Wickham, Mr. of likeness
it. liked she how smilingly, her, asked aunt Her mantelpiece. the over
young a of picture a was it them told and forward, came housekeeper The
brought been had who steward, master’s late her of son the gentleman,
added; she army,” the into gone now is “He expense. own his at him by up
wild.” very out turned has he afraid am I “but

not could Elizabeth but smile, a with niece her at looked Gardiner Mrs.
it. return

miniatures, the of another to pointing Reynolds, Mrs. said that,” “And
the as time same the at drawn was It him. like very master--and my “is
ago.” years eight other--about

Gardiner, Mrs. said person,” fine master’s your of much heard have “I
tell can you Lizzy, But, face. handsome a is “it picture; the at looking
not.” or like is it whether us

this on increase to seemed Elizabeth for respect Reynolds Mrs.
master. her knowing her of intimation

Darcy?” Mr. know lady young that “Does

little.” “A said: and coloured, Elizabeth

ma’am?” gentleman, handsome very a him think you not do “And

handsome.” very “Yes,

you stairs up gallery the in but handsome; so none know I sure am “I
late my was room This this. than him of picture larger finer, a see will
to used they as just are miniatures these and room, favourite master’s
them.” of fond very was He then. be

them. among being Wickham’s Mr. for Elizabeth to accounted This

drawn Darcy, Miss of one to attention their directed then Reynolds Mrs.
old. years eight only was she when

Gardiner. Mrs. said brother?” her as handsome as Darcy Miss is “And

so and seen; was ever that lady young handsomest yes--the “Oh!
is room next the In long. day all sings and plays accomplished!--She
she master; my from present her--a for down come just instrument new a
him.” with to-morrow here comes

her encouraged pleasant, and easy very were manners whose Gardiner, Mr.
either Reynolds, Mrs. remarks; and questions his by communicativeness
her of talking in pleasure great evidently had attachment, or pride by
sister. his and master

year?” the of course the in Pemberley at much master your “Is

his half spend may he say dare I but sir; wish, could I as much so “Not
months.” summer the for down always is Darcy Miss and here; time

Ramsgate.” to goes she “when Elizabeth, thought “Except,”

him.” of more see might you marry, would master your “If

is who know not do I be. will _that_ when know not do I but sir; “Yes,
him.” for enough good

is “It saying, help not could Elizabeth smiled. Gardiner Mrs. and Mr.
so.” think should you that sure, am I credit, his to much very

him,” knows that say will everybody and truth, the than more no say “I
she and far; pretty going was this thought Elizabeth other. the replied
have “I added, housekeeper the as astonishment increasing with listened
ever him known have I and life, my in him from word cross a known never
old.” years four was he since

her to opposite most extraordinary, most others all of praise, was This
opinion. firmest her been had man good-tempered a not was he That ideas.
was and more, hear to longed she awakened; was attention keenest Her
saying: for uncle her to grateful

in lucky are You said. be can much so whom of people few very are “There
master.” a such having

could I world, the through go to were I If am. I know I sir, “Yes,
are who they that observed, always have I But better. a with meet not
and up; grow they when good-natured are children, when good-natured
the in boy generous-hearted most sweetest-tempered, the always was he
world.”

she. thought Darcy?” Mr. be this “Can her. at stared almost Elizabeth

Gardiner. Mrs. said man,” excellent an was father “His

him--just like just be will son his and indeed; was he that ma’am, “Yes,
poor.” the to affable as

Mrs. more. for impatient was and doubted, wondered, listened, Elizabeth
subjects the related She point. other no on her interest could Reynolds
the of price the and rooms, the of dimensions the pictures, the of
family of kind the by amused highly Gardiner, Mr. vain. in furniture,
her of commendation excessive her attributed he which to prejudice
his on energy with dwelt she and subject; the to again led soon master,
staircase. great the up together proceeded they as merits many

ever “that she, said master,” best the and landlord, best the is “He
but nothing of think who nowadays, men young wild the like not lived;
give will but servants or tenants his of one not is There themselves.
saw never I sure am I but proud; him call people Some name. good a him
away rattle not does he because only is it fancy, my To it. of anything
men.” young other like

Elizabeth. thought him!” place this does light amiable an what “In

not “is walked, they as aunt her whispered him,” of account fine “This
friend.” poor our to behaviour his with consistent quite

deceived.” be might we “Perhaps

good.” too was authority our likely; very not is “That

pretty very a into shown were they above lobby spacious the reaching On
than lightness and elegance greater with up fitted lately sitting-room,
to done just but was it that informed were and below; apartments the
when room the to liking a taken had who Darcy, Miss to pleasure give
Pemberley. at last

towards walked she as Elizabeth, said brother,” good a certainly is “He
windows. the of one

enter should she when delight, Darcy’s Miss anticipated Reynolds Mrs.
“Whatever added. she him,” with way the always is this “And room. the
There moment. a in done be to sure is pleasure any sister his give can
her.” for do not would he nothing is

were bedrooms, principal the of three or two and picture-gallery, The
paintings; good many were former the In shown. be to remained that all
already been had as such from and art; the of nothing knew Elizabeth but
Miss of drawings some at look to turned willingly had she below, visible
and interesting, more usually were subjects whose crayons, in Darcy’s,
intelligible. more also

have could they but portraits, family many were there gallery the In
of quest in walked Elizabeth stranger. a of attention the fix to little
arrested it last At her. to known be would features whose face only the
a such with Darcy, Mr. to resemblance striking a beheld she her--and
he when seen sometimes have to remembered she as face the over smile
earnest in picture, the before minutes several stood She her. at looked
gallery. the quitted they before again it to returned and contemplation,
father’s his in taken been had it that them informed Reynolds Mrs.
lifetime.

gentle more a mind, Elizabeth’s in moment, this at certainly was There
of height the at felt ever had she than original the towards sensation
Reynolds Mrs. by him on bestowed commendation The acquaintance. their
praise the than valuable more is praise What nature. trifling no of was
she master, a landlord, a brother, a As servant? intelligent an of
guardianship!--how his in were happiness people’s many how considered
of much bestow!--how to power his in it was pain or pleasure of much
brought been had that idea Every him! by done be must evil or good
she as and character, his to favourable was housekeeper the by forward
his fixed and represented, was he which on canvas the before stood
of sentiment deeper a with regard his of thought she herself, upon eyes
and warmth, its remembered she before; raised ever had it than gratitude
expression. of impropriety its softened

seen, been had inspection general to open was that house the of all When
were housekeeper, the of leave taking and, downstairs, returned they
hall-door. the at them met who gardener, the to over consigned

back turned Elizabeth river, the towards hall the across walked they As
former the while and also, stopped aunt and uncle her again; look to
himself it of owner the building, the of date the to as conjecturing was
stables. the to it behind led which road, the from forward came suddenly

his was abrupt so and other, each of yards twenty within were They
eyes Their sight. his avoid to impossible was it that appearance,
deepest the with overspread were both of cheeks the and met, instantly
from immovable seemed moment a for and started, absolutely He blush.
party, the towards advanced himself, recovering shortly but surprise;
least at composure, perfect of terms in not if Elizabeth, to spoke and
civility. perfect of

approach, his on stopping but away; turned instinctively had She
be to impossible embarrassment an with compliments his received
picture the to resemblance his or appearance, first his Had overcome.
two other the assure to insufficient been examining, been just had they
on surprise, of expression gardener’s the Darcy, Mr. saw now they that
little a stood They it. told have immediately must master, his beholding
confused, and astonished who, niece, their to talking was he while aloof
answer what not knew and face, his to eyes her lift dared scarcely
the at Amazed family. her after inquiries civil his to returned she
that sentence every parted, last they since manner his of alteration
the of idea every and embarrassment; her increasing was uttered he
few the mind, her to recurring there found being her of impropriety
in uncomfortable most the of some were continued they which in minutes
accent his spoke, he when ease; at more much seem he did Nor life. her
as inquiries his repeated he and sedateness; usual its of none had
in stayed having her of and Longbourn, left having her of time the to
the spoke plainly as way, a hurried so in and often, so Derbyshire,
thoughts. his of distraction

few a standing after and, him; fail to seemed idea every length At
took and himself, recollected suddenly he word, a saying without moments
leave.

but figure; his of admiration expressed and her, joined then others The
feelings, own her by engrossed wholly and word, a not heard Elizabeth
Her vexation. and shame by overpowered was She silence. in them followed
the in thing ill-judged most the unfortunate, most the was there coming
light disgraceful a what In him! to appear must it strange How world!
purposely had she if as seem might It man! a vain so strike not it might
he did why Or, come? she did why Oh! again! way his in herself thrown
minutes ten only been they Had expected? was he before day a come thus
discrimination; his of reach the beyond been have should they sooner,
alighted moment arrived--that moment that was he that plain was it for
over again and again blushed She carriage. his or horse his from
strikingly so behaviour, his And meeting. the of perverseness the
was her to speak even should he That mean? it could altered--what
family! her after inquire to civility, such with speak to amazing!--but
never dignified, little so manners his seen she had life her in Never
What meeting. unexpected this on as gentleness such with spoken he had
put he when Park, Rosings in address last his to offer it did contrast a
account to how or think, to what not knew She hand! her into letter his
it. for

and water, the of side the by walk beautiful a entered now had They
finer a or ground, of fall nobler a forward bringing was step every
time some was it but approaching; were they which to woods the of reach
answered she though and, it; of any of sensible was Elizabeth before
and aunt, and uncle her of appeals repeated the to mechanically
she out, pointed they as objects such to eyes her direct to seemed
that on fixed all were thoughts Her scene. the of part no distinguished
then Darcy Mr. where be, might it whichever House, Pemberley of spot one
mind--in his in passing was moment the at what know to longed She was.
everything, of defiance in whether, and her, of thought he manner what
he because only civil been had he Perhaps him. to dear still was she
was which voice his in _that_ been had there yet ease; at himself felt
in pleasure of or pain of more felt had he Whether ease. like not
with her seen not had certainly he but tell, not could she her seeing
composure.

mind of absence her on companions her of remarks the however, length, At
herself. like more appearing of necessity the felt she and her, aroused

while, a for river the to adieu bidding and woods, the entered They
of opening the where spots in when, grounds; higher the of some ascended
the of views charming many were wander, to power eye the gave trees the
overspreading woods of range long the with hills, opposite the valley,
wish a expressed Gardiner Mr. stream. the of part occasionally and many,
walk. a beyond be might it feared but park, whole the round going of
round. miles ten was it that told were they smile triumphant a With
which circuit; accustomed the pursued they and matter; the settled It
woods, hanging among descent a in time, some after again, them brought
crossed They parts. narrowest its of one and water, the of edge the to
scene; the of air general the with character in bridge, simple a by it
the and visited; yet had they any than adorned less spot a was it
stream, the for only room allowed glen, a into contracted here valley,
it. bordered which coppice-wood rough the amidst walk narrow a and
the crossed had they when but windings; its explore to longed Elizabeth
Gardiner, Mrs. house, the from distance their perceived and bridge,
only thought and farther, no go could walker, great a not was who
was, niece Her possible. as quickly as carriage the to returning of
house the towards way their took they and submit, to obliged therefore,
their but direction; nearest the in river, the of side opposite the on
the indulge to able seldom though Gardiner, Mr. for slow, was progress
the watching in engaged much so was and fishing, of fond very was taste,
the to talking and water, the in trout some of appearance occasional
this in on wandering Whilst little. but advanced he that them, about man
astonishment Elizabeth’s and surprised, again were they manner, slow
Darcy Mr. of sight the by first, at been had it what to equal quite was
here being walk The distance. great no at and them, approaching
before him see to them allowed side, other the on than sheltered less
prepared more least at was astonished, however Elizabeth, met. they
with speak to and appear to resolved and before, than interview an for
indeed, moments, few a For them. meet to intended really he if calmness,
idea The path. other some into strike probably would he that felt she
the view; their from him concealed walk the in turning a while lasted
saw she glance, a With them. before immediately was he past, turning
his imitate to and, civility; recent his of none lost had he that
place; the of beauty the admire to met, they as began, she politeness,
when “charming,” and “delightful,” words the beyond got not had she but
of praise that fancied she and obtruded, recollections unlucky some
changed, colour Her construed. mischievously be might her from Pemberley
more. no said she and

asked he pausing, her on and behind; little a standing was Gardiner Mrs.
friends. her to him introducing of honour the him do would she if her
unprepared; quite was she which for civility of stroke a was This
the seeking now being his at smile a suppress hardly could she and
had pride his whom against people very those of some of acquaintance
thought surprise,” his be will “What herself. to offer his in revolted
of people for now them takes He are? they who knows he “when she,
fashion.”

their named she as and made; immediately was however, introduction, The
bore he how see to him, at look sly a stole she herself, to relationship
he as fast as decamping his of expectation the without not was and it,
the by _surprised_ was he That companions. disgraceful such from could
and fortitude, with however, it, sustained he evident; was connection
into entered and them, with back turned away, going from far so
pleased, be but not could Elizabeth Gardiner. Mr. with conversation
had she know should he that consoling was It triumph. but not could
most listened She blush. to need no was there whom for relations some
every in gloried and them, between passed that all to attentively
intelligence, his marked which uncle, her of sentence every expression,
manners. good his or taste, his

Darcy Mr. heard she and fishing; upon turned soon conversation The
he as often as there fish to civility, greatest the with him, invite
time same the at offering neighbourhood, the in continued he while chose
of parts those out pointing and tackle, fishing with him supply to
was who Gardiner, Mrs. sport. most usually was there where stream the
wonder. of expressive look a her gave Elizabeth, with arm-in-arm walking
compliment the exceedingly; her gratified it but nothing, said Elizabeth
and extreme, was however, astonishment, Her herself. for all be must
can what From altered? so he is “Why repeating, she was continually
his that sake _my_ for be cannot _me_--it for be cannot It proceed? it
a such work not could Hunsford at reproofs My softened. thus are manners
me.” love still should he that impossible is It this. as change

two the front, in ladies two the way, this in time some walking After
to descending after places, their resuming on behind, gentlemen
curious some of inspection better the for river the of brink the
originated It alteration. little a be to chanced there water-plant,
found morning, the of exercise the by fatigued who, Gardiner, Mrs. in
preferred consequently and support, her to inadequate arm Elizabeth’s
on walked they and niece, her by place her took Darcy Mr. husband’s. her
him wished She spoke. first lady the silence, short a After together.
the to came she before absence his of assured been had she that know to
been had arrival his that observing, by began accordingly and place,
that us “informed added, she housekeeper,” your unexpected--“for very
we before indeed, and to-morrow; till here be not certainly would you
expected immediately not were you that understood we Bakewell, left
that said and all, it of truth the acknowledged He country.” the in
hours few a forward coming his occasioned had steward his with business
“They travelling. been had he whom with party the of rest the before
some are them among “and continued, he to-morrow,” early me join will
sisters.” his and Bingley you--Mr. with acquaintance an claim will who

instantly were thoughts Her bow. slight a by only answered Elizabeth
last the been had name Bingley’s Mr. when time the to back driven
_his_ complexion, his by judge might she if and, them; between mentioned
engaged. differently very not was mind

a after continued he party,” the in person other one also is “There
allow you Will you. to known be to wishes particularly more “who pause,
acquaintance your to sister my introduce to much, too ask I do or me,
Lambton?” at stay your during

great too was it indeed; great was application an such of surprise The
felt immediately She it. to acceded she manner what in know to her for
her with acquainted being of have might Darcy Miss desire whatever that
was it farther, looking without and, brother, her of work the be must
made not had resentment his that know to gratifying was it satisfactory;
her. of ill really think him

Elizabeth thought. in deep them of each silence, in on walked now They
and flattered was she but impossible; was that comfortable; not was
of compliment a was her to sister his introducing of wish His pleased.
had they when and others, the outstripped soon They kind. highest the
a of quarter a half were Gardiner Mrs. and Mr. carriage, the reached
behind. mile

not herself declared she house--but the into walk to her asked then He
might much time a such At lawn. the on together stood they and tired,
but talk, to wanted She awkward. very was silence and said, been have
recollected she last At subject. every on embargo an be to seemed there
Dale Dove and Matlock of talked they and travelling, been had she that
her slowly--and moved aunt her and time Yet perseverance. great with
was tete-a-tete the before out worn nearly were ideas her and patience
go to pressed all were they up coming Gardiner’s Mrs. and Mr. On over.
and declined, was this but refreshment; some take and house the into
the handed Darcy Mr. politeness. utmost with side each on parted they
him saw Elizabeth off, drove it when and carriage; the into ladies
house. the towards slowly walking

them of each and began; now aunt and uncle her of observations The
expected. had they anything to superior infinitely be to him pronounced
uncle. her said unassuming,” and polite, behaved, well perfectly is “He

her replied sure,” be to him, in stately little a something _is_ “There
now can I unbecoming. not is and air, his to confined is it “but aunt,
I proud, him call may people some though that housekeeper, the with say
it.” of nothing seen have

more was It us. to behaviour his by than surprised more never was “I
such for necessity no was there and attentive; really was it civil; than
trifling.” very was Elizabeth with acquaintance His attention.

Wickham; as handsome so not is “he aunt, her said Lizzy,” sure, be “To
features his for countenance, Wickham’s not has he rather, or,
so was he that me tell to you came how But good. perfectly are
disagreeable?”

liked had she that said could; she as well as herself excused Elizabeth
never had she that and before, than Kent in met had they when better him
morning. this as pleasant so him seen

replied civilities,” his in whimsical little a be may he perhaps “But
him take not shall I therefore and are; often men great “Your uncle. her
off me warn and day, another mind his change might he as word, his at
grounds.” his

but character, his misunderstood entirely had they that felt Elizabeth
nothing. said

really “I Gardiner, Mrs. continued him,” of seen have we what “From
by way a cruel so in behaved have could he that thought have not should
look. ill-natured an not has He Wickham. poor by done has he as anybody
he when mouth his about pleasing something is there contrary, the On
would that countenance his in dignity of something is there And speaks.
the sure, be to But, heart. his of idea unfavourable an one give not
character! flaming most a him give did house his us showed who lady good
liberal a is he But sometimes. aloud laughing help hardly could I
every comprehends servant a of eye the in _that_ and suppose, I master,
virtue.”

of vindication in something say to on called herself felt here Elizabeth
in understand, to them gave therefore and Wickham; to behaviour his
from heard had she what by that could, she as manner a guarded as
different very a of capable were actions his Kent, in relations his
nor faulty, so means no by was character his that and construction;
In Hertfordshire. in considered been had they as amiable, so Wickham’s
pecuniary the all of particulars the related she this, of confirmation
naming actually without connected, been had they which in transactions
on. relied be might as such be to it stating but authority, her

now were they as but concerned; and surprised was Gardiner Mrs.
to way gave idea every pleasures, former her of scene the approaching
out pointing in engaged much too was she and recollection; of charm the
of think to environs its in spots interesting the all husband her to
they walk morning’s the by been had she as Fatigued else. anything
former her of quest in again off set she than dined sooner no had
a of satisfactions the in spent was evening the and acquaintance,
discontinuance. years’ many after renewed intercourse

Elizabeth leave to interest of full too were day the of occurrences The
nothing do could she and friends; new these of any for attention much
above and, civility, Darcy’s Mr. of wonder, with think and think, but
sister. his with acquainted be to her wishing his of all,



44 Chapter


visit to sister his bring would Darcy Mr. that it settled had Elizabeth
consequently was and Pemberley; reaching her after day very the her
morning. that of whole the inn the of sight of out be to not resolved
their after morning very the on for false; was conclusion her But
the about walking been had They came. visitors these Lambton, at arrival
inn the to returning just were and friends, new their of some with place
a of sound the when family, same the with dining for themselves dress to
in lady a and gentleman a saw they and window, a to them drew carriage
recognizing immediately Elizabeth street. the up driving curricle a
her of degree small no imparted and meant, it what guessed livery, the
she which honour the with them acquainting by relations her to surprise
embarrassment the and amazement; all were aunt and uncle Her expected.
many and itself, circumstance the to joined spoke, she as manner her of
on idea new a them to opened day, preceding the of circumstances the of
that felt they but before, it suggested ever had Nothing business. the
a such from attentions such for accounting of way other no was there
these While niece. their for partiality a supposing by than quarter
of perturbation the heads, their in passing were notions newly-born
quite was She increasing. moment every at was feelings Elizabeth’s
disquiet, of causes other amongst but discomposure; own her at amazed
much too said have should brother the of partiality the lest dreaded she
naturally she please, to anxious commonly than more and, favour; her in
her. fail would pleasing of power every that suspected

walked she as and seen; being of fearful window, the from retreated She
of looks such saw herself, compose to endeavouring room, the down and up
worse. everything made as aunt and uncle her in surprise inquiring

introduction formidable this and appeared, brother her and Darcy Miss
new her that see Elizabeth did astonishment With place. took
her Since herself. as embarrassed much as least at was acquaintance
proud; exceedingly was Darcy Miss that heard had she Lambton, at being
was she that her convinced minutes few very a of observation the but
from word a even obtain to difficult it found She shy. exceedingly only
monosyllable. a beyond her

though and, Elizabeth; than scale larger a on and tall, was Darcy Miss
appearance her and formed, was figure her sixteen, than more little
there but brother; her than handsome less was She graceful. and womanly
perfectly were manners her and face, her in humour good and sense was
as her in find to expected had who Elizabeth, gentle. and unassuming
much was been, had Darcy Mr. ever as observer an unembarrassed and acute
feelings. different such discerning by relieved

Bingley that her told Darcy Mr. before together been long not had They
her express to time barely had she and her; on wait to coming also was
quick Bingley’s when visitor, a such for prepare and satisfaction,
All room. the entered he moment a in and stairs, the on heard was step
still she had but away; done long been had him against anger Elizabeth’s
unaffected the against ground its stood have hardly could it any, felt
He again. her seeing on himself expressed he which with cordiality
looked and family, her after way, general though friendly, a in inquired
done. ever had he that ease good-humoured same the with spoke and

personage interesting less a scarcely was he Gardiner Mrs. and Mr. To
before party whole The him. see to wished long had They herself. to than
just had which suspicions The attention. lively a excited indeed, them,
towards observation their directed niece their and Darcy Mr. of arisen
from drew soon they and inquiry; guarded though earnest an with each
knew least at them of one that conviction full the inquiries those
little a remained they sensations lady’s the Of love. to was it what
was admiration with overflowing was gentleman the that but doubt; in
enough. evident

the ascertain to wanted She do. to much had side, her on Elizabeth,
and own, her compose to wanted she visitors; her of each of feelings
she where object, latter the in and all; to agreeable herself make to
she whom to those for success, of sure most was she fail, to most feared
Bingley favour. her in prepossessed were pleasure give to endeavoured
pleased. be to determined, Darcy and eager, was Georgiana ready, was

oh! and, sister; her to flew naturally thoughts her Bingley, seeing In
in directed were his of any whether know to long she did ardently how
on than less talked he that fancy could she Sometimes manner. like a
notion the with herself pleased twice or once and occasions, former
But, resemblance. a trace to trying was he her, at looked he as that,
his to as deceived be not could she imaginary, be might this though
look No Jane. to rival a as up set been had who Darcy, Miss to behaviour
occurred Nothing regard. particular spoke that side either on appeared
point this On sister. his of hopes the justify could that them between
occurred circumstances little three or two and satisfied; soon was she
a denoted interpretation, anxious her in which, parted, they ere
saying of wish a and tenderness, by untinctured not Jane of recollection
observed He dared. he had her, of mention the to lead might that more
tone a in and together, talking were others the when moment a at her, to
since time long very a “was it that regret, real of something had which
reply, could she before and, her;” seeing of pleasure the had had he
of 26th the since met not have We months. eight above is “It added, he
Netherfield.” at together dancing all were we when November,

afterwards he and exact; so memory his find to pleased was Elizabeth
whether rest, the of any by to unattended when her, ask to occasion took
question, the in much not was There Longbourn. at were sisters her _all_
which manner a and look a was there but remark; preceding the in nor
meaning. them gave

himself; Darcy Mr. on eyes her turn could she that often not was It
general of expression an saw she glimpse, a catch did she whenever but,
removed so accent an heard she said he that all in and complaisance,
that her convinced as companions, his of disdain or _hauteur_ from
however witnessed yesterday had she which manners of improvement the
When day. one outlived least at had prove, might existence its temporary
opinion good the courting and acquaintance the seeking thus him saw she
a been have would ago months few a intercourse any whom with people of
the to but herself, to only not civil, thus him saw she disgrace--when
last their recollected and disdained, openly had he whom relations very
was change the difference, Parsonage--the Hunsford in scene lively
hardly could she that mind, her on forcibly so struck and great, so
company the in even Never, visible. being from astonishment her restrain
relations dignified his or Netherfield, at friends dear his of
from free so please, to desirous so him seen she had Rosings, at
importance no when now, as reserve, unbending or self-consequence
the even when and endeavours, his of success the from result could
draw would addressed were attentions his whom to those of acquaintance
and Netherfield of both ladies the of censure and ridicule the down
Rosings.

arose they when and half-an-hour; above them with stayed visitors Their
expressing in him join to sister his on called Darcy Mr. depart, to
dinner to Bennet, Miss and Gardiner, Mrs. and Mr. seeing of wish their
a with though Darcy, Miss country. the left they before Pemberley, at
invitations, giving of habit the in little her marked which diffidence
knowing of desirous niece, her at looked Gardiner Mrs. obeyed. readily
its to as disposed felt concerned, most invitation the whom _she_, how
however, Presuming head. her away turned had Elizabeth but acceptance,
than embarrassment momentary a rather spoke avoidance studied this that
of fond was who husband, her in seeing and proposal, the of dislike any
for engage to ventured she it, accept to willingness perfect a society,
on. fixed was next the after day the and attendance, her

Elizabeth seeing of certainty the in pleasure great expressed Bingley
to inquiries many and her, to say to deal great a still having again,
all construing Elizabeth, friends. Hertfordshire their all after make
on and pleased, was sister, her of speak her hearing of wish a into this
their when herself, found others, some as well as account, this
some with half-hour last the considering of capable them, left visitors
been had it of enjoyment the passing, was it while though satisfaction,
her from hints or inquiries of fearful and alone, be to Eager little.
their hear to enough long only them with stayed she aunt, and uncle
dress. to away hurried then and Bingley, of opinion favourable

was it curiosity; Gardiner’s Mrs. and Mr. fear to reason no had she But
was she that evident was It communication. her force to wish their not
of; idea any before had they than Darcy Mr. with acquainted better much
to much saw They her. with love in much very was he that evident was it
inquiry. justify to nothing but interest,

far as and, well; think to anxiety of matter a now was it Darcy Mr. Of
could They find. to fault no was there reached, acquaintance their as
character his drawn they had and politeness; his by untouched be not
reference any without report, servant’s his and feelings own their from
known was he which to Hertfordshire in circle the account, other any to
interest, an now was There Darcy. Mr. for it recognized have not would
sensible became soon they and housekeeper; the believing in however,
four was he since him known had who servant a of authority the that
be to not was respectability, indicated manners own whose and old, years
of intelligence the in occurred anything had Neither rejected. hastily
had They weight. its lessen materially could that friends Lambton their
not, if and had, probably he pride pride; but of him accuse to nothing
market-town small a of inhabitants the by imputed be certainly would it
he that however, acknowledged, was It visit. not did family the where
poor. the among good much did and man, liberal a was

held not was he that found soon travellers the Wickham, to respect With
the with concerns his of chief the though for estimation; much in there
well-known a yet was it understood, imperfectly were patron his of son
behind debts many left had he Derbyshire, quitting his on that, fact
discharged. afterwards Darcy Mr. which him,

than more evening this Pemberley at were thoughts her Elizabeth, for As
not was long, seemed it passed it as though evening, the and last; the
mansion; that in _one_ towards feelings her determine to enough long
She out. them make to endeavouring hours whole two awake lay she and
she and ago, long vanished had hatred No; him. hate not did certainly
him, against dislike a feeling ever of ashamed been long as almost had
his of conviction the by created respect The called. so be could that
some for had admitted, unwillingly first at though qualities, valuable
heightened now was it and feeling; her to repugnant be to ceased time
in highly so testimony the by nature, friendlier a of somewhat into
light, a amiable so in disposition his forward bringing and favour, his
esteem, and respect above all, above But produced. had yesterday which
overlooked. be not could which goodwill of her within motive a was there
her, loved once having for merely not gratitude, gratitude; was It
and petulance the all forgive to enough well still her loving for but
accusations unjust the all and him, rejecting in manner her of acrimony
avoid would persuaded, been had she who, He rejection. her accompanying
most meeting, accidental this on seemed, enemy, greatest his as her
display indelicate any without and acquaintance, the preserve to eager
only selves two their where manner, of peculiarity any or regard, of
bent and friends, her of opinion good the soliciting was concerned, were
much so of man a in change a Such sister. his to known her making on
ardent love, to gratitude--for but astonishment only not exciting pride
a of was her on impression its such as and attributed; be must it love,
be not could it though unpleasing, means no by as encouraged, be to sort
him, to grateful was she esteemed, she respected, She defined. exactly
how know to wanted only she and welfare; his in interest real a felt she
would it far how and herself, upon depend to welfare that wished she far
her which power, the employ should she that both of happiness the for be
of renewal the her on bringing of possessed, still she her told fancy
addresses. his

that niece, the and aunt the between evening the in settled been had It
the on them see to coming in Darcy’s Miss as civility striking a such
a to only it reached had she for Pemberley, at arrival her of day very
equalled, be not could it though imitated, be to ought breakfast, late
that consequently, and, side; their on politeness of exertion some by
following the Pemberley at her on wait to expedient highly be would it
when though pleased; was Elizabeth go. to therefore, were, They morning.
reply. in say to little very had she reason, the herself asked she

been had scheme fishing The breakfast. after soon them left Gardiner Mr.
meeting his of made engagement positive a and before, day the renewed
noon. before Pemberley at gentlemen the of some



45 Chapter


had her of dislike Bingley’s Miss that was now Elizabeth as Convinced
her unwelcome how feeling help not could she jealousy, in originated
how with know to curious was and her, to be must Pemberley at appearance
renewed. be now would acquaintance the side lady’s that on civility much

saloon, the into hall the through shown were they house, the reaching On
windows Its summer. for delightful it rendered aspect northern whose
woody high the of view refreshing most a admitted ground, the to opening
chestnuts Spanish and oaks beautiful the of and house, the behind hills
lawn. intermediate the over scattered were which

there sitting was who Darcy, Miss by received were they house this In
in lived she whom with lady the and Bingley, Miss and Hurst Mrs. with
with attended but civil, very was them of reception Georgiana’s London.
fear the and shyness from proceeding though which, embarrassment the all
inferior themselves felt who those to give easily would wrong, doing of
niece, her and Gardiner Mrs. reserved. and proud being her of belief the
her. pitied and justice, her did however,

and, curtsey; a by only noticed were they Bingley Miss and Hurst Mrs. By
be, always must pauses such as awkward pause, a seated, being their on
a Annesley, Mrs. by broken first was It moments. few a for succeeded
kind some introduce to endeavour whose woman, agreeable-looking genteel,
the of either than well-bred truly more be to her proved discourse of
from help occasional with Gardiner, Mrs. and her between and others;
she if as looked Darcy Miss on. carried was conversation the Elizabeth,
a venture did sometimes and it; in join to enough courage for wished
heard. being its of danger least was there when sentence short

Bingley, Miss by watched closely herself was she that saw soon Elizabeth
without Darcy, Miss to especially word, a speak not could she that and
her prevented have not would observation This attention. her calling
an at seated been not they had latter, the to talk to trying from
necessity the spared be to sorry not was she but distance; inconvenient
every expected She her. employing were thoughts own Her much. saying of
she wished, She room. the enter would gentlemen the of some that moment
whether and them; amongst be might house the of master the that feared
After determine. scarcely could she most, it feared or wished she
Miss hearing without hour an of quarter a manner this in sitting
cold a her from receiving by roused was Elizabeth voice, Bingley’s
equal with answered She family. her of health the after inquiry
more. no said other the and brevity, and indifference

the by produced was afforded visit their which variation next The
the all of variety a and cake, meat, cold with servants of entrance
many after till place take not did this but season; in fruits finest
been had Darcy Miss to Annesley Mrs. from smile and look significant a
whole the for employment now was There post. her of her remind to given,
the and eat; all could they talk, all not could they though party--for
collected soon peaches and nectarines, grapes, of pyramids beautiful
table. the round them

whether deciding of opportunity fair a had Elizabeth engaged, thus While
the by Darcy, Mr. of appearance the for wished or feared most she
but though then, and room; the entering his on prevailed which feelings
to began she predominate, to wishes her believed had she before moment a
came. he that regret

other three or two with who, Gardiner, Mr. with time some been had He
him left had and river, the by engaged was house, the from gentlemen
to visit a intended family the of ladies the that learning on only
wisely Elizabeth than appear he did sooner No morning. that Georgiana
more the resolution a unembarrassed; and easy perfectly be to resolved
she because kept, easily more the not perhaps but made, be to necessary
them, against awakened were party whole the of suspicions the that saw
behaviour his watch not did which eye an scarcely was there that and
attentive was countenance no In room. the into came first he when
the of spite in Bingley’s, Miss in as marked strongly so curiosity
its of one to spoke she whenever face her overspread which smiles
attentions her and desperate, her made yet not had jealousy for objects;
brother’s her on Darcy, Miss over. means no by were Darcy Mr. to
he that saw Elizabeth and talk, to more much herself exerted entrance,
forwarded and acquainted, get to herself and sister his for anxious was
Miss side. either on conversation at attempt every possible, as much as
the took anger, of imprudence the in and, likewise; this all saw Bingley
civility: sneering with saying, of opportunity first

Meryton? from removed Militia ----shire the not are Eliza, Miss “Pray,
family.” _your_ to loss great a be must They

Elizabeth but name; Wickham’s mention not dared she presence Darcy’s In
the and thoughts; her in uppermost was he that comprehended instantly
distress; moment’s a her gave him with connected recollections various
she attack, ill-natured the repel to vigorously herself exerting but
While tone. detached tolerably a in question the answered presently
heightened a with Darcy, her showed glance involuntary an spoke, she
with overcome sister his and her, at looking earnestly complexion,
what known Bingley Miss Had eyes. her up lift to unable and confusion,
would undoubtedly she friend, beloved her giving then was she pain
discompose to intended merely had she but hint; the from refrained have
believed she whom to man a of idea the forward bringing by Elizabeth
in her injure might which sensibility a betray her make to partial, her
follies the all of latter the remind to perhaps, and, opinion, Darcy’s
connected were family her of part some which by absurdities and
Darcy’s Miss of her reached ever had syllable a Not corps. that with
secrecy where revealed, been it had creature no To elopement. meditated
connections Bingley’s all from and Elizabeth; to except possible, was
very the from it, conceal to anxious particularly was brother her
becoming their of him, to attributed ago long had Elizabeth which wish
without and plan, a such formed certainly had He own. her hereafter
Miss from him separate to endeavour his affect should it that meaning
concern lively his to something add might it that probable is it Bennet,
friend. his of welfare the for

and emotion; his quieted soon however, behaviour, collected Elizabeth’s
to nearer approach not dared disappointed, and vexed Bingley, Miss as
able be to enough not though time, in recovered also Georgiana Wickham,
scarcely meet, to feared she eye whose brother, Her more. any speak to
which circumstance very the and affair, the in interest her recollected
have to seemed Elizabeth from thoughts his turn to designed been had
cheerfully. more and more her on them fixed

above answer and question the after long continue not did visit Their
Miss carriage their to them attending was Darcy Mr. while and mentioned;
person, Elizabeth’s on criticisms in feelings her venting was Bingley
brother’s Her her. join not would Georgiana But dress. and behaviour,
not could judgement his favour; her ensure to enough was recommendation
Georgiana leave to as Elizabeth of terms such in spoken had he And err.
When amiable. and lovely than otherwise her finding of power the without
to repeating help not could Bingley Miss saloon, the to returned Darcy
sister. his to saying been had she what of part some him

she Darcy,” Mr. morning, this looks Bennet Eliza Miss ill very “How
since is she as altered much so anyone saw life my in never “I cried;
agreeing were I and Louisa coarse! and brown so grown is She winter. the
again.” her known have not should we that

contented he address, an such liked have might Darcy Mr. little However
than alteration other no perceived he that replying coolly with himself
the in travelling of consequence miraculous no tanned, rather being her
summer.

could never I that confess must “I rejoined, she part,” own my “For
no has complexion her thin; too is face Her her. in beauty any see
nose Her handsome. all at not are features her and brilliancy;
are teeth Her lines. its in marked nothing is character--there wants
eyes, her for as and way; common the of out not but tolerable,
anything see never could I fine, so called been sometimes have which
do I which look, shrewish sharp, a have They them. in extraordinary
self-sufficiency a is there altogether air her in and all; at like not
intolerable.” is which fashion, without

not was this Elizabeth, admired Darcy that was Bingley Miss as Persuaded
always not are people angry but herself; recommending of method best the
the all had she nettled, somewhat look last at him seeing in and wise;
a from and, however, silent, resolutely was He expected. she success
continued: she speak, him making of determination

all we amazed how Hertfordshire, in her knew first we when remember, “I
recollect particularly I and beauty; reputed a was she that find to were
‘_She_ Netherfield, at dining been had they after night, one saying your
she afterwards But wit.’ a mother her call soon as should beauty!--I a
at pretty rather her thought you believe I and you, on improve to seemed
time.” one

_that_ “but longer, no himself contain could who Darcy, replied “Yes,”
have I since months many is it for her, saw first I when only was
acquaintance.” my of women handsomest the of one as her considered

of satisfaction the all to left was Bingley Miss and away, went then He
herself. but pain any one no gave what say to him forced having

their during occurred had that all of talked Elizabeth and Gardiner Mrs.
them interested particularly had what except returned, they as visit,
discussed, were seen had they everybody of behaviour and look The both.
talked They attention. their engaged mostly had who person the of except
but everything fruit--of his house, his friends, his sister, his of
of thought Gardiner Mrs. what know to longing was Elizabeth yet himself;
niece’s her by gratified highly been have would Gardiner Mrs. and him,
subject. the beginning



46 Chapter


from letter a finding not in disappointed deal good a been had Elizabeth
been had disappointment this and Lambton; at arrival first their on Jane
but there; spent been now had that mornings the of each on renewed
the by justified, sister her and over, was repining her third the on
that marked was which of one on once, at her from letters two of receipt
as it, at surprised not was Elizabeth elsewhere. missent been had it
ill. remarkably direction the written had Jane

and in; came letters the as walk to preparing been just had They
by off set quiet, in them enjoy to her leaving aunt, and uncle her
been had it to; attended be first must missent one The themselves.
their all of account an contained beginning The ago. days five written
afforded; country the as news such with engagements, and parties little
evident in written and later, day a dated was which half, latter the but
effect: this to was It intelligence. important more gave agitation,

a of occurred has something Lizzy, dearest above, the writing “Since
you--be alarming of afraid am I but nature; serious and unexpected most
Lydia. poor to relates say to have I What well. all are we that assured
bed, to gone all were we as just night, last twelve at came express An
Scotland to off gone was she that us inform to Forster, Colonel from
our Imagine Wickham! with truth, the own to officers; his of one with
am I unexpected. wholly so seem not does it however, Kitty, To surprise.
willing am I But sides! both on match a imprudent So sorry. very very,
misunderstood. been has character his that and best, the hope to
step this but him, believe easily can I indiscreet and Thoughtless
is choice His heart. at bad nothing marks it) over rejoice us let (and
nothing. her give can father my know must he for least, at disinterested
How better. it bears father My grieved. sadly is mother poor Our
against said been has what know them let never we that I am thankful
about night Saturday off were They ourselves. it forget must we him;
at morning yesterday till missed not were but conjectured, is as twelve,
have must they Lizzy, dear My directly. off sent was express The eight.
expect to reason us gives Forster Colonel us. of miles ten within passed
of her informing wife, his for lines few a left Lydia soon. here him
poor my from long be cannot I for conclude, must I intention. their
hardly I but out, it make to able be not will you afraid am I mother.
written.” have I what know

knowing scarcely and consideration, for time herself allowing Without
the seized instantly letter this finishing on Elizabeth felt, she what
it follows: as read impatience, utmost the with it opening and other,
first. the of conclusion the than later day a written been had

I letter; hurried my received have you sister, dearest my time, this “By
my time, for confined not though but intelligible, more be may this wish
Dearest coherent. being for answer cannot I that bewildered so is head
you, for news bad have I but write, would I what know hardly I Lizzy,
Wickham Mr. between marriage the as Imprudent delayed. be cannot it and
has it assured be to anxious now are we be, would Lydia poor our and
gone not are they fear to reason much too but is there for place, taken
the Brighton left having yesterday, came Forster Colonel Scotland. to
short Lydia’s Though express. the after hours many not before, day
Gretna to going were they that understand to them gave F. Mrs. to letter
W. that belief his expressing Denny by dropped was something Green,
was which all, at Lydia marry to or there, go to intended never
B. from off set alarm, the taking instantly who, F., Colonel to repeated
Clapham, to easily them trace did He route. their trace to intending
hackney a into removed they place, that entering on for further; no but
that All Epsom. from them brought that chaise the dismissed and coach,
road. London the continue to seen were they that is, this after known is
that on inquiry possible every making After think. to what not know I
renewing anxiously Hertfordshire, into on came F. Colonel London, side
but Hatfield, and Barnet in inns the at and turnpikes, the all at them
With through. pass to seen been had people such success--no any without
apprehensions his broke and Longbourn, to on came he concern kindest the
grieved sincerely am I heart. his to creditable most manner a in us to
Our them. on blame any throw can one no but F., Mrs. and him for
the believe mother and father My great. very is Lizzy, dear my distress,
make might circumstances Many him. of ill so think cannot I but worst,
pursue to than town in privately married be to them for eligible more it
a against design a such form could _he_ if even and plan; first their
suppose I can likely, not is which connections, Lydia’s of woman young
that however, find, to grieve I Impossible! everything? to lost so her
his shook he marriage; their upon depend to disposed not is F. Colonel
to man a not was W. feared he said and hopes, my expressed I when head
she Could room. her keeps and ill, really is mother poor My trusted. be
And expected. be to not is this but better; be would it herself, exert
has Kitty Poor affected. so him saw life my in never I father, my to as
of matter a was it as but attachment; their concealed having for anger
you that Lizzy, dearest glad, truly am I wonder. cannot one confidence,
the as now, but scenes; distressing these of something spared been have
not am I return? your for long I that own I shall over, is shock first
I Adieu! inconvenient. if it, for press to as however, selfish, so
but not; would I you told just have I what do to again pen my up take
to all you begging earnestly help cannot I that such are circumstances
well, so aunt and uncle dear my know I possible. as soon as here come
something still have I though it, requesting of afraid not am I that
Colonel with London to going is father My former. the of ask to more
sure am I do to means he What her. discover to try to instantly, Forster
any pursue to him allow not will distress excessive his but not; know I
to obliged is Forster Colonel and way, safest and best the in measure
my exigence, an such In evening. to-morrow again Brighton at be
will he world; the in everything be would assistance and advice uncle’s
goodness.” his upon rely I and feel, must I what comprehend immediately

seat her from darting Elizabeth, cried uncle?” my is where where, “Oh!
losing without him, follow to eagerness in letter, the finished she as
was it door the reached she as but precious; so time the of moment a
impetuous and face pale Her appeared. Darcy Mr. and servant, a by opened
speak, to himself recover could he before and start, him made manner
situation, Lydia’s by superseded was idea every mind whose in she,
find must I you. leave must I but pardon, your beg “I exclaimed, hastily
not have I delayed; be cannot that business on moment, this Gardiner Mr.
lose.” to instant an

than feeling more with he, cried matter?” the is what God! “Good
minute; a you detain not will “I himself, recollecting then politeness;
are You Gardiner. Mrs. and Mr. after go servant the let or me, let but
yourself.” go cannot you enough; well not

how felt she and her under trembled knees her but hesitated, Elizabeth
back Calling them. pursue to attempting her by gained be would little
breathless so in though him, commissioned she therefore, servant, the
and master his fetch to unintelligible, almost her made as accent an
instantly. home mistress

and herself, support to unable down, sat she room the quitting his On
her, leave to Darcy for impossible was it that ill, miserably so looking
commiseration, and gentleness of tone a in saying, from refrain to or
you give to take could you nothing there Is maid. your call me “Let
ill.” very are You one? you get I shall wine; of glass A relief? present

“There herself. recover to endeavouring replied, she you,” thank I “No,
by distressed only am I well; quite am I me. with matter the nothing is
Longbourn.” from received just have I which news dreadful some

could minutes few a for and it, to alluded she as tears into burst She
say only could suspense, wretched in Darcy, word. another speak not
compassionate in her observe and concern, his of indistinctly something
Jane, from letter a had just have “I again. spoke she length At silence.
younger My anyone. from concealed be cannot It news. dreadful such with
into herself thrown has eloped; friends--has her all left has sister
Brighton. from together off gone are They Wickham. Mr. of--of power the
no money, no has She rest. the doubt to well too him know _You_
ever.” for lost is to--she him tempt can that nothing connections,

yet a in added she consider,” I “When astonishment. in fixed was Darcy
what knew who I, it! prevented have might I “that voice, agitated more
I what of part only--some it of part some explained but I Had was. he
not could this known, been character his Had family! own my to learnt,
now.” late too all--all is it But happened. have

it is But “grieved--shocked. Darcy; cried indeed,” grieved am “I
certain?” certain--absolutely

traced were and night, Sunday on together Brighton left They yes! “Oh,
to gone not certainly are they beyond; not but London, to almost
Scotland.”

her?” recover to attempted, been has what done, been has what “And

uncle’s my beg to written has Jane and London, to gone is father “My
But half-an-hour. in hope, I off, be shall we and assistance; immediate
is How done. be can nothing that well very know done--I be can nothing
have I discovered? be to even they are How on? worked be to man a such
horrible!” way every is It hope. smallest the not

acquiescence. silent in head his shook Darcy

what known I had character--Oh! real his to opened were eyes _my_ “When
too doing of afraid was not--I knew I But do! to dared I what ought, I
mistake!” wretched Wretched, much.

walking was and her, hear to scarcely seemed He answer. no made Darcy
air his contracted, brow his meditation, earnest in room the down and up
Her it. understood instantly and observed, soon Elizabeth gloomy.
family of proof a such under sink _must_ everything sinking; was power
neither could She disgrace. deepest the of assurance an such weakness,
nothing brought self-conquest his of belief the but condemn, nor wonder
It distress. her of palliation no afforded bosom, her to consolatory
own her understand her make to calculated exactly contrary, the on was,
loved have could she that felt honestly so she had never and wishes;
vain. be must love all when now, as him,

Lydia--the her. engross not could intrude, would it though self, But
swallowed soon all, them on bringing was she misery the humiliation,
handkerchief, her with face her covering and care; private every up
of pause a after and, else; everything to lost soon was Elizabeth
by situation her of sense a to recalled only was minutes, several
spoke it though which, manner a in who, companion, her of voice the
been have you afraid am “I said, restraint, likewise spoke compassion,
my of excuse in plead to anything I have nor absence, my desiring long
anything that Heaven to Would concern. unavailing though real, but stay,
to consolation offer might that part my on done or said either be could
may which wishes, vain with you torment not will I But distress! such
I will, affair unfortunate This thanks. your for ask to purposely seem
Pemberley at you seeing of pleasure the having sister’s my prevent fear,
to-day.”

that Say Darcy. Miss to us for apologise to as kind so Be yes. “Oh,
as truth unhappy the Conceal immediately. home us calls business urgent
long.” be cannot it know I possible, is it as long

for sorrow his expressed again secrecy; his of her assured readily He
present at was there than conclusion happier a it wished distress, her
only with relations, her for compliments his leaving and hope, to reason
away. went look, parting serious, one

they that was it improbable how felt Elizabeth room, the quitted he As
as cordiality of terms such on again other each see ever should
a threw she as and Derbyshire; in meetings several their marked had
full so acquaintance, their of whole the over glance retrospective
those of perverseness the at sighed varieties, and contradictions of
would and continuance, its promoted have now would which feelings
termination. its in rejoiced have formerly

Elizabeth’s affection, of foundations good are esteem and gratitude If
if But faulty. nor improbable neither be will sentiment of change
or unreasonable is sources such from springing regard otherwise--if
on arising as described often so is what of comparison in unnatural,
been have words two before even and object, its with interview first a
given had she that except defence, her in said be can nothing exchanged,
Wickham, for partiality her in method latter the to trial a of somewhat
other the seek to her authorise perhaps, might, success ill its that and
him saw she may, it as that Be attachment. of mode interesting less
must infamy Lydia’s what of example early this in and regret; with go
wretched that on reflected she as anguish additional found produce,
entertained she had letter, second Jane’s reading since Never, business.
thought, she Jane, but one No her. marry to meaning Wickham’s of hope a
least the was Surprise expectation. an such with herself flatter could
first the of contents the While development. this on feelings her of
that astonishment surprise--all all was she mind, her in remained letter
marry could he impossible was it whom girl a marry should Wickham
appeared had him attached have ever could Lydia how and money; for
attachment an such For natural. too all was it now But incomprehensible.
suppose not did she though and charms; sufficient have might she this as
intention the without elopement an in engaging deliberately be to Lydia
virtue her neither that believing in difficulty no had she marriage, of
prey. easy an falling from her preserve would understanding her nor

that Hertfordshire, in was regiment the while perceived, never had She
Lydia that convinced was she but him; for partiality any had Lydia
one Sometimes anybody. to herself attach to encouragement only wanted
attentions their as favourite, her been had another, sometimes officer,
been continually had affections Her opinion. her in them raised
and neglect of mischief The object. an without never but fluctuating
now she did acutely how girl--oh! a such towards indulgence mistaken
it! feel

to spot the upon be to see, to hear, home--to at be to wild was She
a in her, upon wholly fall now must that cares the in Jane with share
and exertion, of incapable mother a absent, father a deranged, so family
nothing that persuaded almost though and attendance; constant requiring
utmost the of seemed interference uncle’s her Lydia, for done be could
Mr. severe. was impatience her room the entered he till and importance,
servant’s the by supposing alarm, in back hurried had Gardiner Mrs. and
them satisfying but ill; suddenly taken was niece their that account
their of cause the communicated eagerly she head, that on instantly
postscript the on dwelling and aloud, letters two the reading summons,
a been never had Lydia energy.--Though trembling with last the of
deeply be but not could Gardiner Mrs. and Mr. them, with favourite
the after and it; in concerned were all but only, Lydia Not afflicted.
every promised Gardiner Mr. horror, and surprise of exclamations first
thanked less, no expecting though Elizabeth, power. his in assistance
spirit, one by actuated being three all and gratitude; of tears with him
to were They settled. speedily was journey their to relating everything
Pemberley?” about done be to is what “But possible. as soon as off be
for sent you when here was Darcy Mr. us told “John Gardiner. Mrs. cried
so?” it was us;

engagement. our keep to able be not should we him told I and “Yes;
settled.” all is _That_

to room her into ran she as other, the repeated settled?” all is “What
real the disclose to her for as terms such upon they are “And prepare.
was!” it how knew I that Oh, truth?

the in her amuse to serve only could least at or vain, were wishes But
leisure at been Elizabeth Had hour. following the of confusion and hurry
was employment all that certain remained have would she idle, be to
of share her had she but herself; as wretched so one to impossible
to notes were there rest the amongst and aunt, her as well as business
their for excuses false with Lambton, at friends their all to written be
Mr. and completed; whole the saw however, hour, An departure. sudden
nothing inn, the at account his settled having meanwhile Gardiner
of misery the all after Elizabeth, and go; to but done be to remained
could she than time of space shorter a in herself, found morning, the
Longbourn. to road the on and carriage, the in seated supposed, have



47 Chapter


they as uncle, her said Elizabeth,” again, over it thinking been have “I
much am I consideration, serious upon really, “and town; the from drove
the on does sister eldest your as judge to was I than inclined more
should man young any that unlikely very so me to appears It matter.
or unprotected means no by is who girl a against design a such form
I that family, colonel’s his in staying actually was who and friendless,
friends her that expect he Could best. the hope to inclined strongly am
the by again noticed be to expect he Could forward? step not would
is temptation His Forster? Colonel to affront an such after regiment,
risk!” the to adequate not

moment. a for up brightening Elizabeth, cried so?” think really you “Do

uncle’s your of be to begin “I Gardiner, Mrs. said word,” my “Upon
and honour, decency, of violation a great too really is It opinion.
of ill very so think cannot I of. guilty be to him for interest,
believe to as up, him give wholly so Lizzy, yourself, you Can Wickham.
it?” of capable him

other every of but interest; own his neglecting of perhaps, “Not,
I But so! be should it indeed, If, capable. him believe can I neglect
been had that if Scotland to on go not they should Why it. hope not dare
case?” the

proof absolute no is “there Gardiner, Mr. replied place,” first the “In
Scotland.” to gone not are they that

such is coach hackney a into chaise the from removing their but “Oh!
the on found be to were them of traces no besides, And, presumption! a
road.” Barnet

though there, be may They London. in be to them then--supposing “Well,
is It purpose. exceptional more no for concealment, of purpose the for
it and side; either on abundant very be should money that likely not
less though economically, more be could they that them strike might
Scotland.” in than London in married expeditiously,

their must Why detection? of fear any Why secrecy? this all why “But
particular most His likely. not is no--this no, Oh, private? be marriage
intending never his of persuaded was account, Jane’s by see you friend,
He money. some without woman a marry never will Wickham her. marry to
she has attraction Lydia--what has claims what And it. afford cannot
sake, her for him, make could that humour good and health, youth, beyond
what to As well? marrying by himself benefiting of chance every forego
a on throw might corps the in disgrace of apprehensions the restraint
know I for judge; to able not am I her, with elopement dishonourable
your to as But produce. might step a such that effects the of nothing
has Lydia good. hold hardly will it afraid am I objection, other
father’s my from imagine, might he and forward; step to brothers no
ever has he attention little the and indolence his from behaviour,
would _he_ that family, his in forward going was what to give to seemed
in do, could father any as it, about little as think and little, as do
matter.” a such

him of love but everything to lost so is Lydia that think you can “But
marriage?” than other terms any on him with live to consent to as

with Elizabeth, replied indeed,” shocking most is it and seem, does “It
such in virtue and decency of sense sister’s a “that eyes, her in tears
say. to what not know I really, But, doubt. of admit should point a
never has she young; very is she But justice. her doing not am I Perhaps
half-year, last the for and subjects; serious on think to taught been
amusement but nothing to up given been has twelvemonth--she a for nay,
idle most the in time her of dispose to allowed been has She vanity. and
way. her in came that opinions any adopt to and manner, frivolous and
love, but nothing Meryton, in quartered first were ----shire the Since
doing been has She head. her in been have officers and flirtation,
give to subject, the on talking and thinking by power her in everything
are which feelings; her to susceptibility it? call I shall greater--what
of charm every has Wickham that know all we And enough. lively naturally
woman.” a captivate can that address and person

of ill very so think not “does aunt, her said Jane,” that see you “But
attempt.” the of capable him believe to as Wickham

be might whatever there, is who And ill? think ever Jane does whom “Of
attempt, an such of capable think would she that conduct, former their
what do, I as well as knows, Jane But them? against proved were it till
every in profligate been has he that know both We is. really Wickham
is he that honour; nor integrity neither has he that word; the of sense
insinuating.” is he as deceitful and false as

curiosity whose Gardiner, Mrs. cried this?” all know really you do “And
alive. all was intelligence her of mode the to as

day, other the you, told “I colouring. Elizabeth, replied indeed,” do “I
at last when yourself, you and Darcy; Mr. to behaviour infamous his of
behaved had who man the of spoke he manner what in heard Longbourn,
other are there And him. towards liberality and forbearance such with
to while worth not is it liberty--which at not am I which circumstances
From endless. are family Pemberley whole the about lies his but relate;
proud, a see to prepared thoroughly was I Darcy Miss of said he what
He himself. contrary the to knew he Yet girl. disagreeable reserved,
found have we as unpretending and amiable as was she that know must
her.”

you what of ignorant be she can this? of nothing know Lydia does “But
understand?” to well so seem Jane and

saw and Kent, in was I Till all. of worst the is that yes!--that, “Oh,
was I Fitzwilliam, Colonel relation his and Darcy Mr. of both much so
----shire the home, returned I when And myself. truth the of ignorant
the was that As time. fortnight’s or week a in Meryton leave to was
it thought I, nor whole, the related I whom to Jane, neither case,
could use what of for public; knowledge our make to necessary
the all which opinion good the that one, any to be apparently it
was it when even And overthrown? be then should him of had neighbourhood
opening of necessity the Forster, Mrs. with go should Lydia that settled
be could _she_ That me. to occurred never character his to eyes her
a such That head. my entered never deception the from danger any in
far was believe, easily may you ensue, could _this_ as consequence
thoughts.” my from enough

I reason, no had you therefore, Brighton, to removed all they “When
other?” each of fond them believe to suppose,

either on affection of symptom no remember can I slightest. the “Not
aware be must you perceptible, been kind the of anything had and side;
first When away. thrown be could it which on family a not is ours that
all we so but him; admire to enough ready was she corps, the entered he
for him about senses her of out was Meryton near or in girl Every were.
particular any by _her_ distinguished never he but months; two first the
and extravagant of period moderate a after consequently, and, attention;
regiment, the of others and way, gave him for fancy her admiration, wild
favourites.” her became again distinction, more with her treated who

* * * * *

added be could novelty of little however that believed, easily be may It
by subject, interesting this on conjectures, and hopes, fears, their to
during long, it from them detain could other no discussion, repeated its
absent. never was it thoughts Elizabeth’s From journey. the of whole the
find could she self-reproach, anguish, all of keenest the by there Fixed
forgetfulness. or ease of interval no

night one sleeping and, possible, as expeditiously as travelled They
a was It day. next the time dinner by Longbourn reached road, the on
wearied been have not could Jane that consider to Elizabeth to comfort
expectations. long by

standing were chaise, a of sight the by attracted Gardiners, little The
the when and, paddock; the entered they as house the of steps the on
their up lighted that surprise joyful the door, the to up drove carriage
of variety a in bodies, whole their over itself displayed and faces,
welcome. their of earnest pleasing first the was frisks, and capers

kiss, hasty a them of each giving after and, out; jumped Elizabeth
her from down running came who Jane, where vestibule, the into hurried
her. met immediately apartment, mother’s

the filled tears whilst her, embraced affectionately she as Elizabeth,
been had anything whether asking in moment a not lost both, of eyes
fugitives. the of heard

hope I come, is uncle dear my that now “But Jane. replied yet,” “Not
well.” be will everything

town?” in father my “Is

word.” you wrote I as Tuesday, on went he “Yes,

often?” him from heard you have “And

say to Wednesday on lines few a me wrote He twice. only heard have “We
I which directions, his me give to and safety, in arrived had he that
write not should he that added merely He do. to him begged particularly
mention.” to importance of something had he till again

all?” you are How she? is mother--how my “And

greatly are spirits her though trust; I well, tolerably is mother “My
you seeing in satisfaction great have will and stairs up is She shaken.
thank Kitty, and Mary dressing-room. her leave yet not does She all.
well.” quite are Heaven,

you much How pale. look “You Elizabeth. cried you?” are you--how “But
through!” gone have must

their and well; perfectly being her of her assured however, sister, Her
were Gardiner Mrs. and Mr. while passing been had which conversation,
approach the by to end an put now was children, their with engaged
and welcomed and aunt, and uncle her to ran Jane party. whole the of
tears. and smiles alternate with both, them thanked

Elizabeth which questions the drawing-room, the in all were they When
soon they and others, the by repeated course of were asked already had
of hope sanguine The give. to intelligence no had Jane that found
yet not had suggested heart her of benevolence the which however, good,
that and well, end all would it that expected still she her; deserted
father, her or Lydia from either letter, some bring would morning every
marriage. their announce perhaps, and, proceedings, their explain to

minutes’ few a after repaired, all they apartment whose to Bennet, Mrs.
with expected; be might as exactly them received together, conversation
villainous the against invectives regret, of lamentations and tears
ill-usage; and sufferings own her of complaints and Wickham, of conduct
the indulgence ill-judging whose to person the but everybody blaming
owing. be principally must daughter her of errors

Brighton, to going in point my carry “to she, said able,” been had I “If
Lydia dear poor but happened; have not would _this_ family, my all with
out go her let ever Forsters the did Why her. of care take to nobody had
their on other or neglect great some was there sure am I sight? their of
been had she if thing a such do to girl of kind the not is she for side,
the have to unfit very were they thought always I after. looked well
child! dear Poor am. always I as overruled, was I but her; of charge
Wickham, fight will he know I and away, gone Bennet Mr. here’s now And
become to is what and killed, be will he then and him meets he wherever
his in cold is he before out us turn will Collinses The all? us of
we what know not do I brother, us, to kind not are you if and grave,
do.” shall

after Gardiner, Mr. and ideas; terrific such against exclaimed all They
her told family, her all and her for affection his of assurances general
Mr. assist would and day, next very the London in be to meant he that
Lydia. recovering for endeavour every in Bennet

be to right is it “though he; added alarm,” useless to way give not “Do
certain. as it on look to occasion no is there worst, the for prepared
we more days few a In Brighton. left they since week a quite not is It
married, not are they that know we till and them; of news some gain may
as over matter the give us let not do marrying, of design no have and
make and brother, my to go shall I town to get I as soon As lost.
consult may we then and Street; Gracechurch to me with home come him
done.” be to is what to as together

I what exactly is “that Bennet, Mrs. replied brother,” dear my “Oh!
out, them find town, to get you when do, now And for. wish most could
them _make_ already, married not are they if and be; may they wherever
but that, for wait them let not do clothes, wedding for as And marry.
them, buy to chooses she as money much as have shall she Lydia tell
fighting. from Bennet Mr. keep all, above And, married. are they after
my of out frighted am I that in, am I state dreadful a what him Tell
me--such over all flutterings, such tremblings, such have wits--and
that heart, at beatings such and head, my in pains and side my in spasms
to not Lydia dear my tell And day. by nor night by rest no get can I
does she for me, seen has she till clothes her about directions any give
I are! you kind how brother, Oh, warehouses. best the are which know not
all.” it contrive will you know

endeavours earnest his of again her assured he though Gardiner, Mr. But
well as her, to moderation recommending avoid not could cause, the in
till manner this in her with talking after and fear; her as hopes her in
on feelings her all vent to her left all they table, the on was dinner
daughters. her of absence the in attended who housekeeper, the

real no was there that persuaded were sister and brother her Though
to attempt not did they family, the from seclusion a such for occasion
her hold to enough prudence not had she that knew they for it, oppose
it judged and table, at waited they while servants, the before tongue
could they whom one the and household, the of only _one_ that better
the on solicitude and fears her all comprehend should trust most
subject.

been had who Kitty, and Mary by joined soon were they dining-room the In
appearance their make to apartments separate their in engaged busily too
The toilette. her from other the and books, her from came One before.
visible was change no and calm; tolerably were however, both, of faces
anger the or sister, favourite her of loss the that except either, in
of more given had business, this in incurred herself had she which
was she Mary, for As Kitty. of accents the to usual than fretfulness
countenance a with Elizabeth, to whisper to herself of enough mistress
table: at seated were they after soon reflection, grave of

of. talked much be probably will and affair, unfortunate most a is “This
of bosoms wounded the into pour and malice, of tide the stem must we But
consolation.” sisterly of balm the other each

added, she replying, of inclination no Elizabeth in perceiving Then,
useful this it from draw may we Lydia, for be must event the as “Unhappy
one that irretrievable; is female a in virtue of loss that lesson:
less no is reputation her that ruin; endless in her involves step false
in guarded much too be cannot she that and beautiful; is it than brittle
sex.” other the of undeserving the towards behaviour her

oppressed much too was but amazement, in eyes her up lifted Elizabeth
such with herself console to continued however, Mary, reply. any make to
them. before evil the from extractions moral of kind

for be to able were Bennets Miss elder two the afternoon, the In
of herself availed instantly Elizabeth and themselves; by half-an-hour
to eager equally was Jane which inquiries, any making of opportunity the
sequel dreadful the over lamentations general in joining After satisfy.
Miss and certain, but all as considered Elizabeth which event, this of
continued former the impossible, wholly be to assert not could Bennet
which it about everything and all me tell “But saying, by subject, the
Colonel did What particulars. further me Give heard. already not have I
elopement the before anything of apprehension no they Had say? Forster
ever.” for together them seen have must They place? took

partiality, some suspected often had he that own did Forster “Colonel
so am I alarm. any him give to nothing but side, Lydia’s on especially
He utmost. the to kind and attentive was behaviour His him! for grieved
had he before concern, his of us assure to order in us, to coming _was_
apprehension that when Scotland: to gone being not their of idea any
journey.” his hastened it abroad, got first

of know he Did marry? not would Wickham that convinced Denny was “And
himself?” Denny seen Forster Colonel Had off? go to intending their

of anything knowing denied Denny _him_, by questioned when but, “Yes;
not did He it. about opinion real his give not would and plans, their
am I _that_, from marrying--and not their of persuasion his repeat
before.” misunderstood been have might he hope, to inclined

a entertained you of one not himself, came Forster Colonel till “And
married?” really being their of suppose, I doubt,

felt I brains? our enter should idea an such that possible it was “How
him with happiness sister’s my of fearful little uneasy--a little a
quite always been not had conduct his that knew I because marriage, in
how felt only they that; of nothing knew mother and father My right.
natural very a with owned, then Kitty be. must it match a imprudent
letter last Lydia’s in that us, of rest the than more knowing on triumph
their of seems, it known, had She step. a such for her prepared had she
weeks.” many other, each with love in being

Brighton?” to went they before not “But

not.” believe I “No,

Does himself? Wickham of well think to appear Forster Colonel did “And
character?” real his know he

formerly he as Wickham of well so speak not did he that confess must “I
sad this since And extravagant. and imprudent be to him believed He did.
debt; in greatly Meryton left he that said is it place, taken has affair
false.” be may this hope I but

him, of knew we what told we had secret, less been we had Jane, “Oh,
happened!” have not could this

expose to “But sister. her replied better,” been have would it “Perhaps
present their what knowing without person any of faults former the
intentions.” best the with acted We unjustifiable. seemed were, feelings

his to note Lydia’s of particulars the repeat Forster Colonel “Could
wife?”

see.” to us for him with it brought “He

These Elizabeth. to it gave and pocket-book, her from it took then Jane
contents: the were

HARRIET, DEAR “MY

help cannot I and gone, am I where know you when laugh will “You
am I as soon as morning, to-morrow surprise your at myself laughing
who, with guess cannot you if and Green, Gretna to going am I missed.
I world the in man one but is there for simpleton, a you think shall I
think so him, without happy be never should I angel. an is he and love,
my of Longbourn at word them send not need You off. be to harm no it
greater, the surprise the make will it for it, like not do you if going,
joke good a What Wickham.’ ‘Lydia name my sign and them to write I when
to excuses my make Pray laughing. for write hardly can I be! will it
to-night. him with dancing and engagement, my keeping not for Pratt
will I him tell and all; knows he when me excuse will he hope I him Tell
shall I pleasure. great with meet, we ball next the at him with dance
tell would you wish I but Longbourn; to get I when clothes my for send
are they before gown muslin worked my in slit great a mend to Sally
will you hope I Forster. Colonel to love my Give Good-bye. up. packed
journey. good our to drink

friend, affectionate “Your

BENNET.” “LYDIA

had she when Elizabeth cried Lydia!” thoughtless thoughtless, “Oh!
moment! a such at written be to this, is letter a “What it. finished
their of subject the on serious was _she_ that shows it least at But
her on not was it to, her persuade afterwards might he Whatever journey.
it!” felt have must he how father! poor My infamy. of _scheme_ a side

ten full for word a speak not could He shocked. so anyone saw never “I
in house whole the and immediately, ill taken was mother My minutes.
confusion!” such

who it to belonging servant a there “was Elizabeth, cried Jane,” “Oh!
day?” the of end the before story whole the know not did

is time a such at guarded be to But was. there hope I know. not do “I
to endeavoured I though and hysterics, in was mother My difficult. very
so do not did I afraid am I power, my in assistance every her give
happen possibly might what of horror the But done! have might I as much
faculties.” my me from took almost

look not do You you. for much too been has her upon attendance “Your
anxiety and care every had have you you! with been had I that Oh well.
alone.” yourself upon

every in shared have would and kind, very been have Kitty and “Mary
them. of either for right it think not did I but sure; am I fatigue,
hours her that much, so studies Mary and delicate; and slight is Kitty
Longbourn to came Phillips aunt My on. in broken be not should repose of
till stay to as good so was and away; went father my after Tuesday, on
And all. us to comfort and use great of was She me. with Thursday
to morning Wednesday on here walked she kind; very been has Lucas Lady
if daughters’, her of any or services, her offered and us, with condole
us.” to use of be should they

she “perhaps Elizabeth; cried home,” at stayed have better had “She
see cannot one this, as misfortune a such under but, well, _meant_
condolence impossible; is Assistance neighbours. one’s of little too
satisfied.” be and distance, a at us over triumph them Let insufferable.

had father her which measures the into inquire to proceeded then She
daughter. his of recovery the for town, in while pursue, to intended

where place the Epsom, to go “to Jane, replied believe,” I meant “He
could anything if try and postilions the see horses, changed last they
the discover to be must object principal His them. from out made be
come had It Clapham. from them took which coach hackney the of number
a of circumstance the that thought he as and London; from fare a with
might another into carriage one from removing lady’s and gentleman
anyhow could he If Clapham. at inquiries make to meant he remarked be
he fare, his down set before had coachman the house what at discover
impossible be not might it hoped and there, inquiries make to determined
any of know not do I coach. the of number and stand the out find to
gone, be to hurry a such in was he but formed; had he that designs other
finding in difficulty had I that discomposed, greatly so spirits his and
this.” as much so even out



48 Chapter


next the Bennet Mr. from letter a of hopes in were party whole The
him. from line single a bringing without in came post the but morning,
and negligent most a occasions, common all on be, to him knew family His
exertion. for hoped had they time a such at but correspondent; dilatory
to intelligence pleasing no had he that conclude to forced were They
Mr. certain. be to glad been have would they _that_ of even but send;
off. set he before letters the for only waited had Gardiner

constant receiving of least at certain were they gone, was he When
parting, at promised, uncle their and on, going was what of information
could, he as soon as Longbourn, to return to Bennet Mr. on prevail to
only the as it considered who sister, his of consolation great the to
duel. a in killed being not husband’s her for security

few a Hertfordshire in remain to were children the and Gardiner Mrs.
serviceable be might presence her thought former the as longer, days
a was and Bennet, Mrs. on attendance their in shared She nieces. her to
also aunt other Their freedom. of hours their in them to comfort great
of design the with said, she as always, and frequently, them visited
without came never she as up--though, them heartening and cheering
irregularity, or extravagance Wickham’s of instance fresh some reporting
found she than dispirited more them leaving without away went seldom she
them.

months three but who, man the blacken to striving seemed Meryton All
debt in be to declared was He light. of angel an almost been had before,
with honoured all intrigues, his and place, the in tradesman every to
family. tradesman’s every into extended been had seduction, of title the
world; the in man young wickedest the was he that declared Everybody
the distrusted always had they that out find to began everybody and
above credit not did she though Elizabeth, goodness. his of appearance
of assurance former her make to enough believed said, was what of half
less still believed who Jane, even and certain; more ruin sister’s her
come now was time the as especially more hopeless, almost became it, of
entirely before never had she which Scotland, to gone had they if when,
of news some gained have probability all in must they of, despaired
them.

a received wife his Tuesday on Sunday; on Longbourn left Gardiner Mr.
immediately had he arrival, his on that, them told it him; from letter
Street; Gracechurch to come to him persuaded and brother, his out found
arrival, his before Clapham, and Epsom to been had Bennet Mr. that
now was he that and information; satisfactory any gaining without but
Bennet Mr. as town, in hotels principal the all at inquire to determined
first their on them, of one to gone have might they possible it thought
himself Gardiner Mr. lodgings. procured they before London, to coming
was brother his as but measure, this from success any expect not did
Mr. that added He it. pursuing in him assist to meant he it, in eager
promised and London leave to present at disinclined wholly seemed Bennet
effect: this to postscript a also was There soon. very again write to

if out, find to him desire to Forster Colonel to written have “I
regiment, the in intimates man’s young the of some from possible,
to likely be would who connections or relations any has Wickham whether
were there If himself. concealed now has he town of part what in know
a such gaining of probability a with to apply could one that anyone
have we present At consequence. essential of be might it that, as clue
in everything do say, dare I will, Forster Colonel us. guide to nothing
perhaps, thoughts, second on But, head. this on us satisfy to power his
any than better living, now has he relations what us tell could Lizzy
person.” other

her to deference this whence from understand to loss no at was Elizabeth
information any give to power her in not was it but proceeded; authority
never had She deserved. compliment the as nature a satisfactory so of
both mother, and father a except relations, any had having his of heard
of some that however, possible, was It years. many dead been had whom of
information; more give to able be might ----shire the in companions his
application the it, expecting in sanguine very not was she though and
to. forward look to something a was

anxious most the but anxiety; of day a now was Longbourn at day Every
letters of arrival The expected. was post the when was each of part
letters, Through impatience. morning’s every of object grand the was
every and communicated, be would told be to was bad or good of whatever
importance. of news some bring to expected was day succeeding

for arrived letter a Gardiner, Mr. from again heard they before But
Jane as which, Collins; Mr. from quarter, different a from father, their
absence, his in him for came that all open to directions received had
his curiosities what knew who Elizabeth, and read; accordingly she
as was It likewise. it read and her, over looked were, always letters
follows:

SIR, DEAR “MY

situation my and relationship, our by upon, called myself feel “I
now are you affliction grievous the on you with condole to life, in
from letter a by informed yesterday were we which of under, suffering
myself and Collins Mrs. that sir, dear my assured, Be Hertfordshire.
in family, respectable your all and you with sympathise sincerely
because kind, bitterest the of be must which distress, present your
be shall arguments No remove. can time no which cause a from proceeding
that misfortune--or a severe so alleviate can that part my on wanting
the others all of be must that circumstance a under you, comfort may
would daughter your of death The mind. parent’s a to afflicting most
to more the is it And this. of comparison in blessing a been have
Charlotte dear my as suppose to reason is there because lamented, be
has daughter your in behaviour of licentiousness this that me, informs
time, same the at though, indulgence; of degree faulty a from proceeded
think to inclined am I Bennet, Mrs. and yourself of consolation the for
be not could she or bad, naturally be must disposition own her that
be, may that Howsoever age. an early so at enormity, an such of guilty
joined only not am I opinion which in pitied; be to grievously are you
to daughter, her and Catherine Lady by likewise but Collins, Mrs. by
that apprehending in me with agree They affair. the related have I whom
of fortunes the to injurious be will daughter one in step false this
says, condescendingly herself Catherine Lady as who, for others; the all
leads consideration this And family? a such with themselves connect will
event certain a on satisfaction, augmented with reflect, to moreover me
involved been have must I otherwise, been it had for November; last of
to sir, dear you, advise then me Let disgrace. and sorrow your all in
child unworthy your off throw to possible, as much as yourself console
her of fruits the reap to her leave and ever, for affection your from
offense. heinous own

etc.” etc., sir, dear am, “I

from answer an received had he till again write not did Gardiner Mr.
send. to nature pleasant a of nothing had he then and Forster; Colonel
he whom with relationship single a had Wickham that known not was It
one near no had he that certain was it and connection, any up kept
he since but numerous; been had acquaintances former His living.
of terms on was he that appear not did it militia, the in been had
therefore, one, no was There them. of any with friendship particular
the in And him. of news any give to likely as out pointed be could who
for motive powerful very a was there finances, own his of state wretched
for relations, Lydia’s by discovery of fear his to addition in secrecy,
a to him behind debts gaming left had he that transpired just had it
a than more that believed Forster Colonel amount. considerable very
Brighton. at expenses his clear to necessary be would pounds thousand
more still were honour of debts his but town, in deal good a owed He
particulars these conceal to attempt not did Gardiner Mr. formidable.
gamester!” “A horror. with them heard Jane family. Longbourn the from
it.” of idea an not had I unexpected. wholly is “This cried. she

their see to expect might they that letter, his in added Gardiner Mr.
Rendered Saturday. was which day, following the on home at father
yielded had he endeavours, their all of ill-success the by spiritless
and family, his to return would he that entreaty brother-in-law’s his to
advisable be to suggest might occasion whatever do to him to it leave
did she this, of told was Bennet Mrs. When pursuit. their continuing for
considering expected, children her as satisfaction much so express not
before. been had life his for anxiety her what

he “Sure cried. she Lydia?” poor without and home, coming he is “What,
Wickham, fight to is Who them. found has he before London leave not will
away?” comes he if her, marry him make and

she that settled was it home, at be to wish to began Gardiner Mrs. As
Bennet Mr. that time same the at London, to go should children the and
their of stage first the them took therefore, coach, The it. from came
Longbourn. to back master its brought and journey,

her and Elizabeth about perplexity the all in away went Gardiner Mrs.
His world. the of part that from her attended had that friend Derbyshire
and niece; her by them before mentioned voluntarily been never had name
their of formed, had Gardiner Mrs. which half-expectation of kind the
had Elizabeth nothing. in ended had him, from letter a by followed being
Pemberley. from come could that return her since none received

for excuse other any rendered family the of state unhappy present The
be could therefore, nothing, unnecessary; spirits her of lowness the
time this by was who Elizabeth, though _that_, from conjectured fairly
aware perfectly was feelings, own her with acquainted well tolerably
of dread the borne have could she Darcy, of nothing known she had that,
thought, she her, spared have would It better. somewhat infamy Lydia’s
two. of out night sleepless one

usual his of appearance the all had he arrived, Bennet Mr. When
the in been ever had he as little as said He composure. philosophic
him taken had that business the of mention no made saying; of habit
of speak to courage had daughters his before time some was it and away,
it.

that tea, at them joined had he when afternoon, the till not was It
briefly her on then, and subject; the introduce to ventured Elizabeth
“Say replied, he endured, have must he what for sorrow her expressing
doing, own my been has It myself? but suffer should Who that. of nothing
it.” feel to ought I and

Elizabeth. replied yourself,” upon severe too be not must “You

prone so is nature Human evil. an such against me warn well may “You
have I much how feel life my in once me let Lizzy, No, it! into fall to
impression. the by overpowered being of afraid not am I blame. to been
enough.” soon away pass will It

London?” in be to them suppose you “Do

concealed?” well so be they can else where “Yes;

Kitty. added London,” to go to want to used Lydia “And

there residence her “and drily; father her said then,” happy is “She
duration.” some of be probably will

continued: he silence short a after Then

me to advice your in justified being for ill-will no you bear I “Lizzy,
mind.” of greatness some shows event, the considering which, May, last

mother’s her fetch to came who Bennet, Miss by interrupted were They
tea.

an such gives it good; one does “which cried, he parade,” a is “This
my in sit will I same; the do will I day Another misfortune! to elegance
as trouble much as give and gown, powdering and nightcap my in library,
away.” runs Kitty till it defer may I perhaps, or, can; I

should I “If fretfully. Kitty said papa,” away, run to going not am “I
Lydia.” than better behave would I Brighton, to go ever

Eastbourne as it near so you trust not would I Brighton. to go “_You_
and cautious, be to learnt last at have I Kitty, No, pounds! fifty for
into enter to ever is officer No it. of effects the feel will you
be will Balls village. the through pass to even nor again, house my
sisters. your of one with up stand you unless prohibited, absolutely
have you that prove can you till doors of out stir to never are you And
manner.” rational a in day every of minutes ten spent

cry. to began light, serious a in threats these all took who Kitty,

good a are you If unhappy. yourself make not “do he, said well,” “Well,
of end the at review a to you take will I years, ten next the for girl
them.”



49 Chapter


walking were Elizabeth and Jane as return, Bennet’s Mr. after days Two
housekeeper the saw they house, the behind shrubbery the in together
their to them call to came she that concluding and, them, towards coming
summons, expected the of instead but, her; meet to forward went mother,
pardon, your beg “I Bennet, Miss to said she her, approached they when
some got have might you hopes in was I but you, interrupting for madam,
ask.” to coming of liberty the took I so town, from news good

town.” from nothing heard have We Hill? mean, you do “What

know you “don’t astonishment, great in Hill, Mrs. cried madam,” “Dear
here been has He Gardiner? Mr. from master for come express an is there
letter.” a had has master and half-hour, this

They speech. for time have to in get to eager too girls, the ran Away
the to thence from breakfast-room; the into vestibule the through ran
of point the on were they and neither; in was father their library;
the by met were they when mother, their with stairs up him seeking
said: who butler,

the towards walking is he ma’am, master, my for looking are you “If
copse.” little

once hall the through passed instantly they information, this Upon
deliberately was who father, their after lawn the across ran and more,
paddock. the of side one on wood small a towards way his pursuing

as running of habit the in much so nor light so not was who Jane,
breath, for panting sister, her while behind, lagged soon Elizabeth,
out: cried eagerly and him, with up came

uncle?” my from heard you Have news? news--what what papa, “Oh,

express.” by him from letter a had have I “Yes

bad?” or bring--good it does news what and “Well,

from letter the taking he, said expected?” be to good of there is “What
it.” read to like would you perhaps “But pocket. his

up. came now Jane hand. his from it caught impatiently Elizabeth

is it what myself know hardly I “for father, their said aloud,” it “Read
about.”

2. August Monday, Street, “Gracechurch

BROTHER, DEAR “MY

as, such and niece, my of tidings some you send to able am I last “At
you after Soon satisfaction. you give will it hope I whole, the upon
of part what in out find to enough fortunate was I Saturday, on me left
enough is it meet; we till reserve I particulars The were. they London
both--” them seen have I discovered. are they know to

married!” are “they Jane; cried hoped,” always I as is it “Then

on: read Elizabeth

there find I can nor married, not are They both. them seen have “I
the perform to willing are you if but so; being of intention any was
will it hope I side, your on make to ventured have I which engagements
assure to is, you of required is that All are. they before long be not
thousand five the of share equal her settlement, by daughter, your to
and yourself of decease the after children your among secured pounds
her, allowing of engagement an into enter to moreover, and, sister; my
conditions are These annum. per pounds hundred one life, your during
with, complying in hesitation no had I everything, considering which,
by this send shall I you. for privileged, myself thought I as far as
You answer. your me bringing in lost be may time no that express,
Wickham’s Mr. that particulars, these from comprehend, easily will
be. to believed generally are they as hopeless so not are circumstances
there say to happy am I and respect; that in deceived been has world The
to discharged, are debts his all when even money, little some be will
conclude I as If, fortune. own her to addition in niece, my on settle
throughout name your in act to powers full me send you case, the be will
to directions give immediately will I business, this of whole the
the be not will There settlement. proper a preparing for Haggerston
at quiet stay therefore again; town to coming your for occasion smallest
as answer your back Send care. and diligence my on depend and Longbourn,
it judged have We explicitly. write to careful be and can, you as fast
hope I which of house, this from married be should niece my that best
as soon as again write shall I to-day. us to comes She approve. will you
etc., Yours, on. determined is more anything

GARDINER.” “EDW.

be it “Can finished. had she when Elizabeth, cried possible?” it “Is
her?” marry will he that possible

her said him,” thought we as then, undeserving, so not is “Wickham
you.” congratulate I father, dear “My sister.

Elizabeth. cried letter?” the answered you have “And

soon.” done be must it but “No;

he before time more no lose to him entreat then she did earnestly Most
wrote.

immediately. write and back “come cried, she father,” dear my “Oh!
case.” a such in is moment every important how Consider

trouble the dislike you “if Jane, said you,” for write me “Let
yourself.”

done.” be must it “but replied; he much,” very it dislike “I

house. the towards walked and them, with back turned he saying, so And

be must suppose, I terms, the “but Elizabeth; said ask--” I may “And
with.” complied

little.” so asking his of ashamed only am I with! “Complied

man!” a _such_ is he Yet marry! _must_ they “And

there But done. be to else nothing is There marry. must they yes, “Yes,
money much how is, one know; to much very want I that things two are
ever I am how other, the and about; it bring to down laid has uncle your
him.” pay to

sir?” mean, you do “what Jane, cried uncle!” My “Money!

a slight so on Lydia marry would senses his in man no that mean, “I
am I after fifty and life, my during year a hundred one as temptation
gone.”

me to occurred not had it “though Elizabeth; said true,” very is “That
Oh! remain! to still something and discharged, be to debts His before.
has he afraid am I man, good Generous, doings! uncle’s my be must it
this.” all do not could sum small A himself. distressed

farthing a with her takes he if fool a “Wickham’s father; her said “No,”
him, of ill so think to sorry be should I pounds. thousand ten than less
relationship.” our of beginning very the in

be to sum a such half is How forbid! Heaven pounds! thousand “Ten
repaid?”

continued thought, in deep them, of each and answer, no made Bennet Mr.
the to on went then father Their house. the reached they till silent
breakfast-room. the into walked girls the and write, to library

they as soon as Elizabeth, cried married!” be to really are they “And
be to are we _this_ for And is! this strange “How themselves. by were
happiness, of chance their is as small marry, should they That thankful.
Lydia!” Oh, rejoice. to forced are we character, his is as wretched and

would certainly he “that Jane, replied thinking,” with myself comfort “I
kind our Though her. for regard real a not had he if Lydia marry not
ten that believe cannot I him, clearing towards something done has uncle
children has He advanced. been has it, like anything or pounds, thousand
thousand ten half spare he could How more. have may and own, his of
pounds?”

said been,” have debts Wickham’s what learn to able ever were he “If
shall we sister, our on side his on settled is much how “and Elizabeth,
has Wickham because them, for done has Gardiner Mr. what know exactly
never can aunt and uncle my of kindness The own. his of sixpence not
personal their her affording and home, her taking Their requited. be
as advantage her to sacrifice a such is countenance, and protection
is she time this By acknowledge. enough cannot gratitude of years
now, miserable her make not does goodness such If them! with actually
she when her, for meeting a What happy! be to deserve never will she
aunt!” my sees first

said side,” either on passed has that all forget to endeavour must “We
to consenting His happy. be yet will they trust and hope “I Jane:
of way right a to come is he that believe, will I proof, a is her marry
myself flatter I and them; steady will affection mutual Their thinking.
in may as manner, a rational so in live and quietly, so settle will they
forgotten.” imprudence past their make time

nor you, neither “as Elizabeth, replied such,” been has conduct “Their
it.” of talk to useless is It forget. ever can anybody nor I,

likelihood all in was mother their that girls the to occurred now It
library, the to went They happened. had what of ignorant perfectly
make to them wish not would he whether father their asked and therefore,
coolly head, his raising without and, writing was He her. to known it
replied:

please.” you as “Just

her?” to read to letter uncle’s my take we “May

away.” get and like, you whatever “Take

stairs up went they and writing-table, his from letter the took Elizabeth
communication one Bennet: Mrs. with both were Kitty and Mary together.
news, good for preparation slight a After all. for do therefore, would,
As herself. contain hardly could Bennet Mrs. aloud. read was letter the
soon being Lydia’s of hope Gardiner’s Mr. read had Jane as soon
its to added sentence following every and forth, burst joy her married,
she as delight, from violent as irritation an in now was She exuberance.
daughter her that know To vexation. and alarm from fidgety been ever had
her for fear no by disturbed was She enough. was married be would
misconduct. her of remembrance any by humbled nor felicity,

will She indeed! delightful is “This cried. she Lydia!” dear dear, “My
sixteen! at married be will She again! her see shall I married! be
manage would he knew I be. would it how knew I brother! kind good, My
the But too! Wickham dear see to and her! see to long I How everything!
about Gardiner sister my to write will I clothes! wedding the clothes,
him ask and father, your to down run dear, my Lizzy, directly. them
bell, the Ring myself. go will I stay, Stay, her. give will he much how
dear dear, My moment. a in things my on put will I Hill. for Kitty,
meet!” we when together be shall we merry How Lydia!

of violence the to relief some give to endeavoured daughter eldest Her
Mr. which obligations the to thoughts her leading by transports, these
under. all them laid behaviour Gardiner’s

great a “in added, she conclusion,” happy this attribute must we “For
to himself pledged has he that persuaded are We kindness. his to measure
money.” with Wickham Mr. assist

but it do should who right; very all is “it mother, her cried “Well,”
children my and I own, his of family a had not had he If uncle? own her
have we time first the is it and know; you money, his all had have must
happy! so am I Well! presents. few a except him, from anything had ever
well How Wickham! Mrs. married. daughter a have shall I time short a In
in am I Jane, dear My June. last sixteen only was she And sounds! it
and dictate, will I so write; can’t I sure am I that flutter, a such
money the about father your with settle will We me. for write you
immediately.” ordered be should things the but afterwards;

and muslin, calico, of particulars the all to proceeding then was She
had orders, plentiful very some dictated have shortly would and cambric,
her till wait to her persuaded difficulty, some with though Jane, not
observed, she delay, day’s One consulted. be to leisure at was father
quite be to happy too was mother her and importance; small of be would
head. her into came too, schemes, Other usual. as obstinate so

the tell and dressed, am I as soon “as she, said Meryton,” to go will “I
call can I back, come I as And Philips. sister my to news good good,
carriage. the order and down run Kitty, Long. Mrs. and Lucas Lady on
do I can Girls, sure. am I good, of deal great a me do would airing An
you have Hill, dear My Hill! comes Here Oh! Meryton? in you for anything
shall you and married; be to going is Lydia Miss news? good the heard
wedding.” her at merry make to punch of bowl a have all

her received Elizabeth joy. her express to instantly began Hill Mrs.
took folly, this of sick then, and rest, the amongst congratulations
freedom. with think might she that room, own her in refuge

was it that but enough; bad be best, at must, situation Lydia’s Poor
in though, and so; it felt She thankful. be to need had she worse, no
could prosperity worldly nor happiness rational neither forward, looking
had they what to back looking in sister, her for expected justly be
had they what of advantages the all felt she ago, hours two only feared,
gained.



50 Chapter


that, life his of period this before wished often very had Bennet Mr.
for sum annual an by laid had he income, whole his spending of instead
survived she if wife, his of and children, his of provision better the
that in duty his done he Had ever. than more it wished now He him.
whatever for uncle her to indebted been have not need Lydia respect,
of satisfaction The her. for purchased be now could credit or honour of
be to Britain Great in men young worthless most the of one on prevailing
place. proper its in rested have then might husband her

anyone to advantage little so of cause a that concerned seriously was He
he and brother-in-law, his of expense sole the at forwarded be should
assistance, his of extent the out find to possible, if determined, was
could. he as soon as obligation the discharge to and

perfectly be to held was economy married, had Bennet Mr. first When
join to was son The son. a have to were they course, of for, useless,
widow the and age, of be should he as soon as entail, the off cutting in
daughters Five for. provided be means that by would children younger and
Mrs. and come; to was son the yet but world, the entered successively
he that certain been had birth, Lydia’s after years many for Bennet,
then was it but of, despaired been last at had event This would.
her and economy, for turn no had Bennet Mrs. saving. be to late too
their exceeding their prevented alone had independence of love husband’s
income.

and Bennet Mrs. on articles marriage by settled was pounds thousand Five
the amongst divided be should it proportions what in But children. the
with point, one was This parents. the of will the on depended latter
Bennet Mr. and settled, be to now was which least, at Lydia, to regard
In him. before proposal the to acceding in hesitation no have could
brother, his of kindness the for acknowledgment grateful of terms
perfect his paper on delivered then he concisely, most expressed though
the fulfil to willingness his and done, was that all of approbation
supposed before never had He him. for made been had that engagements
would it daughter, his marry to on prevailed be Wickham could that,
present the by as himself to inconvenience little so with done be
the by loser the year a pounds ten be scarcely would He arrangement.
pocket and board her with what for, them; paid be to was that hundred
her to passed which money in presents continual the and allowance,
within little very been had expenses Lydia’s hands, mother’s her through
sum. that

was too, side, his on exertion trifling such with done be would it That
as have to was present at wish his for surprise; welcome very another
transports first the When possible. as business the in trouble little
he over, were her seeking in activity his produced had which rage of
soon was letter His indolence. former his all to returned naturally
quick was he business, undertaking in dilatory though for, dispatched;
he what of particulars further know to begged He execution. its in
any send to Lydia with angry too was but brother, his to indebted was
her. to message

proportionate with and house, the through quickly spread news good The
decent with latter the in borne was It neighbourhood. the through speed
advantage the for more been have would it sure, be To philosophy.
the as or, town; the upon come Bennet Lydia Miss had conversation of
distant some in world, the from secluded been alternative, happiest
the and her; marrying in of talked be to much was there But farmhouse.
from before proceeded had which well-doing her for wishes good-natured
spirit their of little a but lost Meryton in ladies old spiteful the all
misery her husband an such with because circumstances, of change this in
certain. considered was

this on but downstairs; been had Bennet Mrs. since fortnight a was It
in and table, her of head the at seat her took again she day happy
her to damp a gave shame of sentiment No high. oppressively spirits
object first the been had which daughter, a of marriage The triumph.
of point the on now was sixteen, was Jane since wishes her of
those on wholly ran words her and thoughts her and accomplishment,
and carriages, new muslins, fine nuptials, elegant of attendants
a for neighbourhood the through searching busily was She servants.
considering or knowing without and, daughter, her for situation proper
and size in deficient as many rejected be, might income their what
importance.

the it--or quit could Gouldings the “if she, said do,” might Park “Haye
is Ashworth but larger; were drawing-room the if Stoke, at house great
for as and me; from miles ten her have to bear not could I off! far too
dreadful.” are attics the Lodge, Pulvis

the while interruption without on talk to her allowed husband Her
“Mrs. her: to said he withdrawn, had they when But remained. servants
and son your for houses these of all or any take you before Bennet,
this in house _one_ Into understanding. right a to come us let daughter,
the encourage not will I admittance. have never shall they neighbourhood
Longbourn.” at them receiving by either, of impudence

It firm. was Bennet Mr. but declaration; this followed dispute long A
horror, and amazement with found, Bennet Mrs. and another; to led soon
his for clothes buy to guinea a advance not would husband her that
of mark no him from receive should she that protested He daughter.
comprehend hardly could Bennet Mrs. occasion. the on whatever affection
inconceivable of point a such to carried be could anger his That it.
her which without privilege a daughter his refuse to as resentment
believe could she all exceeded valid, seem scarcely would marriage
new of want her which disgrace the to alive more was She possible.
of sense any to than nuptials, daughter’s her on reflect must clothes
they before fortnight a Wickham with living and eloping her at shame
place. took

of distress the from had, she that sorry heartily most now was Elizabeth
for fears their with acquainted Darcy Mr. make to led been moment, the
the give shortly so would marriage her since for sister; her
its conceal to hope might they elopement, the to termination proper
the on immediately not were who those all from beginning unfavourable
spot.

were There means. his through farther spreading its of fear no had She
depended; confidently more have would she secrecy whose on people few
sister’s a of knowledge whose one no was there time, same the at but,
fear any from however, much--not, so her mortified have would frailty
rate, any at for, herself, to individually it from disadvantage of
been marriage Lydia’s Had them. between impassable gulf a seemed there
that supposed be to not was it terms, honourable most the on concluded
other every to where, family a with himself connect would Darcy Mr.
the of relationship and alliance an added be now would objection,
scorned. justly so he whom man a with kind nearest

The shrink. would he that wonder not could she connection a such From
his of herself assured had she which regard, her procuring of wish
a such survive expectation rational in not could Derbyshire, in feeling
she though repented, she grieved; was she humbled, was She this. as blow
no could she when esteem, his of jealous became She what. of knew hardly
there when him, of hear to wanted She it. by benefited be to hope longer
that convinced was She intelligence. gaining of chance least the seemed
they likely longer no was it when him, with happy been have could she
meet. should

the that know he could thought, often she as him, for triumph a What
now would ago, months four only spurned proudly had she which proposals
she generous, as was He received! gratefully and gladly most been have
mortal, was he while but sex; his of generous most the as not, doubted
triumph. a be must there

in who, man the exactly was he that comprehend to now began She
and understanding His her. suit most would talents, and disposition
It wishes. her all answered have would own, her unlike though temper,
ease her by both; of advantage the to been have must that union an was
improved; manners his softened, been have might mind his liveliness, and
she world, the of knowledge and information, judgement, his from and
importance. greater of benefit received have must

what multitude admiring the teach now could marriage happy such no But
and tendency, different a of union An was. really felicity connubial
their in formed be to soon was other, the of possibility the precluding
family.

independence, tolerable in supported be to were Lydia and Wickham How
could happiness permanent of little how But imagine. not could she
passions their because together brought only were who couple a to belong
conjecture. easily could she virtue, their than stronger were

* * * * *

Bennet’s Mr. To brother. his to again wrote soon Gardiner Mr.
to eagerness his of assurance with replied, briefly he acknowledgments
entreaties with concluded and family; his of any of welfare the promote
principal The again. him to mentioned be never might subject the that
resolved had Wickham Mr. that them inform to was letter his of purport
militia. the quitting on

as soon “as added, he so,” do should he that wish my greatly was “It
in me, with agree will you think I And on. fixed was marriage his
on both advisable, highly as corps that from removal the considering
into go to intention Wickham’s Mr. is It niece’s. my and account his
who some still are there friends, former his among and regulars; the
an of promise the has He army. the in him assist to willing and able are
It North. the in quartered now regiment, ----‘s General in ensigncy
He kingdom. the of part this from far so it have to advantage an is
each may they where people, different among hope I and fairly; promises
have I prudent. more be both will they preserve, to character a have
arrangements, present our of him inform to Forster, Colonel to written
Wickham Mr. of creditors various the satisfy will he that request to and
I which for payment, speedy of assurances with Brighton, near and in
carrying of trouble the yourself give you will And myself. pledged have
subjoin shall I whom of Meryton, in creditors his to assurances similar
I debts; his all in given has He information? his to according list a
directions, our has Haggerston us. deceived not has he least at hope
regiment, his join then will They week. a in completed be will all and
Mrs. from understand I and Longbourn; to invited first are they unless
she before all you seeing of desirous very is niece my that Gardiner,
to remembered dutifully be to begs and well, is She South. the leaves
etc., mother.--Yours, her and you

GARDINER.” “E.

removal Wickham’s of advantages the all saw daughters his and Bennet Mr.
Bennet Mrs. But do. could Gardiner Mr. as clearly as ----shire the from
North, the in settled being Lydia’s it. with pleased well so not was
company, her in pride and pleasure most expected had she when just
in residing their of plan her up given means no by had she for
a such was it besides, and, disappointment; severe a was Hertfordshire,
acquainted was she where regiment a from taken be should Lydia that pity
favourites. many so had and everybody, with

shocking quite be will “it she, said Forster,” Mrs. of fond so is “She
she that too, men, young the of several are there And away! her send to
----‘s General in pleasant so be not may officers The much. very likes
regiment.”

being of considered, be might it such for request, daughter’s His
North, the for off set she before again family her into admitted
Elizabeth, and Jane But negative. absolute an first at received
and feelings sister’s their of sake the for wishing, in agreed who
parents, her by marriage her on noticed be should she that consequence,
her receive to mildly, so and rationally so yet earnestly so him urged
was he that married, were they as soon as Longbourn, at husband her and
their And wished. they as act and thought, they as think to on prevailed
show to able be would she that knowing of satisfaction the had mother
the to banished was she before neighbourhood the in daughter married her
sent he therefore, brother, his to again wrote Bennet Mr. When North.
as soon as that settled, was it and come; to them for permission his
was Elizabeth Longbourn. to proceed should they over, was ceremony the
and scheme, a such to consent should Wickham that however, surprised,
would him with meeting any inclination, own her only consulted she had
wishes. her of object last the been have



51 Chapter


her for felt Elizabeth and Jane and arrived; day wedding sister’s Their
to sent was carriage The herself. for felt she than more probably
Their dinner-time. by it in return to were they and ----, at them meet
especially, more Jane and Bennets, Miss elder the by dreaded was arrival
she had herself, attended have would which feelings the Lydia gave who
sister her what of thought the in wretched was and culprit, the been
endure. must

receive to room breakfast the in assembled were family The came. They
to up drove carriage the as Bennet Mrs. of face the decked Smiles them.
alarmed, daughters, her grave; impenetrably looked husband her door; the
uneasy. anxious,

and open, thrown was door the vestibule; the in heard was voice Lydia’s
and her, embraced forwards, stepped mother Her room. the into ran she
smile, affectionate an with hand, her gave rapture; with her welcomed
an with joy both them wished and lady; his followed who Wickham, to
happiness. their of doubt no shewed which alacrity

quite not was turned, then they whom to Bennet, Mr. from reception Their
scarcely he and austerity; in gained rather countenance His cordial. so
was indeed, couple, young the of assurance easy The lips. his opened
Bennet Miss even and disgusted, was Elizabeth him. provoke to enough
noisy, wild, unabashed, untamed, still; Lydia was Lydia shocked. was
their demanding sister, to sister from turned She fearless. and
eagerly looked down, sat all they length at when and congratulations;
and it, in alteration little some of notice took room, the round
been had she since while great a was it that laugh, a with observed,
there.

manners his but herself, than distressed more all at not was Wickham
been marriage his and character his had that pleasing, so always were
he while address, easy his and smiles his ought, they what exactly
had Elizabeth all. them delighted have would relationship, their claimed
down, sat she but assurance; such to equal quite him believed before not
impudence the to future in limits no draw to herself within resolving
the of cheeks the but blushed; Jane and blushed, She man. impudent an of
colour. of variation no suffered confusion their caused who two

neither could mother her and bride The discourse. of want no was There
near sit to happened who Wickham, and enough; fast talk them of
neighbourhood, that in acquaintance his after inquiring began Elizabeth,
her in equal to unable very felt she which ease humoured good a with
the in memories happiest the have to them of each seemed They replies.
led Lydia and pain; with recollected was past the of Nothing world.
for to alluded have not would sisters her which subjects to voluntarily
world. the

away; went I “since cried, she months,” three being its of think “Only
things been have there yet and declare; I fortnight a but seems it
sure am I away, went I when gracious! Good time. the in happened enough
I though again! back came I till married being of idea more no had I
was.” I if fun good very be would it thought

looked Elizabeth distressed. was Jane eyes. his up lifted father Her
of anything saw nor heard never who she, but Lydia; at expressively
the do mamma, “Oh! continued, gaily insensible, be to chose she which
not; might they afraid was I to-day? married am I know hereabouts people
he determined was I so curricle, his in Goulding William overtook we and
took and him, to next side-glass the down let I so and it, know should
that so frame, window the upon rest just hand my let and glove, my off
anything.” like smiled and bowed I then and ring, the see might he

room; the of out ran and up, got She longer. no it bear could Elizabeth
to hall the through passing them heard she till more, no returned and
with Lydia, see to enough soon them joined then She parlour. dining the
say her hear and hand, right mother’s her to up walk parade, anxious
go must you and now, place your take I Jane, “Ah! sister, eldest her to
woman.” married a am I because lower,

embarrassment that Lydia give would time that supposed be to not was It
good and ease Her first. at free wholly so been had she which from
and Lucases, the Phillips, Mrs. see to longed She increased. spirits
Wickham” “Mrs. called herself hear to and neighbours, other their all
her show to dinner after went she time, mean the in and them; of each by
housemaids. two the and Hill Mrs. to married, being of boast and ring,

breakfast the to returned all were they when she, said mamma,” “Well,
I man? charming a he not Is husband? my of think you do what “and room,
half have may they hope only I me. envy all must sisters my sure am
get to place the is That Brighton. to go all must They luck. good my
go.” all not did we mamma, is, it pity a What husbands.

don’t I Lydia, dear my But should. we will, my had I if and true; “Very
so?” be it Must off. way a such going your like all at

all of it like shall I that. in nothing is yes;--there lord! “Oh,
We us. see and down come must sisters, my and papa, and You things.
some be will there say dare I and winter, the all Newcastle at be shall
all.” them for partners good get to care take will I and balls,

mother. her said anything!” beyond it like should “I

sisters my of two or one leave may you away, go you when then “And
the before them for husbands get shall I say dare I and you; behind
over.” is winter

not do I “but Elizabeth; said favour,” the of share my for you thank “I
husbands.” getting of way your like particularly

Wickham Mr. them. with days ten above remain to not were visitors Their
join to was he and London, left he before commission his received had
fortnight. a of end the at regiment his

and short; so be would stay their that regretted Bennet Mrs. but one No
and daughter, her with about visiting by time the of most the made she
to acceptable were parties These home. at parties frequent very having
did as such to desirable more even was circle family a avoid to all;
not. did as such than think,

expected had Elizabeth what just was Lydia for affection Wickham’s
her needed scarcely had She him. for Lydia’s to equal not it; find to
that things, of reason the from satisfied, be to observation present
rather love, her of strength the by on brought been had elopement their
caring violently without why, wondered have would she and his; by than
certain felt not she had all, at her with elope to chose he her, for
and circumstances; of distress by necessary rendered was flight his that
opportunity an resist to man young the not was he case, the were that if
companion. a having of

every on Wickham dear her was He him. of fond exceedingly was Lydia
every did He him. with competition in put be to was one no occasion;
on birds more kill would he sure was she and world; the in best thing
country. the in else body any than September, of first the

two her with sitting was she as arrival, their after soon morning, One
Elizabeth: to said she sisters, elder

You believe. I wedding, my of account an _you_ gave never I “Lizzy,
you not Are it. about all others the and mamma told I when by, not were
managed?” was it how hear to curious

said little too be cannot there think “I Elizabeth; replied really,” “No
subject.” the on

were We off. went it how you tell must I But strange! so are You “La!
in were lodgings Wickham’s because Clement’s, St. at know, you married,
eleven by there be all should we that settled was it And parish. that
others the and together; go to were I and aunt and uncle My o’clock.
in was I and came, morning Monday Well, church. the at us meet to were
to happen would something that know, you afraid, so was I fuss! a such
was there And distracted. quite gone have should I then and off, it put
as just away talking and preaching dressing, was I time the all aunt, my
in word one above hear not did I However, sermon. a reading was she if
longed I Wickham. dear my of suppose, may you thinking, was I for ten,
coat.” blue his in married be would he whether know to

never would it thought I usual; as ten at breakfasted we so and “Well,
aunt and uncle my that understand, to are you bye, the by for, over; be
believe you’ll If them. with was I time the all unpleasant horrid were
a there was I though doors, of out foot my put once not did I me,
was London sure be To anything. or scheme, or party, one Not fortnight.
so and Well, open. was Theatre Little the however, but, thin, rather
upon away called was uncle my door, the to came carriage the as just
once when know, you then, And Stone. Mr. man horrid that to business
I frightened so was I Well, it. of end no is there together, get they
we if and away; me give to was uncle my for do, to what know not did
he luckily, But, day. all married be not could we hour, the beyond were
However, out. set all we then and time, minutes’ ten in again back came
the going, prevented been had he if that afterwards recollected I
well.” as done have might Darcy Mr. for off, put be not need wedding

amazement. utter in Elizabeth, repeated Darcy!” “Mr.

gracious But know. you Wickham, with there come to was yes!--he “Oh,
promised I it. about word a said have to not ought I forgot! quite I me!
secret!” a such be to was It say? Wickham will What faithfully! so them

the on word another not “say Jane, said secret,” be to was it “If
further.” no seeking my upon depend may You subject.

will “we curiosity; with burning though Elizabeth, said certainly,” “Oh!
questions.” no you ask

you tell certainly should I did, you if “for Lydia, said you,” “Thank
angry.” be would Wickham then and all,

her of out it put to forced was Elizabeth ask, to encouragement such On
away. running by power,

least at or impossible; was point a such on ignorance in live to But
at been had Darcy Mr. information. for try to not impossible was it
people, among exactly and scene, a exactly was It wedding. sister’s her
go. to temptation least and do, to least apparently had he where
her into hurried wild, and rapid it, of meaning the to as Conjectures
as her, pleased best that Those none. with satisfied was she but brain;
She improbable. most seemed light, noblest the in conduct his placing
paper, of sheet a seizing hastily and suspense; such bear not could
what of explanation an request to aunt, her to letter short a wrote
been had which secrecy the with compatible were it if dropt, had Lydia
intended.

be must curiosity my “what added, she comprehend,” readily may “You
(comparatively and us, of any with unconnected person a how know to
such at you amongst been have should family, our to stranger a speaking)
is, it it--unless understand me let and instantly, write Pray time. a
seems Lydia which secrecy the in remain to reasons, cogent very for
with satisfied be to endeavour must I then and necessary; think to
ignorance.”

finished she as herself, to added she though,” _shall_, I that “Not
honourable an in me tell not do you if aunt, dear my “and letter; the
it find to stratagems and tricks to reduced be certainly shall I manner,
out.”

to speak to her allow not would honour of sense delicate Jane’s
glad was Elizabeth fall; let had Lydia what of privately Elizabeth
any receive would inquiries her whether appeared it it;--till of
confidante. a without be rather had she satisfaction,



52 Chapter


as letter her to answer an receiving of satisfaction the had Elizabeth
it of possession in sooner no was She could. possibly she as soon
to likely least was she where copse, little the into hurrying than,
to prepared and benches the of one on down sat she interrupted, be
not did it that her convinced letter the of length the for happy; be
denial. a contain

6. Sept. street, “Gracechurch

NIECE, DEAR “MY

morning whole this devote shall and letter, your received just have “I
comprise not will writing _little_ a that foresee I as it, answering to
your by surprised myself confess must I you. tell to have I what
angry, me think Don’t _you_. from it expect not did I application;
such imagined not had I that know you let to mean only I for however,
to choose not do you If side. _your_ on necessary be to inquiries
surprised much as is uncle Your impertinence. my forgive me, understand
concerned party a being your of belief the but nothing am--and I as
really are you if But done. has he as act to him allowed have would
explicit. more be must I ignorant, and innocent

most a had uncle your Longbourn, from home coming my of day very the “On
several him with up shut was and called, Darcy Mr. visitor. unexpected
so not was curiosity my so arrived; I before over all was It hours.
Mr. tell to came He been. have to seems _yours_ as racked dreadfully
were, Wickham Mr. and sister your where out found had he that Gardiner
repeatedly, Wickham both; them with talked and seen had he that and
day one only Derbyshire left he collect, can I what From once. Lydia
for hunting of resolution the with town to came and ourselves, after
to owing being its of conviction his was professed motive The them.
to as known well so been not had worthlessness Wickham’s that himself
confide or love to character of woman young any for impossible it make
and pride, mistaken his to whole the imputed generously He him. in
private his lay to him beneath it thought before had he that confessed
He itself. for speak to was character His world. the to open actions
remedy to endeavour and forward, step to duty his therefore, it, called
another_ _had he If himself. by on brought been had which evil an
days some been had He him. disgrace never would it sure am I motive,
to something had he but them; discover to able was he before town, in
consciousness the and had; _we_ than more was which search, his direct
us. follow to resolving his for reason another was this of

ago time some was who Younge, Mrs. a seems, it lady, a is “There
cause some on charge her from dismissed was and Darcy, Miss to governess
large a took then She what. say not did he though disapprobation, of
letting by herself maintained since has and Edward-street, in house
with acquainted intimately knew, he was, Younge Mrs. This lodgings.
to got he as soon as him of intelligence for her to went he and Wickham;
he what her from get could he before days three or two was it But town.
and bribery without suppose, I trust, her betray not would She wanted.
found. be to was friend her where know did really she for corruption,
had and London, in arrival first their on her to gone had indeed Wickham
up taken have would they house, her into them receive to able been she
the procured friend kind our however, length, At her. with abode their
and Wickham, saw He street. ---- in were They direction. wished-for
he her, with object first His Lydia. seeing on insisted afterwards
disgraceful present her quit to her persuade to been had acknowledged,
prevailed be could they as soon as friends her to return and situation,
But go. would it as far as assistance, his offering her, receive to on
cared She was. she where remaining on resolved absolutely Lydia found he
hear not would she his; of help no wanted she friends; her of none for
or time some married be should they sure was She Wickham. leaving of
feelings, her were such Since when. signify much not did it and other,
which, marriage, a expedite and secure to thought, he remained, only it
never had learnt easily he Wickham, with conversation first very his in
regiment, the leave to obliged himself confessed He design. _his_ been
and pressing; very were which honour, of debts some of account on
her on flight Lydia’s of ill-consequences the all lay to not scrupled
as and immediately; commission his resign to meant He alone. folly own
He it. about little very conjecture could he situation, future his to
have should he knew he and where, know not did he but somewhere, go must
on. live to nothing

Though once. at sister your married not had he why him asked Darcy “Mr.
able been have would he rich, very be to imagined not was Bennet Mr.
by benefited been have must situation his and him, for something do to
still Wickham that question, this to reply in found, he But marriage.
in marriage by fortune his making effectually more of hope the cherished
likely not was he however, circumstances, such Under country. other some
relief. immediate of temptation the against proof be to

of Wickham discussed. be to much was there for times, several met “They
be to reduced was length at but get; could he than more wanted course
reasonable.

to was step next Darcy’s Mr. _them_, between settled being thing “Every
Gracechurch in called first he and it, with acquainted uncle your make
be not could Gardiner Mr. But home. came I before evening the street
was father your that inquiry, further on found, Darcy Mr. and seen,
judge not did He morning. next the town quit would but him, with still
your as consult properly so could he whom person a be to father your
the after till him seeing postponed readily therefore and uncle,
next the till and name, his leave not did He former. the of departure
business. on called had gentleman a that known only was it day

home, at uncle your gone, was father Your again. came he Saturday “On
together. talk of deal great a had they before, said I as and,

all not was It too. him saw _I_ then and Sunday, on again met “They
to off sent was express the was, it as soon as Monday: before settled
that Lizzy, fancy, I obstinate. very was visitor our But Longbourn.
been has He all. after character, his of defect real the is obstinacy
one. true the is _this_ but times, different at faults many of accused
(and sure am I though himself; do not did he that done be to was Nothing
your it), about nothing say therefore thanked, be to it speak not do I
whole. the settled have readily most would uncle

either than more was which time, long a for together it battled “They
uncle your last at But deserved. it in concerned lady or gentleman the
his to use of be to allowed being of instead and yield, to forced was
it, of credit probable the having only with up put to forced was niece,
letter your believe really I and grain; the against sorely went which
explanation an required it because pleasure, great him gave morning this
where praise the give and feathers, borrowed his of him rob would that
Jane or yourself, than farther no go must this Lizzy, But, due. was it
most. at

young the for done been has what suppose, I well, pretty know “You
considerably to believe, I amounting, paid, be to are debts His people.
own her to addition in thousand another pounds, thousand a than more
all why reason The purchased. commission his and _her_, upon settled
It above. given have I as such was alone, him by done be to was this
that consideration, proper of want and reserve his to him, to owing was
he that consequently and misunderstood, so been had character Wickham’s
truth some was there Perhaps was. he as noticed and received been had
reserve, _anybody’s_ or reserve, _his_ whether doubt I though _this_; in
talking, fine this all of spite in But event. the for answerable be can
would uncle your that assured perfectly rest may you Lizzy, dear my
_another for credit him given not had we if yielded, have never
affair. the in interest_

who friends, his to again returned he on, resolved was this all “When
in be should he that agreed was it but Pemberley; at staying still were
were matters money all and place, took wedding the when more once London
finish. last the receive to then

which relation a is It thing. every you told now have I believe “I
not will it least at hope I surprise; great you give to is me tell you
constant had Wickham and us; to came Lydia displeasure. any you afford
I when been, had he what exactly was _He_ house. the to admission
was I little how you tell not would I but Hertfordshire; in him knew
not had I if us, with staid she while behaviour her with satisfied
coming on conduct her that Wednesday, last letter Jane’s by perceived,
tell now I what therefore and it, with piece a of exactly was home
most the in repeatedly her to talked I pain. fresh no you give can you
had she what of wickedness the all her to representing manner, serious
she If family. her on brought had she unhappiness the all and done,
was I listen. not did she sure am I for luck, good by was it me, heard
and Elizabeth dear my recollected I then but provoked, quite sometimes
her. with patience had sakes their for and Jane,

you, informed Lydia as and return, his in punctual was Darcy “Mr.
leave to was and day, next the us with dined He wedding. the attended
my me, with angry very be you Will Thursday. or Wednesday on again town
bold never was I (what saying of opportunity this take I if Lizzy, dear
has, us to behaviour His him. like I much how before) say to enough
His Derbyshire. in were we when as pleasing as been respect, every in
little a but nothing wants he me; please all opinions and understanding
teach may wife his _prudently_, marry he if _that_, and liveliness, more
But name. your mentioned ever hardly sly;--he very him thought I him.
fashion. the seems slyness

not do least at or presuming, very been have I if me forgive “Pray
happy quite be never shall I P. from me exclude to as far so me punish
little nice a with phaeton, low A park. the round all been have I till
thing. very the be would ponies, of pair

half this me wanting been have children The more. no write must I “But
hour.

sincerely, very “Yours,

GARDINER.” “M.

spirits, of flutter a into Elizabeth threw letter this of contents The
the bore pain or pleasure whether determine to difficult was it which in
had uncertainty which suspicions unsettled and vague The share. greatest
sister’s her forward to doing been have might Darcy Mr. what of produced
too goodness of exertion an as encourage to feared had she which match,
the from just, be to dreaded time same the at and probable, be to great
true! be to extent greatest their beyond proved were obligation, of pain
all himself on taken had he town, to purposely them followed had He
which in research; a such on attendant mortification and trouble the
and abominate must he whom woman a to necessary been had supplication
reason meet, frequently meet, to reduced was he where and despise,
to wished most always he whom man the bribe, finally and persuade, with,
had He pronounce. to him to punishment was it name very whose and avoid,
Her esteem. nor regard neither could he whom girl a for this all done
shortly hope a was it But her. for it done had he that whisper did heart
vanity her even that felt soon she and considerations, other by checked
her--for for affection his on depend to required when insufficient, was
so sentiment a overcome to able him--as refused already had who woman a
Brother-in-law Wickham. with relationship against abhorrence as natural
had, He connection. the from revolt must pride of kind Every Wickham! of
had he But much. how think to ashamed was She much. done sure, be to
extraordinary no asked which interference, his for reason a given
been had he feel should he that reasonable was It belief. of stretch
and it; exercising of means the had he and liberality, had he wrong;
she inducement, principal his as herself place not would she though
assist might her for partiality remaining that believe perhaps, could,
materially be must mind of peace her where cause a in endeavours his
were they that know to painful, exceedingly painful, was It concerned.
They return. a receive never could who person a to obligations under
Oh! him. to thing, every character, her Lydia, of restoration the owed
ever had she sensation ungracious every over grieve she did heartily how
For him. towards directed ever had she speech saucy every encouraged,
cause a in that Proud him. of proud was she but humbled; was she herself
himself. of better the get to able been had he honour, and compassion of
It again. and again him of commendation aunt’s her over read She
some of sensible even was She her. pleased it but enough; hardly was
she both steadfastly how finding on regret, with mixed though pleasure,
subsisted confidence and affection that persuaded been had uncle her and
herself. and Darcy Mr. between

one’s some by reflections, her and seat, her from roused was She
was she path, another into strike could she before and approach;
Wickham. by overtaken

he, said sister?” dear my ramble, solitary your interrupt I afraid am “I
her. joined he as

follow not does it “but smile; a with replied she do,” certainly “You
unwelcome.” be must interruption the that

and friends; good always were We were. it if indeed, sorry be should “I
better.” are we now

out?” coming others the Are “True.

to carriage the in going are Lydia and Bennet Mrs. know. not do “I
that aunt, and uncle our from find, I sister, dear my so, And Meryton.
Pemberley.” seen actually have you

affirmative. the in replied She

much too be would it believe I yet and pleasure, the you envy almost “I
the saw you And Newcastle. to way my in it take could I else or me, for
of fond very always was she Reynolds, Poor suppose? I housekeeper, old
you.” to name my mention not did she course of But me.

did.” she “Yes,

say?” she did what “And

turned had--not afraid was she and army, the into gone were you “That
strangely are things know, you _that_, as distance a such At well. out
misrepresented.”

had she hoped Elizabeth lips. his biting replied, he “Certainly,”
said: afterwards soon he but him; silenced

other each passed We month. last town in Darcy see to surprised was “I
there.” doing be can he what wonder I times. several

said Bourgh,” de Miss with marriage his for preparing “Perhaps
this at there him take to particular, something be must “It Elizabeth.
year.” of time

I thought I Lambton? at were you while him see you Did “Undoubtedly.
had.” you that Gardiners the from understood

sister.” his to us introduced he “Yes;

her?” like you do “And

much.” “Very

year this within improved uncommonly is she that indeed, heard, have “I
glad very am I promising. very not was she her, saw last I When two. or
well.” out turn will she hope I her. liked you

age.” trying most the over got has she will; she say dare “I

Kympton?” of village the by go you “Did

did.” we that recollect not do “I

A had. have to ought I which living the is it because it, mention “I
suited have would It House! Parsonage place!--Excellent delightful most
respect.” every in me

sermons?” making liked have you should “How

duty, my of part as it considered have should I well. “Exceedingly
to not ought One nothing. been have soon would exertion the and
The me! for thing a such been have would it sure, be to repine;--but,
ideas my all answered have would life a such of retirement the quiet,
the mention Darcy hear ever you Did be. to not was it But happiness! of
Kent?” in were you when circumstance,

was it that good_, _as thought I which authority, from heard have “I
patron.” present the of will the at and only, conditionally you left

the from so you told I _that_; in something was there Yes, have. “You
remember.” may you first,

not was sermon-making when time, a was there that too, hear, _did_ “I
actually you that present; at be to seems it as you to palatable so
business the that and orders, taking never of resolution your declared
accordingly.” compromised been had

remember may You foundation. without wholly not was it and did! “You
it.” of talked we first when point, that on you told I what

fast walked had she for house, the of door the at almost now were They
him, provoke to sake, sister’s her for unwilling, and him; of rid get to
smile: good-humoured a with reply, in said only she

let not Do know. you sister, and brother are we Wickham, Mr. “Come,
one of always be shall we hope I future, In past. the about quarrel us
mind.”

though gallantry, affectionate with it kissed he hand; her out held She
house. the entered they and look, to how knew hardly he



53 Chapter


he that conversation this with satisfied perfectly so was Wickham Mr.
Elizabeth, sister dear his provoked or himself, distressed again never
she that find to pleased was she and it; of subject the introducing by
quiet. him keep to enough said had

was Bennet Mrs. and came, soon departure Lydia’s and his of day The
means no by husband her as which, separation, a to submit to forced
to likely was Newcastle, to going all their of scheme her into entered
twelvemonth. a least at continue

again?” meet we shall “when cried, she Lydia,” dear my “Oh!

perhaps.” years, three or two these Not know. don’t I lord! “Oh,

dear.” my often, very me to “Write

for time much never have women married know you But can. I as often “As
to else nothing have will They _me_. to write may sisters My writing.
do.”

He wife’s. his than affectionate more much were adieus Wickham’s Mr.
things. pretty many said and handsome, looked smiled,

of out were they as soon as Bennet, Mr. said fellow,” a fine as is “He
to love makes and smirks, and simpers, He saw. I ever “as house, the
Lucas William Sir even defy I him. of proud prodigiously am I all. us
son-in-law.” valuable more a produce to himself

days. several for dull very Bennet Mrs. made daughter her of loss The

with parting as bad so nothing is there “that she, said think,” often “I
them.” without forlorn so seems One friends. one’s

said daughter,” a marrying of Madam, see, you consequence, the is “This
are four other your that satisfied better you make must “It Elizabeth.
single.”

married, is she because me leave not does Lydia thing. such no is “It
If off. far so be to happens regiment husband’s her because only but
soon.” so gone have not would she nearer, been had that

shortly was into her threw event this which condition spiritless the But
an by hope, of agitation the to again opened mind her and relieved,
housekeeper The circulation. in be to began then which news of article
her of arrival the for prepare to orders received had Netherfield at
several for there shoot to two, or day a in down coming was who master,
and Jane, at looked She fidgets. the in quite was Bennet Mrs. weeks.
turns. by head her shook and smiled

Mrs. (for sister,” down, coming is Bingley Mr. so and well, “Well,
Not better. the much so “Well, news). the her brought first Phillips
am I and know, you us, to nothing is He though. it, about care I that
welcome very is he however, But, again. him see to want never _I_ sure
happen? _may_ what knows who And it. likes he if Netherfield, to come to
to never ago long agreed we sister, know, You us. to nothing is that But
coming?” is he certain quite it is so, And it. about word a mention

in was Nicholls Mrs. “for other, the replied it,” on depend may “You
purpose on myself out went and by, passing her saw I night; last Meryton
He true. certain was it that me told she and it; of truth the know to
was She Wednesday. on likely very latest, the at Thursday on down comes
on meat some in order to purpose on me, told she butcher’s, the to going
killed.” be to fit just ducks of couple three got has she and Wednesday,

changing without coming his of hear to able been not had Bennet Miss
to name his mentioned had she since months many was It colour.
said: she together, alone were they as soon as now, but Elizabeth;

present the of us told aunt my when Lizzy, to-day, me at look you saw “I
from was it imagine don’t But distressed. appeared I know I and report;
that felt I because moment, the for confused only was I cause. silly any
affect not does news the that you assure do I at. looked be _should_ I
comes he that thing, one of glad am I pain. or pleasure with either me
of afraid am I that Not him. of less the see shall we because alone;
remarks.” people’s other dread I but _myself_,

in him seen not she Had it. of make to what know not did Elizabeth
no with there coming of capable him supposed have might she Derbyshire,
partial him thought still she but acknowledged; was what than view other
coming his of probability greater the to as wavered she and Jane, to
come to enough bold being or permission, friend’s his _with_ there
it. without

cannot man poor this “that thought, sometimes she hard,” is it “Yet
this all raising without hired, legally has he which house a to come
himself.” to him leave _will_ I speculation!

her be to believed really and declared, sister her what of spite In
easily could Elizabeth arrival, his of expectation the in feelings
disturbed, more were They it. by affected were spirits her that perceive
them. seen often had she than unequal, more

parents, their between canvassed warmly so been had which subject The
again. forward brought now was ago, twelvemonth a about

“you Bennet, Mrs. said dear,” my comes, Bingley Mr. ever as soon “As
course.” of him on wait will

I if promised, and year, last him visiting into me forced You no. “No,
in ended it But daughters. my of one marry should he him, see to went
again.” errand fool’s a on sent be not will I and nothing,

attention an such necessary absolutely how him to represented wife His
to returning his on gentlemen, neighbouring the all from be would
Netherfield.

society, our wants he “If he. said despise,” I etiquette an “‘Tis
hours my spend not will I live. we where knows He it. seek him let
back come and away go they time every neighbours my after running in
again.”

wait not do you if rude abominably be will it that is, know I all “Well,
I here, dine to him asking my prevent shan’t that however, But, him. on
will That soon. Gouldings the and Long Mrs. have must We determined. am
for table at room just be will there so ourselves, with thirteen make
him.”

her bear to able better the was she resolution, this by Consoled
her that know to mortifying very was it though incivility; husband’s
before it, of consequence in Bingley, Mr. see all might neighbours
near,-- drew arrival his of day the As did. _they_

“It sister. her to Jane said all,” at comes he that sorry be to begin “I
can I but indifference, perfect with him see could I nothing; be would
well; means mother My of. talked perpetually thus it hear to bear hardly
she what from suffer I much how know, can one no know, not does she but
over!” is Netherfield at stay his when be, I shall Happy says.

it “but Elizabeth; replied you,” comfort to anything say could I wish “I
satisfaction usual the and it; feel must You power. my of out wholly is
have you because me, denied is sufferer a to patience preaching of
much.” so always

servants, of assistance the through Bennet, Mrs. arrived. Bingley Mr.
anxiety of period the that it, of tidings earliest the have to contrived
counted She could. it as long as be might side her on fretfulness and
sent; be could invitation their before intervene must that days the
his after morning third the on But before. him seeing of hopeless
window, dressing-room her from him, saw she Hertfordshire, in arrival
house. the towards ride and paddock the enter

resolutely Jane joy. her of partake to called eagerly were daughters Her
went mother, her satisfy to Elizabeth, but table; the at place her kept
down sat and him, with Darcy Mr. saw looked,--she window--she the to
sister. her by again

be?” it can “who Kitty; said mamma,” him, with gentleman a is “There

not do I sure am I suppose; I dear, my other, or acquaintance “Some
know.”

with be to used that man that like just looks “it Kitty, replied “La!”
man.” proud tall, That what’s-his-name. Mr. before. him

of friend any Well, vow. I does, it so Darcy!--and Mr. gracious! “Good
must I else but sure; be to here, welcome be always will Bingley’s Mr.
him.” of sight very the hate I that say

little but knew She concern. and surprise with Elizabeth at looked Jane
awkwardness the for felt therefore and Derbyshire, in meeting their of
time first the for almost him seeing in sister, her attend must which
uncomfortable were sisters Both letter. explanatory his receiving after
their and themselves; for course of and other, the for felt Each enough.
be to resolution her and Darcy, Mr. of dislike her of on, talked mother
either by heard being without friend, Bingley’s Mr. as only him to civil
be not could which uneasiness of sources had Elizabeth But them. of
Mrs. shew to courage had yet never had she whom to Jane, by suspected
him. towards sentiment of change own her relate to or letter, Gardiner’s
refused, had she proposals whose man a only be could he Jane, To
extensive more own her to but undervalued; had she merit whose and
indebted were family whole the whom to person the was he information,
an with herself regarded she whom and benefits, of first the for
as just and reasonable as least at tender, so quite not if interest,
his coming--at his at astonishment Her Bingley. for felt Jane what
again, her seeking voluntarily and Longbourn, to Netherfield, to coming
altered his witnessing first on known had she what to equal almost was
Derbyshire. in behaviour

a half for returned face, her from driven been had which colour The
to lustre added delight of smile a and glow, additional an with minute
and affection his that time of space that for thought she as eyes, her
secure. be not would she But unshaken. be still must wishes

early be then will “it she; said behaves,” he how see first me “Let
expectation.” for enough

to daring without and composed, be to striving work, at intently sat She
of face the to them carried curiosity anxious till eyes, her up lift
little a looked Jane door. the approaching was servant the as sister her
the On expected. had Elizabeth than sedate more but usual, than paler
with them received she yet increased; colour her appearing, gentlemen’s
any from free equally behaviour of propriety a with and ease, tolerable
complaisance. unnecessary any or resentment of symptom

down sat and allow, would civility as either to little as said Elizabeth
She command. often not did it which eagerness an with work, her to again
and, usual; as serious, looked He Darcy. at glance one only ventured had
as than Hertfordshire, in look to used been had he as more thought, she
mother’s her in not could he perhaps But, Pemberley. at him seen had she
but painful, a was It aunt. and uncle her before was he what be presence
conjecture. improbable, an not

period short that in and instant, an for seen likewise had she Bingley,
Mrs. by received was He embarrassed. and pleased both looking him saw
ashamed, daughters two her made which civility of degree a with Bennet
of politeness ceremonious and cold the with contrasted when especially
friend. his to address and curtsey her

latter the to owed mother her that knew who particularly, Elizabeth,
infamy, irremediable from daughter favourite her of preservation the
ill so distinction a by degree painful most a to distressed and hurt was
applied.

question a did, Gardiner Mrs. and Mr. how her of inquiring after Darcy,
He anything. scarcely said confusion, without answer not could she which
but silence; his of reason the was that perhaps her; by seated not was
friends, her to talked had he There Derbyshire. in so been not had it
without elapsed minutes several now But herself. to not could he when
resist to unable occasionally, when and voice; his of sound the bringing
often as she face, his to eyes her raised she curiosity, of impulse the
but object no on frequently and herself, at as Jane at looking him found
when than please, to anxiety less and thoughtfulness More ground. the
angry and disappointed, was She expressed. plainly were met, last they
so. being for herself with

come?” he did why “Yet she. said otherwise!” be to it expect I “Could

to and himself; but anyone with conversation for humour no in was She
speak. to courage hardly had she him

more. no do could but sister, his after inquired She

Bennet. Mrs. said away,” went you since Bingley, Mr. time, long a is “It

it. to agreed readily He

say _did_ People again. back come never would you afraid be to began “I
hope I however, but, Michaelmas; at entirely place the quit to meant you
neighbourhood, the in happened have changes many great A true. not is it
my of one And settled. and married is Lucas Miss away. went you since
have must you indeed, it; of heard have you suppose I daughters. own
know; I Courier, The and Times The in was It papers. the in it seen
‘Lately, said, only was It be. to ought it as in put not was it though
a being there without Bennet,’ Lydia Miss to Esq. Wickham, George
anything. or lived, she where place the or father, her of said syllable
to came he how wonder I and too, up drawing Gardiner’s brother my was It
it?” see you Did it. of business awkward an such make

Elizabeth congratulations. his made and did, he that replied Bingley
could she therefore, looked, Darcy Mr. How eyes. her up lift not dared
tell. not

married,” well daughter a have to sure, be to thing, delightful a is “It
very is it Bingley, Mr. time, same the at “but mother, her continued
to down gone are They me. from way a such taken her have to hard
stay to are they there and seems, it northward, quite place a Newcastle,
have you suppose I for there; is regiment His long. how know not do I
the into gone being his of and ----shire, the leaving his of heard
so not perhaps though friends, _some_ has he Heaven! Thank regulars.
deserves.” he as many

such in was Darcy, Mr. at levelled be to this knew who Elizabeth,
her, from drew It seat. her keep hardly could she that shame, of misery
effectually so had else nothing which speaking, of exertion the however,
in stay any make to meant he whether Bingley asked she and before; done
believed. he weeks, few A present. at country the

mother, her said Bingley,” Mr. birds, own your all killed have you “When
Mr. on please you as many as shoot and here, come will you beg “I
and you, oblige to happy vastly be will he sure am I manor. Bennet’s
you.” for covies the of best the all save will

officious such unnecessary, such at increased, misery Elizabeth’s
had as present at arise to prospect fair same the Were attention!
be would persuaded, was she thing, every ago, year a them flattered
felt she instant, that At conclusion. vexatious same the to hastening
for amends herself or Jane make not could happiness of years that
confusion. painful such of moments

to more never “is herself, to she said heart,” my of wish first “The
pleasure no afford can society Their them. of either with company in be
either see never me Let this! as wretchedness such for atone will that
again!” other the or one

no offer to were happiness of years which for misery, the Yet
observing from relief, material afterwards soon received compensation,
her of admiration the re-kindled sister her of beauty the much how
little; but her to spoken had he in, came he first When lover. former
He attention. his of more her giving be to seemed minutes five every but
and natured, good as year; last been had she as handsome as her found
no that anxious was Jane chatty. so quite not though unaffected, as
persuaded really was and all, at her in perceived be should difference
engaged, busily so was mind her But ever. as much as talked she that
silent. was she when know always not did she that

her of mindful was Bennet Mrs. away, go to rose gentlemen the When
at dine to engaged and invited were they and civility, intended
time. days few a in Longbourn

when “for added, she Bingley,” Mr. debt, my in visit a quite are “You
with dinner family a take to promised you winter, last town to went you
assure I and see; you forgot, not have I returned. you as soon as us,
keep and back come not did you that disappointed much very was I you,
engagement.” your

of something said and reflection, this at silly little a looked Bingley
away. went then They business. by prevented been having at concern his

dine and stay to them ask to inclined strongly been had Bennet Mrs.
did she table, good very a kept always she though but, day; that there
man a for enough good be could courses two than less anything think not
pride and appetite the satisfy or designs, anxious such had she whom on
year. a thousand ten had who one of



54 Chapter


spirits; her recover to out walked Elizabeth gone, were they as soon As
that subjects those on interruption without dwell to words, other in or
her. vexed and astonished behaviour Darcy’s Mr. more. them deaden must

she, said indifferent,” and grave, silent, be to only came he if “Why,
all?” at come he “did

pleasure. her gave that way no in it settle could She

when aunt, and uncle my to pleasing, still amiable, still be could “He
If hither? come why me, fears he If me? to not why and town; in was he
will I man! teasing, Teasing, silent? why me, for cares longer no he
him.” about more no think

approach the by kept involuntarily time short a for was resolution Her
her showed which look, cheerful a with her joined who sister, her of
Elizabeth. than visitors, their with satisfied better

perfectly feel I over, is meeting first this “that she, said “Now,”
by again embarrassed be never shall I and strength, own my know I easy.
publicly be then will It Tuesday. on here dines he glad am I coming. his
indifferent and common as only meet we sides, both on that, seen
acquaintance.”

Jane, “Oh, laughingly. Elizabeth, said indeed,” indifferent very “Yes,
care.” take

now?” danger in be to as weak, so me think cannot you Lizzy, dear “My

with love in much as him making of danger great very in are you think “I
ever.” as you

* * * * *

in Bennet, Mrs. and Tuesday; till again gentlemen the see not did They
good the which schemes, happy the all to way giving was meanwhile, the
had visit, hour’s an half in Bingley, of politeness common and humour
revived.

two the and Longbourn; at assembled party large a was there Tuesday On
punctuality their of credit the to expected, anxiously most were who
the to repaired they When time. good very in were sportsmen, as
take would Bingley whether see to watched eagerly Elizabeth dining-room,
by him, to belonged had parties, former their all in which, place, the
forbore ideas, same the by occupied mother, prudent Her sister. her
to seemed he room, the entering On herself. by sit to him invite to
was it smile: to happened and round, look to happened Jane but hesitate;
her. by himself placed He decided.

friend. his towards looked sensation, triumphant a with Elizabeth,
that imagined have would she and indifference, noble with it bore He
eyes his seen not she had happy, be to sanction his received had Bingley
half-laughing of expression an with Darcy, Mr. towards turned likewise
alarm.

an showed as time, dinner during such, was sister her to behaviour His
persuaded formerly, than guarded more though which, her, of admiration
his and happiness, Jane’s himself, to wholly left if that Elizabeth,
the upon depend not dared she Though secured. speedily be would own,
It behaviour. his observing from pleasure received yet she consequence,
in was she for boast; could spirits her that animation the all her gave
table the as her from far as almost was Darcy Mr. humour. cheerful no
little how knew She mother. her of side one on was He them. divide could
to appear either make or either, to pleasure give would situation a such
but discourse, their of any hear to enough near not was She advantage.
and formal how and other, each to spoke they seldom how see could she
ungraciousness, mother’s Her did. they whenever manner their was cold
mind; Elizabeth’s to painful more him owed they what of sense the made
tell to privileged be to anything given have times, at would, she and
the of whole the by unfelt nor unknown neither was kindness his that him
family.

of opportunity some afford would evening the that hopes in was She
away pass not would visit the of whole the that together; them bringing
than conversation of more something into enter to them enabling without
Anxious entrance. his attending salutation ceremonious mere the
the before drawing-room, the in passed which period the uneasy, and
her made almost that degree a to dull and wearisome was came, gentlemen
all which on point the as entrance their to forward looked She uncivil.
depend. must evening the for pleasure of chance her

for up him give shall “I she, said _then_,” me, to come not does he “If
ever.”

have would he if as looked he thought she and came; gentlemen The
table, the round crowded had ladies the alas! but, hopes; her answered
coffee, the out pouring Elizabeth and tea, making was Bennet Miss where
her near vacancy single a not was there that confederacy a close so in
of one approaching, gentlemen’s the on And chair. a of admit would which
whisper: a in said, and ever, than her to closer moved girls the

them; of none want We determined. am I us, part and come shan’t men “The
we?” do

with him followed She room. the of part another to away walked had Darcy
enough patience scarcely had spoke, he whom to everyone envied eyes, her
for herself against enraged was then and coffee; to anybody help to
silly! so being

to enough foolish be ever I could How refused! been once has who man “A
not would who sex, the among one there Is love? his of renewal a expect
woman? same the to proposal second a as weakness a such against protest
feelings!” their to abhorrent so indignity no is There

cup coffee his back bringing his by however, revived, little a was She
saying: of opportunity the seized she and himself;

still?” Pemberley at sister your “Is

Christmas.” till there remain will she “Yes,

her?” left friends her all Have alone? quite “And

Scarborough, to on gone been have others The her. with is Annesley “Mrs.
weeks.” three these

converse to wished he if but say; to more nothing of think could She
for however, her, by stood He success. better have might he her, with
whispering lady’s young the on last, at and, silence; in minutes, some
away. walked he again, Elizabeth to

ladies the placed, card-tables the and removed, were tea-things the When
him, by joined soon be to hoping then was Elizabeth and rose, all
her to victim a fall him seeing by overthrown were views her all when
seated after moments few a in and players, whist for rapacity mother’s
pleasure. of expectation every lost now She party. the of rest the with
had she and tables, different at evening the for confined were They
side her towards turned often so were eyes his that but hope, to nothing
herself. as unsuccessfully as play him make to as room, the of

to gentlemen Netherfield two the keep to designed had Bennet Mrs.
the of any before ordered unluckily was carriage their but supper;
them. detaining of opportunity no had she and others,

“What themselves, to left were they as soon as she, said girls,” “Well
well, uncommonly off passed has thing every think I day? the to you say
The saw. ever I any as dressed well as was dinner The you. assure I
so saw never they said everybody turn--and a to roasted was venison
the at had we what than better times fifty was soup The haunch. a fat
partridges the that acknowledged, Darcy Mr. even and week; last Lucases’
French three or two has he suppose I and done; well remarkably were
greater in look you saw never I Jane, dear my And, least. at cooks
And not. did you whether her asked I for too, so said Long Mrs. beauty.
her have shall we Bennet, Mrs. ‘Ah! besides? said she think you do what
good as is Long Mrs. think do I indeed. did She last.’ at Netherfield at
girls, behaved pretty very are nieces her lived--and ever as creature a
prodigiously.” them like I handsome: all at not and

of enough seen had she spirits; great very in was short, in Bennet, Mrs.
at him get would she that convinced be to Jane, to behaviour Bingley’s
happy a in when family, her to advantage of expectations her and last;
at disappointed quite was she that reason, beyond far so were humour,
proposals. his make to day, next the again there him seeing not

“The Elizabeth. to Bennet Miss said day,” agreeable very a been has “It
we hope I other. the with one suitable so selected, well so seemed party
again.” meet often may

smiled. Elizabeth

me. mortifies It me. suspect not must You so. do not must you “Lizzy,
an as conversation his enjoy to learnt now have I that you assure I
am I it. beyond wish a having without man, young sensible and agreeable
had never he that are, now manners his what from satisfied, perfectly
blessed is he that only is It affection. my engaging of design any
generally of desire stronger a and address, of sweetness greater with
man.” other any than pleasing,

and smile, me let not will “you sister, her said cruel,” very are “You
moment.” every it to me provoking are

believed!” be to cases some in is it hard “How

others!” in impossible how “And

I than more feel I that me persuade to wish you should why “But
acknowledge?”

to love all We answer. to how know hardly I which question a is “That
Forgive knowing. worth not is what only teach can we though instruct,
confidante.” your me make not do indifference, in persist you if and me;



55 Chapter


His alone. and again, called Bingley Mr. visit, this after days few A
in home return to was but London, for morning that him left had friend
remarkably in was and hour, an above them with sat He time. days ten
many with but, them; with dine to him invited Bennet Mrs. spirits. good
elsewhere. engaged himself confessed he concern, of expressions

lucky.” more be shall we hope “I she, said call,” you time “Next

would she if and etc.; etc. time, any at happy particularly be should He
them. on waiting of opportunity early an take would leave, him give

to-morrow?” come you “Can

was invitation her and to-morrow; for all at engagement no had he Yes,
alacrity. with accepted

them of none were ladies the that time good very such in and came, He
dressing her in room, daughter’s her to Bennet Mrs. ran In dressed.
out: crying finished, half hair her with and gown,

is Bingley come--Mr. is He down. hurry and haste make Jane, dear “My
Miss to come Sarah, Here, haste. make haste, Make indeed. is, He come.
Miss mind Never gown. her with on her help and moment, this Bennet
hair.” Lizzy’s

is Kitty say dare I “but Jane; said can,” we as soon as down be will “We
ago.” hour an half stairs up went she for us, of either than forwarder

quick! be quick, be Come it? with do to she has what Kitty! hang “Oh!
dear?” my sash, your is Where

down go to on prevailed be not would Jane gone, was mother her when But
sisters. her of one without

the in again visible was themselves by them get to anxiety same The
his was as library, the to retired Bennet Mr. tea, After evening.
of obstacles Two instrument. her to stairs up went Mary and custom,
at winking and looking sat Bennet Mrs. removed, thus being five the
any making without time, considerable a for Catherine and Elizabeth
last at when and her; observe not would Elizabeth them. on impression
do What mamma? matter the is “What said, innocently very she did, Kitty
do?” to I am What for? me at winking keep you

still sat then She you.” at wink not did I nothing. child, “Nothing
she occasion, precious a such waste to unable but longer; minutes five
to want I love, my here, “Come Kitty, to saying and up, got suddenly
look a gave instantly Jane room. the of out her took you,” to speak
her and premeditation, such at distress her spoke which Elizabeth at
Mrs. minutes, few a In it. to in give not would _she_ that entreaty
out: called and door the half-opened Bennet

you.” with speak to want I dear, my “Lizzy,

go. to forced was Elizabeth

as mother, her said know;” you themselves by them leave well as may “We
in sit to stairs up going are I and “Kitty hall. the in was she as soon
dressing-room.” my

remained but mother, her with reason to attempt no made Elizabeth
returned then sight, of out were Kitty and she till hall, the in quietly
drawing-room. the into

every was Bingley ineffectual. were day this for schemes Bennet’s Mrs.
His daughter. her of lover professed the except charming, was that thing
their to addition agreeable most a him rendered cheerfulness and ease
the of officiousness ill-judged the with bore he and party; evening
command and forbearance a with remarks silly her all heard and mother,
daughter. the to grateful particularly countenance of

went he before and supper; stay to invitation an needed scarcely He
Mrs. and own his through chiefly formed, was engagement an away,
husband. her with shoot to morning next coming his for means, Bennet’s

passed word a Not indifference. her of more no said Jane day, this After
in bed to went Elizabeth but Bingley; concerning sisters the between
Darcy Mr. unless concluded, be speedily must all that belief happy the
tolerably felt she however, Seriously, time. stated the within returned
gentleman’s that with place taken have must this all that persuaded
concurrence.

spent Bennet Mr. and he and appointment; his to punctual was Bingley
more much was latter The on. agreed been had as together, morning the
presumption of nothing was There expected. companion his than agreeable
into him disgust or ridicule, his provoke could that Bingley in folly or
the than eccentric, less and communicative, more was he and silence;
dinner; to him with returned course of Bingley him. seen ever had other
get to work at again was invention Bennet’s Mrs. evening the in and
letter a had who Elizabeth, daughter. her and him from away body every
tea; after soon purpose that for room breakfast the into went write, to
be not could she cards, to down sit to going all were others the as for
schemes. mother’s her counteract to wanted

she finished, was letter her when drawing-room, the to returning on But
mother her that fear to reason was there surprise, infinite her to saw,
her perceived she door, the opening On her. for ingenious too been had
in engaged if as hearth, the over together standing Bingley and sister
of faces the suspicion, no to led this had and conversation; earnest
would other, each from away moved and round turned hastily they as both,
she _hers_ but enough; awkward was situation Their all. it told have
and either; by uttered was syllable a Not worse. still was thought
as who Bingley, when again, away going of point the on was Elizabeth
few a whispering and rose, suddenly down, sat had other the as well
room. the of out ran sister, her to words

give would confidence where Elizabeth, from reserves no have could Jane
liveliest the with acknowledged, her, embracing instantly and pleasure;
world. the in creature happiest the was she that emotion,

Oh! it. deserve not do I much. too far “by added, she much!” too “‘Tis
happy?” as everybody not is why

warmth, a sincerity, a with given were congratulations Elizabeth’s
of sentence Every express. poorly but could words which delight, a
not would she But Jane. to happiness of source fresh a was kindness
be to remained that half say or sister, her with stay to herself allow
present. the for said

any on not would “I cried. she mother;” my to instantly go must “I
it hear to her allow or solicitude; affectionate her with trifle account
to Lizzy, Oh! already. father my to gone is He myself. but anyone from
dear my all to pleasure such give will relate to have I what that know
happiness!” much so bear I shall how family!

the up broken purposely had who mother, her to away hastened then She
Kitty. with stairs up sitting was and party, card

ease and rapidity the at smiled now herself, by left was who Elizabeth,
many so them given had that settled, finally was affair an which with
vexation. and suspense of months previous

anxious friend’s his all of end the “is she, said this,” “And
the contrivance! and falsehood sister’s his all of circumspection!
end!” reasonable most wisest, happiest,

her with conference whose Bingley, by joined was she minutes few a In
purpose. the to and short been had father

door. the opened he as hastily, he said sister?” your is “Where

say.” dare I moment, a in down be will She stairs. up mother my “With

wishes good the claimed her, to up coming and, door, the shut then He
expressed heartily and honestly Elizabeth sister. a of affection and
with hands shook They relationship. their of prospect the in delight her
listen to had she down, came sister her till then, and cordiality; great
perfections; Jane’s of and happiness, own his of say to had he all to
his all believed really Elizabeth lover, a being his of spite in and
for had they because founded, rationally be to felicity of expectations
of disposition super-excellent and understanding, excellent the basis
and her between taste and feeling of similarity general a and Jane,
himself.

of satisfaction the all; them to delight common no of evening an was It
as face, her to animation sweet such of glow a gave mind Bennet’s Miss
hoped and smiled, and simpered Kitty ever. than handsomer look her made
or consent her give not could Bennet Mrs. soon. coming was turn her
feelings, her satisfy to enough warm terms in approbation her speak
when and hour; an half for else nothing of Bingley to talked she though
showed plainly manner and voice his supper, at them joined Bennet Mr.
was. he happy really how

their till it, to allusion in lips his passed however, word, a Not
he gone, was he as soon as but night; the for leave his took visitor
said: and daughter, his to turned

woman.” happy very a be will You you. congratulate I “Jane,

his for him thanked and him, kissed instantly, him to went Jane
goodness.

in pleasure great have I “and replied, he girl;” good a are “You
your of doubt a not have I settled. happily so be will you thinking
are You unlike. means no by are tempers Your together. well very doing
so on; resolved be ever will nothing that complying, so you of each
will you that generous, so and you; cheat will servant every that easy,
income.” your exceed always

be would matters money in thoughtlessness or Imprudence so. not hope “I
me.” in unpardonable

you are “what wife, his cried Bennet,” Mr. dear My income! their “Exceed
likely very and year, a thousand five or four has he Why, of? talking
so am I Jane, dear dear, my “Oh! daughter, her addressing Then more.”
it how knew I night. all sleep of wink a get shan’t I sure am I happy!
not could you sure was I last. at so, be must it said always I be. would
when him, saw I ever as soon as remember, I nothing! for beautiful so be
was it likely how thought I year, last Hertfordshire into came first he
that man young handsomest the is he Oh! together. come should you that
seen!” was ever

her competition beyond was Jane forgotten. all were Lydia, Wickham,
younger Her other. no for cared she moment, that At child. favourite
happiness of objects for her with interest make to began soon sisters
dispense. to able be future in might she which

Kitty and Netherfield; at library the of use the for petitioned Mary
winter. every there balls few a for hard very begged

Longbourn; at visitor daily a course of was time, this from Bingley,
after till remaining always and breakfast, before frequently coming
enough be not could who neighbour, barbarous some when unless supper;
himself thought he which dinner to invitation an him given had detested,
accept. to obliged

for sister; her with conversation for time little but now had Elizabeth
else; anyone on bestow to attention no had Jane present, was he while
hours those in them of both to useful considerably herself found she but
he Jane, of absence the In occur. sometimes must that separation of
of talking of pleasure the for Elizabeth, to himself attached always
of means same the sought constantly Jane gone, was Bingley when and her;
relief.

he that me telling “by evening, one she, said happy,” so me made has “He
believed not had I spring! last town in being my of ignorant totally was
possible.” it

for account he did how “But Elizabeth. replied much,” as suspected “I
it?”

to friends no certainly were They doing. sister’s his been have must “It
have might he since at, wonder cannot I which me, with acquaintance his
see, they when But respects. many in advantageously more much so chosen
will they me, with happy is brother their that will, they trust I as
we though again; terms good on be shall we and contented, be to learn
other.” each to were once we what be never can

ever I “that Elizabeth, said speech,” unforgiving most the is “That
again you see to indeed, me, vex would It girl! Good utter. you heard
regard.” pretended Bingley’s Miss of dupe the

November, last town to went he when that Lizzy, it, believe you “Would
being _my_ of persuasion a but nothing and me, loved really he
again!” down coming his prevented have would indifferent

his of credit the to is it but sure; be to mistake little a made “He
modesty.”

and diffidence, his on Jane from panegyric a introduced naturally This
pleased was Elizabeth qualities. good own his on put he value little the
for, friend; his of interference the betrayed not had he that find to
she world, the in heart forgiving and generous most the had Jane though
him. against her prejudice must which circumstance a was it knew

cried existed!” ever that creature fortunate most the certainly am “I
blessed and family, my from singled thus I am why Lizzy, “Oh! Jane.
but _were_ there If happy! as _you_ see but could I If all! them above
you!” for man another such

as happy so be could never I men, such forty me give to were you “If
your have can never I goodness, your disposition, your have I Till you.
very have I if perhaps, and, myself; for shift me let no, No, happiness.
time.” in Collins Mr. another with meet may I luck, good

a long be not could family Longbourn the in affairs of situation The
Phillips, Mrs. to it whisper to privileged was Bennet Mrs. secret.
her all by same the do to permission, any without ventured, she and
Meryton. in neighbours

the in family luckiest the be to pronounced speedily were Bennets The
away, run first had Lydia when before, weeks few a only though world,
misfortune. for out marked be to proved generally been had they



56 Chapter


been had Jane with engagement Bingley’s after week a about morning, One
the in together sitting were family the of females the and he as formed,
the by window, the to drawn suddenly was attention their dining-room,
up driving four and chaise a perceived they and carriage; a of sound
the besides, and visitors, for morning the in early too was It lawn. the
horses The neighbours. their of any of that to answer not did equipage
who servant the of livery the nor carriage, the neither and post; were
that however, certain, was it As them. to familiar were it, preceded
avoid to Bennet Miss on prevailed instantly Bingley coming, was somebody
the into him with away walk and intrusion, an such of confinement the
three remaining the of conjectures the and off, set both They shrubbery.
thrown was door the till satisfaction, little with though continued,
Bourgh. de Catherine Lady was It entered. visitor their and open

their but surprised; be to intending all course of were They
Mrs. of part the on and expectation; their beyond was astonishment
even them, to unknown perfectly was she though Kitty, and Bennet
felt. Elizabeth what to inferior

no made ungracious, usually than more air an with room the entered She
the of inclination slight a than salutation Elizabeth’s to reply other
her mentioned had Elizabeth word. a saying without down sat and head,
of request no though entrance, ladyship’s her on mother her to name
made. been had introduction

such of guest a having by flattered though amazement, all Bennet, Mrs.
sitting After politeness. utmost the with her received importance, high
Elizabeth, to stiffly very said she silence, in moment a for

your is suppose, I lady, That Bennet. Miss well, are you hope “I
mother.”

was. she that concisely very replied Elizabeth

sisters.” your of one is suppose I _that_ “And

Catherine. Lady to speak to delighted Bennet, Mrs. said madam,” “Yes,
married, lately is all of youngest My one. but girl youngest my is “She
man young a with walking grounds, the about somewhere is eldest my and
family.” the of part a become soon will believe, I who,

short a after Catherine Lady returned here,” park small very a have “You
silence.

I but say; dare I lady, my Rosings, of comparison in nothing is “It
Lucas’s.” William Sir than larger much is it you assure

in evening, the for room sitting inconvenient most a be must “This
west.” full are windows the summer;

then and dinner, after there sat never they that her assured Bennet Mrs.
added:

and Mr. left you whether ladyship your asking of liberty the take I “May
well.” Collins Mrs.

last.” before night the them saw I well. very “Yes,

from her for letter a produce would she that expected now Elizabeth
no But calling. her for motive probable only the seemed it as Charlotte,
puzzled. completely was she and appeared, letter

some take to ladyship her begged civility, great with Bennet, Mrs.
politely, very not and resolutely, very Catherine Lady but refreshment;
Elizabeth, to said up, rising then, and anything; eating declined

wilderness little a of kind prettyish a be to seemed there Bennet, “Miss
you if it, in turn a take to glad be should I lawn. your of side one on
company.” your with me favour will

the about ladyship her show “and mother, her cried dear,” my “Go,
hermitage.” the with pleased be will she think I walks. different

parasol, her for room own her into running and obeyed, Elizabeth
the through passed they As downstairs. guest noble her attended
and dining-parlour the into doors the opened Catherine Lady hall,
decent be to survey, short a after them, pronouncing and drawing-room,
on. walked rooms, looking

her that saw Elizabeth and door, the at remained carriage Her
walk gravel the along silence in proceeded They it. in was waiting-woman
for effort no make to determined was Elizabeth copse; the to led that
and insolent usually than more now was who woman a with conversation
disagreeable.

in looked she as she, said nephew?” her like her think ever I could “How
face. her

following the in began Catherine Lady copse, the entered they as soon As
manner:--

my of reason the understand to Bennet, Miss loss, no at be can “You
I why you tell must conscience, own your heart, own Your hither. journey
come.”

astonishment. unaffected with looked Elizabeth

account to able all at been not have I Madam. mistaken, are you “Indeed,
here.” you seeing of honour the for

to ought “you tone, angry an in ladyship, her replied Bennet,” “Miss
may _you_ insincere however But with. trifled be to not am I that know,
been ever has character My so. _me_ find not shall you be, to choose
such of cause a in and frankness, and sincerity its for celebrated
most a of report A it. from depart not certainly shall I this, as moment
your only not that told was I ago. days two me reached nature alarming
that but married, advantageously most being of point the on was sister
soon be likelihood, all in would, Bennet, Elizabeth Miss that you,
I Though Darcy. Mr. nephew, own my nephew, my to united afterwards
him injure not would I though falsehood, scandalous a be must it _know_
resolved instantly I possible, it of truth the suppose to as much so
to known sentiments my make might I that place, this for off setting on
you.”

colouring Elizabeth, said true,” be to impossible it believed you “If
coming of trouble the took you wonder “I disdain, and astonishment with
it?” by propose ladyship your could What far. so

contradicted.” universally report a such having upon insist to once “At

Elizabeth said family,” my and me see to Longbourn, to coming “Your
report a such indeed, if, it; of confirmation a rather be “will coolly,
existence.” in is

been not it Has it? of ignorant be to pretend then you Do “If!
a such that know not you Do yourselves? by circulated industriously
abroad?” spread is report

was.” it that heard never “I

it?” for foundation no is there that declare, likewise you can “And

may You ladyship. your with frankness equal possess to pretend not do “I
answer.” to choose not shall I which questions ask

Has satisfied. being on insist I Bennet, Miss borne. be to not is “This
marriage?” of offer an you made nephew, my has he,

impossible.” be to it declared has ladyship “Your

his of use the retains he while so, be must it so; be to ought “It
infatuation, of moment a in may, allurements and arts your But reason.
You family. his all to and himself to owes he what forget him made have
in.” him drawn have may

it.” confess to person last the be shall I have, I “If

such to accustomed been not have I am? I who know you do Bennet, “Miss
world, the in has he relation nearest the almost am I this. as language
concerns.” dearest his all know to entitled am and

this, as behaviour such will nor mine; know to entitled not are you “But
explicit.” be to me induce ever

the have you which to match, This understood. rightly be me “Let
is Darcy Mr. never. No, place. take never can aspire, to presumption
say?” to you have what Now daughter. my to engaged

will he suppose to reason no have can you so, is he if that this; “Only
me.” to offer an make

replied: then and moment, a for hesitated Catherine Lady

infancy, their From kind. peculiar a of is them between engagement “The
of wish favourite the was It other. each for intended been have they
planned we cradles, their in While hers. of as well as mother, _his_
would sisters both of wishes the when moment the at now, and union: the
of woman young a by prevented be to marriage, their in accomplished be
to unallied wholly and world, the in importance no of birth, inferior
his To friends? his of wishes the to regard no pay you Do family! the
of feeling every to lost you Are Bourgh? de Miss with engagement tacit
earliest his from that say me heard not you Have delicacy? and propriety
cousin?” his for destined was he hours

is there If me? to that is what But before. it heard had I and “Yes,
not certainly shall I nephew, your marrying my to objection other no
to him wished aunt and mother his that knowing by it from kept be
the planning in could you as much as did both You Bourgh. de Miss marry
neither is Darcy Mr. If others. on depended completion Its marriage.
make to he not is why cousin, his to confined inclination nor honour by
him?” accept I not may why choice, that am I if And choice? another

Yes, it. forbid interest, nay, prudence, decorum, honour, “Because
or family his by noticed be to expect not do for interest; Bennet, Miss
will You all. of inclinations the against act wilfully you if friends,
him. with connected everyone by despised, and slighted, censured, be
mentioned be even never will name your disgrace; a be will alliance Your
us.” of any by

Mr. of wife the “But Elizabeth. replied misfortunes,” heavy are “These
necessarily happiness of sources extraordinary such have must Darcy
cause no have whole, the upon could, she that situation, her to attached
repine.” to

gratitude your this Is you! of ashamed am I girl! headstrong “Obstinate,
that on me to due nothing Is spring? last you to attentions my for
came I that Bennet, Miss understand, to are You down. sit us Let score?
will nor purpose; my carrying of resolution determined the with here
person’s any to submit to used been not have I it. from dissuaded be I
disappointment.” brooking of habit the in been not have I whims.

pitiable; more present at situation ladyship’s your make will “_That_
me.” on effect no have will it but

my and daughter My silence. in me Hear interrupted. be not will “I
maternal the on descended, are They other. each for formed are nephew
respectable, from father’s, the on and, line; noble same the from side,
on fortune Their untitled--families. ancient--though and honourable,
of voice the by other each for destined are They splendid. is sides both
them? divide to is what and houses; respective their of member every
connections, family, without woman young a of pretensions upstart The
you If be. not shall not, must it But endured! be to this Is fortune. or
in sphere the quit to wish not would you good, own your of sensible were
up.” brought been have you which

that quitting as myself consider not should I nephew, your marrying “In
are we far so daughter; gentleman’s a am I gentleman; a is He sphere.
equal.”

mother? your was who But daughter. gentleman’s a _are_ You “True.
their of ignorant me imagine not Do aunts? and uncles your are Who
condition.”

does nephew your “if Elizabeth, said be,” may connections my “Whatever
_you_.” to nothing be can they them, to object not

him?” to engaged you are all, for once me “Tell

Lady obliging of purpose mere the for not, would Elizabeth Though
a after say, but not could she question, this answered have Catherine,
deliberation: moment’s

not.” am “I

pleased. seemed Catherine Lady

engagement?” an such into enter to never me, promise you will “And

kind.” the of promise no make will “I

more a find to expected I astonished. and shocked am I Bennet “Miss
that belief a into yourself deceive not do But woman. young reasonable
the me given have you till away go not shall I recede. ever will I
require.” I assurance

into intimidated be to not am I it. give shall _never_ certainly I “And
marry to Darcy Mr. wants ladyship Your unreasonable. wholly so anything
their make promise wished-for the you giving my would but daughter; your
would me, to attached be to him Supposing probable? more all at marriage
cousin? his on it bestow to wish him make hand his accept to refusing my
have you which with arguments the that Catherine, Lady say, to me Allow
the as frivolous as been have application extraordinary this supported
if character, my mistaken widely have You ill-judged. was application
your far How these. as persuasions such by on worked be can I think you
tell; cannot I affairs, his in interference your of approve might nephew
beg, must I mine. in yourself concern to right no certainly have you but
subject.” the on farther no importuned be to therefore,

the all To done. means no by have I please. you if hasty, so “Not
am I add. to another still have I urged, already have I objections
infamous sister’s youngest your of particulars the to stranger no
a was her marrying man’s young the that all; it know I elopement.
is And uncles. and father your of expence the at business, patched-up
his of son the is husband, her Is sister? nephew’s my be to girl a such
are what earth!--of and Heaven brother? his be to steward, father’s late
polluted?” thus be to Pemberley of shades the Are thinking? you

answered. resentfully she say,” to further nothing have now can “You
to return to beg must I method. possible every in me insulted have “You
house.” the

turned they and also, rose Catherine Lady spoke. she as rose she And
incensed. highly was ladyship Her back.

nephew! my of credit and honour the for then, regard, no have “You
you with connection a that consider not you Do girl! selfish Unfeeling,
everybody?” of eyes the in him disgrace must

sentiments.” my know You say. to further nothing have I Catherine, “Lady

him?” have to resolved then are “You

manner, that in act to resolved only am I thing. such no said have “I
without happiness, my constitute opinion, own my in will, which
me.” with unconnected wholly so person any to or _you_, to reference

the obey to refuse You me. oblige to then, refuse, You well. is “It
in him ruin to determined are You gratitude. and honour, duty, of claims
world.” the of contempt the him make and friends, his all of opinion the

any “have Elizabeth, replied gratitude,” nor honour, nor duty, “Neither
either of principle No instance. present the in me, on claim possible
the to regard with And Darcy. Mr. with marriage my by violated be would
former the if world, the of indignation the or family, his of resentment
moment’s one me give not would it me, marrying his by excited _were_
in join to sense much too have would general in world the concern--and
scorn.” the

well. Very resolve! final your is This opinion! real your is this “And
your that Bennet, Miss imagine, not Do act. to how know now shall I
you find to hoped I you. try to came I gratified. be ever will ambition
point.” my carry will I it, upon depend but, reasonable;

of door the at were they till on, talked Catherine Lady manner this In
leave no take “I added, she round, hastily turning when, carriage, the
deserve You mother. your to compliments no send I Bennet. Miss you, of
displeased.” seriously most am I attention. such no

her persuade to attempting without and answer; no made Elizabeth
She herself. it into quietly walked house, the into return to ladyship
mother Her stairs. up proceeded she as away drive carriage the heard
Lady why ask to dressing-room, the of door the at her met impatiently
herself. rest and again in come not would Catherine

go.” would “she daughter, her said it,” choose not did “She

prodigiously was here calling her and woman! fine-looking very a is “She
were Collinses the us tell to suppose, I came, only she for civil!
through passing so, and say, dare I somewhere, road her on is She well.
had she suppose I you. on call well as might she thought Meryton,
Lizzy?” you, to say to particular nothing

to for here; falsehood little a into give to forced was Elizabeth
impossible. was conversation their of substance the acknowledge



57 Chapter


threw visit extraordinary this which spirits of discomposure The
many for she, could nor overcome; easily be not could into, Elizabeth
it Catherine, Lady incessantly. than less it of think to learn hours,
Rosings, from journey this of trouble the taken actually had appeared,
Mr. with engagement supposed her off breaking of purpose sole the for
report the what from but sure! be to scheme, rational a was It Darcy.
imagine; to loss a at was Elizabeth originate, could engagement their of
Bingley, of friend intimate the being _his_ that recollected she till
the when time a at enough, was Jane, of sister the being _her_ and
supply to another, for eager everybody made wedding one of expectation
her of marriage the that feel to forgotten herself not had She idea. the
neighbours her And together. frequently more them bring must sister
the with communication their through (for therefore Lodge, Lucas at
had Catherine), Lady reached had concluded, she report, the Collinses,
looked had she which immediate, and certain almost as down that set only
time. future some at possible as to forward

help not could she however, expressions, Catherine’s Lady revolving In
persisting her of consequence possible the to as uneasiness some feeling
to resolution her of said had she what From interference. this in
meditate must she that Elizabeth to occurred it marriage, their prevent
similar a take might _he_ how and nephew; her to application an
dared she her, with connection a to attached evils the of representation
his for affection his of degree exact the not knew She pronounce. not
suppose to natural was it but judgment, her on dependence his or aunt,
it and do; could _she_ than ladyship her of higher much thought he that
_one_, with marriage a of miseries the enumerating in that, certain was
would aunt his own, his to unequal so were connections immediate whose
would he dignity, of notions his With side. weakest his on him address
weak appeared had Elizabeth to which arguments, the that feel probably
reasoning. solid and sense good much contained ridiculous, and

often had which do, should he what to as before wavering been had he If
might relation a near so of entreaty and advice the likely, seemed
dignity as happy as be to once at him determine and doubt, every settle
Lady more. no return would he case that In him. make could unblemished
to engagement his and town; through way her in him see might Catherine
way. give must Netherfield to again coming of Bingley

his to come should promise his keeping not for excuse an therefore, “If,
understand to how know shall “I added, she days,” few a within friend
his of wish every expectation, every over give then shall I it.
might he when me, regretting only with satisfied is he If constancy.
him regret to cease soon shall I hand, and affections my obtained have
all.” at

* * * * *

had visitor their who hearing on family, the of rest the of surprise The
same the with it, satisfied obligingly they but great; very was been,
and curiosity; Bennet’s Mrs. appeased had which supposition of kind
subject. the on teasing much from spared was Elizabeth

her by met was she downstairs, going was she as morning, next The
hand. his in letter a with library his of out came who father,

room.” my into come you; for look to going was “I he, said “Lizzy,”

to had he what know to curiosity her and thither; him followed She
manner some in being its of supposition the by heightened was her tell
it that her struck suddenly It held. he letter the with connected
the all dismay with anticipated she and Catherine; Lady from be might
explanations. consequent

He down. sat both they and place, fire the to father her followed She
said, then

me astonished has that morning this letter a received have “I
its know to ought you yourself, concerns principally it As exceedingly.
brink the on daughters two had I that before, know not did I contents.
conquest.” important very a on you congratulate me Let matrimony. of

instantaneous the in cheeks Elizabeth’s into rushed now colour The
aunt; the of instead nephew, the from letter a being its of conviction
explained he that pleased be to most whether undetermined was she and
to addressed rather not was letter his that offended or all, at himself
continued: father her when herself;

matters such in penetration great have ladies Young conscious. look “You
the discover to sagacity, _your_ even defy may I think I but these; as
Collins.” Mr. from is letter This admirer. your of name

say?” to have _he_ can what and Collins! Mr. “From

with begins He course. of purpose the to much very “Something
of daughter, eldest my of nuptials approaching the on congratulations
gossiping good-natured, the of some by told been has he seems, it which,
says he what reading by impatience, your with sport not shall I Lucases.
thus ‘Having follows: as is yourself, to relates What point. that on
on myself and Collins Mrs. of congratulations sincere the you offered
another; of subject the on hint short a add now me let event, happy this
daughter Your authority. same the by advertised been have we which of
after Bennet, of name the bear long not will presumed, is it Elizabeth,
may fate her of partner chosen the and it, resigned has sister elder her
in personages illustrious most the of one as to up looked reasonably be
land.’ this

young ‘This this? by meant is who Lizzy, guess, possibly you “Can
of heart the thing every with way, peculiar a in blessed, is gentleman
extensive and kindred, noble property, desire,--splendid most can mortal
cousin my warn me let temptations, these all of spite in Yet patronage.
precipitate a by incur may you evils what of yourself, and Elizabeth,
be will you course, of which, proposals, gentleman’s this with closure
of.’ advantage immediate take to inclined

out: comes it now But is? gentleman this who Lizzy, idea, any you “Have

imagine to reason have We follows. as is you cautioning for motive “‘My
with match the on look not does Bourgh, de Catherine Lady aunt, his that
eye.’ friendly a

_have_ I think I Lizzy, Now, man! the is see, you Darcy_, “_Mr.
within man any on pitched have Lucases, the or he, Could you. surprised
lie the given have would name whose acquaintance, our of circle the
any at looks never who Darcy, Mr. related? they what to effectually more
his in you at looked never probably who and blemish, a see to but woman
admirable!” is It life!

force only could but pleasantry, father’s her in join to tried Elizabeth
so manner a in directed been wit his had Never smile. reluctant most one
her. to agreeable little

diverted?” not you “Are

on.” read Pray yes. “Oh!

last ladyship her to marriage this of likelihood the mentioning “‘After
she what expressed condescension, usual her with immediately, she night,
some of score the on that apparent, became it when occasion; the on felt
her give never would she cousin, my of part the on objections family
duty my it thought I match. a disgraceful so termed she what to consent
and she that cousin, my to this of intelligence speediest the give to
run not and about, are they what of aware be may admirer noble her
Mr. sanctioned.’ properly been not has which marriage a into hastily
sad Lydia’s cousin my that rejoiced truly am ‘I adds, moreover Collins
their that concerned only am and up, hushed well so been has business
generally so be should place took marriage the before together living
refrain or station, my of duties the neglect however, not, must I known.
young the received you that hearing at amazement my declaring from
an was It married. were they as soon as house your into couple
should I Longbourn, of rector the been I had and vice; of encouragement
them, forgive to certainly ought You it. opposed have strenuously very
their allow or sight, your in them admit to never but Christian, a as
Christian of notion his is That hearing.’ your in mentioned be to names
Charlotte’s dear his about only is letter his of rest The forgiveness!
you Lizzy, But, olive-branch. young a of expectation his and situation,
_missish_, be to going not are You it. enjoy not did you if as look
we do what For report. idle an at affronted be to pretend and hope, I
our in them at laugh and neighbours, our for sport make to but live,
turn?”

so is it But diverted. excessively am “I Elizabeth, cried “Oh!”
strange!”

man other any on fixed they Had amusing. it makes what is “Yes--_that_
_your_ and indifference, perfect _his_ but nothing; been have would it
abominate I as Much absurd! delightfully so it make dislike, pointed
any for correspondence Collins’s Mr. up give not would I writing,
giving help cannot I his, of letter a read I when Nay, consideration.
and impudence the value I as much Wickham, over even preference the him
Catherine Lady said what Lizzy, pray, And son-in-law. my of hypocrisy
consent?” her refuse to call she Did report? this about

had it as and laugh; a with only replied daughter his question this To
by distressed not was she suspicion, least the without asked been
her make to loss a at more been never had Elizabeth it. repeating his
she when laugh, to necessary was It not. were they what appear feelings
by her, mortified cruelly most had father Her cried. have rather would
but nothing do could she and indifference, Darcy’s Mr. of said he what
of instead perhaps, that fear or penetration, of want a such at wonder
much. too fancied have might she little, too seeing his



58 Chapter


as friend, his from excuse of letter such any receiving of Instead
Darcy bring to able was he do, to Bingley Mr. expected half Elizabeth
Catherine’s Lady after passed had days many before Longbourn to him with
time had Bennet Mrs. before and, early; arrived gentlemen The visit.
sat daughter her which of aunt, his seen having their of him tell to
proposed Jane, with alone be to wanted who Bingley, dread, momentary in
the in not was Bennet Mrs. to. agreed was It out. walking all their
five remaining the but time; spare never could Mary walking; of habit
others the allowed soon however, Jane, and Bingley together. off set
Darcy and Kitty, Elizabeth, while behind, lagged They them. outstrip to
Kitty either; by said was little Very other. each entertain to were
a forming secretly was Elizabeth talk; to him of afraid much too was
same. the doing be might he perhaps and resolution; desperate

upon call to wished Kitty because Lucases, the towards walked They
concern, general a it making for occasion no saw Elizabeth as and Maria;
the was Now alone. him with on boldly went she them left Kitty when
was courage her while and, executed, be to resolution her for moment
said: immediately she high,

giving of sake the for and, creature; selfish very a am I Darcy, “Mr.
I yours. wounding be may I much how not care feelings, own my to relief
my to kindness unexampled your for you thanking help longer no can
to anxious most been have I it, known have I since Ever sister. poor
rest the to known it Were it. feel I gratefully how you to acknowledge
express.” to gratitude own my merely have not should I family, my of

surprise of tone a in Darcy, replied sorry,” exceedingly sorry, am “I
a in may, what of informed been ever have you “that emotion, and
Gardiner Mrs. think not did I uneasiness. you given have light, mistaken
trusted.” be to little so was

to betrayed first thoughtlessness Lydia’s aunt. my blame not must “You
could I course, of and, matter; the in concerned been had you that me
again, and again you thank me Let particulars. the knew I till rest not
induced which compassion generous that for family, my all of name the in
the for mortifications, many so bear and trouble, much so take to you
them.” discovering of sake

alone. yourself for be it “let replied, he me,” thank _will_ you “If
other the to force add might you to happiness giving of wish the That
your But deny. to attempt not shall I on, me led which inducements
thought I believe I them, respect I as Much nothing. me owe _family_
_you_.” of only

pause, short a After word. a say to embarrassed much too was Elizabeth
your If me. with trifle to generous too are “You added, companion her
_My_ once. at so me tell April, last were they what still are feelings
silence will you from word one but unchanged, are wishes and affections
ever.” for subject this on me

of anxiety and awkwardness common than more the all feeling Elizabeth,
not though immediately, and speak; to herself forced now situation, his
undergone had sentiments her that understand to him gave fluently, very
make to as alluded, he which to period the since change, a material so
The assurances. present his pleasure and gratitude with receive her
never probably had he as such was produced, reply this which happiness
as and sensibly as occasion the on himself expressed he and before; felt
Elizabeth Had do. to supposed be can love in violently man a as warmly
the well how seen have might she eye, his encounter to able been
him; became face, his over diffused delight, heartfelt of expression
of her told he and listen, could she look, not could she though but,
his made him, to was she importance what of proving in which, feelings,
valuable. more moment every affection

to much too was There direction. what in knowing without on, walked They
She objects. other any to attention for said, and felt, and thought, be
understanding good present their for indebted were they that learnt soon
through return her in him on call did who aunt, his of efforts the to
the and motive, its Longbourn, to journey her relate there and London,
on emphatically dwelling Elizabeth; with conversation her of substance
apprehension, ladyship’s her in which, latter the of expression every
that belief the in assurance; and perverseness her denoted peculiarly
promise that obtain to endeavours her assist must relation a such
her for unluckily But, give. to refused had she which nephew her from
contrariwise. exactly been had effect its ladyship,

myself allowed ever scarcely had I “as he, said hope,” to me taught “It
that, certain be to disposition your of enough knew I before. hope to
have would you me, against decided irrevocably absolutely, been you had
openly.” and frankly Catherine, Lady to it acknowledged

enough know you “Yes, replied, she as laughed and coloured Elizabeth
so you abusing After _that_. of capable me believe to frankness my of
all to you abusing in scruple no have could I face, your to abominably
relations.” your

your though For, deserve? not did I that me, of say you did “What
my premises, mistaken on formed ill-founded, were accusations
was It reproof. severest the merited had time the at you to behaviour
abhorrence.” without it of think cannot I unpardonable.

that to annexed blame of share greater the for quarrel not will “We
examined, strictly if neither, of conduct “The Elizabeth. said evening,”
improved hope, I both, have we then, since but irreproachable; be will
civility.” in

I what of recollection The myself. to reconciled easily so be cannot “I
of whole the during expressions my manners, my conduct, my of said, then
Your me. to painful inexpressibly months, many been has and now, is it,
a in behaved you ‘had forget: never shall I applied, well so reproof,
can you not, know You words. your were Those manner.’ gentlemanlike more
time, some was it me;--though tortured have they how conceive, scarcely
justice.” their allow to enough reasonable was I before confess, I

an strong so make to them expecting from far very certainly was “I
such in felt ever being their of idea smallest the not had I impression.
way.” a

proper every of devoid then me thought You it. believe easily can “I
never shall I countenance your of turn The did. you sure am I feeling,
possible any in you addressed have not could I that said you as forget,
me.” accept to you induce would that way

at do not will recollections These said. then I what repeat not do “Oh!
it.” of ashamed heartily most been long have I that you assure I all.

you make soon it “did he, said it,” “Did letter. his mentioned Darcy
its to credit any give it, reading on you, Did me? of better think
contents?”

her all gradually how and been, had her on effect its what explained She
removed. been had prejudices former

was it but pain, you give must wrote I what “that he, said knew,” “I
part one was There letter. the destroyed have you hope I necessary.
the having your dread should I which it, of opening the especially,
might which expressions some remember can I again. reading of power
me.” hate you make justly

the to essential it believe you if burnt, be certainly shall letter “The
my think to reason both have we though but, regard; my of preservation
easily so quite hope, I not, are they unalterable, entirely not opinions
implies.” that as changed

perfectly myself believed “I Darcy, replied letter,” that wrote I “When
a in written was it that convinced since am I but cool, and calm
spirit.” of bitterness dreadful

The so. end not did it but bitterness, in began perhaps, letter, “The
feelings The letter. the of more no think But itself. charity is adieu
now are it, received who person the and wrote, who person the of
unpleasant every that then, were they what from different widely so
some learn must You forgotten. be to ought it attending circumstance
you gives remembrance its as past the of only Think philosophy. my of
pleasure.”

Your kind. the of philosophy any for credit you give cannot “I
contentment the that reproach, of void totally so be must retrospections
of better, much is what but, philosophy, of not is them from arising
intrude will recollections Painful so. not is it me, with But innocence.
selfish a been have I repelled. be to not, ought which cannot, which
I child a As principle. in not though practice, in life, my all being
I temper. my correct to taught not was I but right, was what taught was
conceit. and pride in them follow to left but principles, good given was
spoilt was I child), only an years many (for son only an Unfortunately
all particularly, father, (my themselves good though who, parents, my by
taught almost encouraged, allowed, amiable), and benevolent was that
family own my beyond none for care to overbearing; and selfish be to me
least at wish to world; the of rest the all of meanly think to circle;
I Such own. my with compared worth and sense their of meanly think to
been have still might I such and twenty; and eight to eight from was,
You you! owe not I do What Elizabeth! loveliest dearest, you, for but
you, By advantageous. most but first, at indeed hard lesson, a me taught
reception. my of doubt a without you to came I humbled. properly was I
woman a please to pretensions my all were insufficient how me showed You
pleased.” being of worthy

should?” I that yourself persuaded then you “Had

be to you believed I vanity? my of think you will What had. I “Indeed
addresses.” my expecting wishing,

assure I intentionally, not but fault, in been have must manners “My
me lead often might spirits my but you, deceive to meant never I you.
evening?” _that_ after me hated have must you How wrong.

take to began soon anger my but first, at perhaps angry was I you! “Hate
direction.” proper a

at met we when me, of thought you what asking of afraid almost am “I
coming?” for me blamed You Pemberley.

surprise.” but nothing felt I indeed; “No

you. by noticed being in _mine_ than greater be not could surprise “Your
I and politeness, extraordinary no deserved I that me told conscience My
due.” my than _more_ receive to expect not did I that confess

in civility every by you, show to “was Darcy, replied then,” object “My
to hoped I and past; the resent to as mean so not was I that power, my
you letting by opinion, ill your lessen to forgiveness, your obtain
wishes other any soon How to. attended been had reproofs your that see
an half about in believe I but tell, hardly can I themselves introduced
you.” seen had I after hour

her of and acquaintance, her in delight Georgiana’s of her told then He
to leading naturally which interruption; sudden its at disappointment
of resolution his that learnt soon she interruption, that of cause the
formed been had sister her of quest in Derbyshire from her following
thoughtfulness and gravity his that and inn, the quitted he before
must purpose a such what than struggles other no from arisen had there
comprehend.

to subject a painful too was it but again, gratitude her expressed She
farther. on dwelt be to each,

know to busy too and manner, leisurely a in miles several walking After
that watches, their examining on last, at found they it, about anything
home. at be to time was it

which wonder a was Jane!” and Bingley Mr. of become could “What
with delighted was Darcy affairs. their of discussion the introduced
of information earliest the him given had friend his engagement; their
it.

Elizabeth. said surprised?” were you whether ask must “I

happen.” soon would it that felt I away, went I When all. at “Not

And much.” as guessed I permission. your given had you say, to is “That
much pretty been had it that found she term, the at exclaimed he though
case. the

a made “I he, said London,” to going my before evening the “On
I ago. long made have to ought I believe I which him, to confession
his in interference former my make to occurred had that all of him told
had never had He great. was surprise His impertinent. and absurd affairs
myself believed I that moreover, him, told I suspicion. slightest the
indifferent was sister your that done, had I as supposing, in mistaken
was her to attachment his that perceive easily could I as and him; to
together.” happiness their of doubt no felt I unabated,

his directing of manner easy his at smiling help not could Elizabeth
friend.

him told you “when she, said observation,” own your from speak you “Did
spring?” last information my from merely or him, loved sister my that

visits two the during her observed narrowly had I former. the “From
affection.” her of convinced was I and here; made lately had I which

to conviction immediate carried suppose, I it, of assurance your “And
him.”

had diffidence His modest. unaffectedly most is Bingley did. “It
but case, a anxious so in judgment own his on depending his prevented
confess to obliged was I easy. thing every made mine on reliance his
not could I him. offended unjustly, not and time, a for which thing, one
months three town in been had sister your that conceal to myself allow
was He him. from it kept purposely and it, known had I that winter, last
remained he than longer no lasted persuaded, am I anger, his But angry.
me forgiven heartily has He sentiments. sister’s your of doubt any in
now.”

delightful most a been had Bingley Mr. that observe to longed Elizabeth
checked she but invaluable; was worth his that guided easily so friend;
at, laughed be to learn to yet had he that remembered She herself.
happiness the anticipating In begin. to early too rather was it and
he own, his to only inferior be to was course of which Bingley, of
they hall the In house. the reached they till conversation the continued
parted.



59 Chapter


question a was to?” walking been have you can where Lizzy, dear “My
room, their entered she as soon as Jane from received Elizabeth which
to only had She table. to down sat they when others the all from and
own her beyond was she till about, wandered had they that reply, in say
anything nor that, neither but spoke; she as coloured She knowledge.
truth. the of suspicion a awakened else,

The extraordinary. anything by unmarked quietly, passed evening The
silent. were unacknowledged the laughed, and talked lovers acknowledged
mirth; in overflows happiness which in disposition a of not was Darcy
happy was she that _knew_ rather confused, and agitated Elizabeth, and
embarrassment, immediate the besides for, so; be to herself _felt_ than
felt be would what anticipated She her. before evils other were there
no that aware was she known; became situation her when family the in
a was it others the with that feared even and Jane; but him liked one
away. do might consequence and fortune his all not which dislike

far very was suspicion Though Jane. to heart her opened she night At
here. incredulous absolutely was she habits, general Bennet’s Miss from

no, No, Darcy! Mr. to be!--engaged cannot This Lizzy. joking, are “You
impossible.” be to it know I me. deceive not shall you

and you; on was dependence sole My indeed! beginning wretched a is “This
am I indeed, Yet, not. do you if me, believe will else nobody sure am I
are we and me, loves still He truth. the but nothing speak I earnest. in
engaged.”

much how know I be. cannot it Lizzy! “Oh, doubtingly. her at looked Jane
him.” dislike you

I Perhaps forgot. be to all is _That_ matter. the of nothing know “You
as cases such in But now. do I as well so him love always not did
ever shall I time last the is This unpardonable. is memory good a these,
myself.” it remember

more and again, Elizabeth amazement. all looked still Bennet Miss
truth. its of her assured seriously

cried you,” believe must I now Yet so! really be it can Heaven! “Good
you are you--but congratulate do would--I I Lizzy, dear dear, “My Jane.
be can you that certain quite you question--are the forgive certain?
him?” with happy

that already, us between settled is It that. of doubt no be can “There
pleased, you are But world. the in couple happiest the be to are we
brother?” a such have to like you Shall Jane?

more myself or Bingley either give could Nothing much. very “Very,
you do And impossible. as it of talked we it, considered we But delight.
than rather anything do Lizzy! Oh, enough? well quite him love really
ought you what feel you that sure quite you Are affection. without marry
do?” to

I when do, to ought I than _more_ feel I think only will You yes! “Oh,
all.” you tell

mean?” you do “What

am I Bingley. do I than better him love I that confess must I “Why,
angry.” be will you afraid

Let seriously. very talk to want I serious. _be_ now sister, dearest “My
me tell you Will delay. without know, to am I that thing every know me
him?” loved have you long how

began. it when know hardly I that gradually, so on coming been has “It
grounds beautiful his seeing first my from it date must I believe I But
Pemberley.” at

the produced however, serious, be would she that entreaty Another
assurances solemn her by Jane satisfied soon she and effect; desired
nothing had Bennet Miss article, that on convinced When attachment. of
wish. to further

myself. as happy as be will you “for she, said happy,” quite am I “Now
you, of love his but nothing for it Were him. for value a had always I
your and friend Bingley’s as now, but him; esteemed have always must I
But me. to dear more yourself and Bingley only be can there husband,
you did little How me. with reserved very sly, very been have you Lizzy,
know I that all owe I Lambton! and Pemberley at passed what of me tell
you.” to not another, to it of

unwilling been had She secrecy. her of motives the her told Elizabeth
made had feelings own her of state unsettled the and Bingley; mention to
longer no would she now But friend. his of name the avoid equally her
acknowledged, was All marriage. Lydia’s in share his her from conceal
conversation. in spent night the half and

* * * * *

next the window a at stood she as Bennet, Mrs. cried gracious!” “Good
with again here coming not is Darcy Mr. disagreeable that “if morning,
always be to as tiresome so being by mean he can What Bingley! dear our
or something or a-shooting, go would he but notion no had I here? coming
him? with do we shall What company. his with us disturb not and other,
Bingley’s in be not may he that again, him with out walk must you Lizzy,
way.”

yet proposal; a convenient so at laughing help hardly could Elizabeth
an such him giving always be should mother her that vexed really was
epithet.

and expressively, so her at looked Bingley entered, they as soon As
information; good his of doubt no left as warmth, such with hands shook
lanes more no you have Bennet, “Mrs. aloud, said afterwards soon he and
to-day?” again way her lose may Lizzy which in hereabouts

walk “to Bennet, Mrs. said Kitty,” and Lizzy, and Darcy, Mr. advise “I
has Darcy Mr. and walk, long nice a is It morning. this Mount Oakham to
view.” the seen never

am I “but Bingley; Mr. replied others,” the for well very do may “It
that owned Kitty Kitty?” it, Won’t Kitty. for much too be will it sure
see to curiosity great a professed Darcy home. at stay rather had she
went she As consented. silently Elizabeth and Mount, the from view the
saying: her, followed Bennet Mrs. ready, get to stairs up

that have to forced be should you that Lizzy, sorry, quite am “I
is it it: mind not will you hope I But yourself. to all man disagreeable
talking for occasion no is there and know; you sake, Jane’s for all
to yourself put not do So, then. and now just except him, to
inconvenience.”

be should consent Bennet’s Mr. that resolved was it walk, their During
the herself to reserved Elizabeth evening. the of course the in asked
mother her how determine not could She mother’s. her for application
grandeur and wealth his all whether doubting sometimes it; take would
she whether But man. the of abhorrence her overcome to enough be would
it it, with delighted violently or match, the against set violently were
credit do to adapted ill equally be would manner her that certain was
hear should Darcy Mr. that bear more no could she and sense; her to
her of vehemence first the than joy, her of raptures first the
disapprobation.

* * * * *

saw she library, the to withdrew Bennet Mr. after soon evening, the In
was it seeing on agitation her and him, follow and also rise Darcy Mr.
to going was he but opposition, father’s her fear not did She extreme.
_she_, means--that her through be should it that and unhappy; made be
be should choice, her by him distressing be should child, favourite his
wretched a her--was of disposing in regrets and fears with him filling
when, again, appeared Darcy Mr. till misery in sat she and reflection,
minutes few a In smile. his by relieved little a was she him, at looking
while and, Kitty; with sitting was she where table the approached he
he father, your to “Go whisper, a in said work her admire to pretending
directly. gone was She library.” the in you wants

anxious. and grave looking room, the about walking was father Her
be to senses, your of out you Are doing? you are “what he, said “Lizzy,”
him?” hated always you not Have man? this accepting

more been had opinions former her that wish then she did earnestly How
from her spared have would It moderate! more expressions her reasonable,
give; to awkward exceedingly was it which professions and explanations
confusion, some with him, assured she and necessary, now were they but
Darcy. Mr. to attachment her of

be to rich, is He him. have to determined are you words, other in “Or,
Jane. than carriages fine and clothes fine more have may you and sure,
happy?” you make they will But

my of belief your “than Elizabeth, said objection,” other any you “Have
indifference?”

but man; of sort unpleasant proud, a be to him know all We all. at “None
him.” liked really you if nothing be would this

him. love “I eyes, her in tears with replied, she him,” like do I do, “I
not do You amiable. perfectly is He pride. improper no has he Indeed
in him of speaking by me pain not do pray then is; really he what know
terms.” such

kind the is He consent. my him given have “I father, her said “Lizzy,”
he which anything, refuse dare never should I whom to indeed, man, of
on resolved are you if _you_, to it give now I ask. to condescended
know I it. of better think to you advise me let But him. having
nor happy neither be could you that know I Lizzy. disposition, your
looked you unless husband; your esteemed truly you unless respectable,
the in you place would talents lively Your superior. a as him to up
escape scarcely could You marriage. unequal an in danger greatest
seeing of grief the have not me let child, My misery. and discredit
are you what not know You life. in partner your respect to unable _you_
about.”

and reply; her in solemn and earnest was affected, more still Elizabeth,
object the really was Darcy Mr. that assurances repeated by length, at
of estimation her which change gradual the explaining by choice, her of
affection his that certainty absolute her relating undergone, had him
months’ many of test the stood had but day, a of work the not was
did she qualities, good his all energy with enumerating and suspense,
match. the to him reconcile and incredulity, father’s her conquer

to more no have “I speaking, ceased she when he, said dear,” my “Well,
with parted have not could I you. deserves he case, the be this If say.
worthy.” less anyone to Lizzy, my you,

Darcy Mr. what him told then she impression, favourable the complete To
astonishment. with her heard He Lydia. for done voluntarily had

thing; every did Darcy so, And indeed! wonders, of evening an is “This
him got and debts, fellow’s the paid money, the gave match, the up made
trouble of world a me save will It better. the much So commission! his
have _would_ and must I doing, uncle’s your been it Had economy. and
own their thing every carry lovers young violent these but him; paid
about storm and rant will he to-morrow; him pay to offer shall I way.
matter.” the of end an be will there and you, for love his

reading his on before, days few a embarrassment her recollected then He
her allowed time, some her at laughing after and letter; Collins’s Mr.
come men young any “If room, the quitted she as go--saying, to last at
leisure.” at quite am I for in, them send Kitty, or Mary for

after and, weight; heavy very a from relieved now was mind Elizabeth’s
join to able was she room, own her in reflection quiet hour’s an half
for recent too was thing Every composure. tolerable with others the
longer no was there away; tranquilly passed evening the but gaiety,
familiarity and ease of comfort the and dreaded, be to material anything
time. in come would

her, followed she night, at dressing-room her to up went mother her When
extraordinary; most was effect Its communication. important the made and
to unable and still, quite sat Bennet Mrs. it, hearing first on for
could she that minutes many many, under it was Nor syllable. a utter
credit to backward general in not though heard; she what comprehend
a of shape the in came that or family, her of advantage the for was what
in about fidget to recover, to length at began She them. of any to lover
herself. bless and wonder, again, down sit up, get chair, her

would Who Darcy! Mr. me! dear think! only me! bless Lord gracious! “Good
rich how Lizzy! sweetest my Oh! true? really it is And it! thought have
carriages what jewels, what pin-money, What be! will you great how and
so am I all. at it--nothing to nothing is Jane’s have! will you
my tall!--Oh, so handsome! man!--so charming a Such happy. pleased--so
I before. much so him disliked having my for apologise pray Lizzy! dear
thing Every town! in house A Lizzy. dear Dear, it. overlook will he hope
Oh, year! a thousand Ten married! daughters Three charming! is that
distracted.” go shall I me. of become will What Lord!

and doubted: be not need approbation her that prove to enough was This
herself, by only heard was effusion an such that rejoicing Elizabeth,
room, own her in minutes three been had she before But away. went soon
her. followed mother her

Ten else! nothing of think can “I cried, she child,” dearest “My
a And Lord! a as good as ‘Tis more! likely very and year, a thousand
But licence. special a by married be shall and must You licence. special
of, fond particularly is Darcy Mr. dish what me tell love, dearest my
to-morrow.” it have may I that

gentleman the to behaviour mother’s her what of omen sad a was This
certain the in though that, found Elizabeth and be; might himself
relations’ her of secure and affection, warmest his of possession
morrow the But for. wished be to something still was there consent,
stood luckily Bennet Mrs. for expected; she than better much off passed
to speak to not ventured she that son-in-law intended her of awe such in
her mark or attention, any him offer to power her in was it unless him,
opinion. his for deference

get to pains taking father her seeing of satisfaction the had Elizabeth
rising was he that her assured soon Bennet Mr. and him; with acquainted
esteem. his in hour every

perhaps, “Wickham, he. said highly,” sons-in-law three my all admire “I
well as quite husband _your_ like shall I think I but favourite; my is
Jane’s.” as



60 Chapter


Mr. wanted she again, playfulness to rising soon spirits Elizabeth’s
could “How her. with love in fallen ever having his for account to Darcy
when charmingly, on going your comprehend can “I she. said begin?” you
first the in off you set could what but beginning; a made once had you
place?”

which words, the or look, the or spot, the or hour, the on fix cannot “I
I before middle the in was I ago. long too is It foundation. the laid
begun.” _had_ I that knew

behaviour manners--my my for as and withstood, early had you beauty “My
spoke never I and uncivil, the on bordering always least at was _you_ to
sincere; be Now not. than pain you give to wishing rather without you to
impertinence?” my for me admire you did

did.” I mind, your of liveliness the “For

less. little very was It once. at impertinence it call well as may “You
officious of deference, of civility, of sick were you that is, fact The
speaking, always were who women the with disgusted were You attention.
and roused, I alone. approbation _your_ for thinking and looking, and
really been not you Had _them_. unlike so was I because you, interested
you pains the of spite in but it; for me hated have would you amiable,
and just; and noble always were feelings your yourself, disguise to took
assiduously so who persons the despised thoroughly you heart, your in
for accounting of trouble the you saved have There--I you. courted
perfectly it think to begin I considered, things all really, and it;
thinks nobody me--but of good actual no knew you sure, be To reasonable.
love.” in fall they when _that_ of

was she while Jane to behaviour affectionate your in good no there “Was
Netherfield?” at ill

it of virtue a make But her? for less done have could who Jane! “Dearest
are you and protection, your under are qualities good My means. all by
me to belongs it return, in and, possible; as much as them exaggerate to
may as often as you with quarrelling and teasing for occasions find to
unwilling so you made what you asking by directly begin shall I and be;
first you when me, of shy so you made What last. at point the to come to
did called, you when especially, Why, here? dined afterwards and called,
me?” about care not did you if as look you

encouragement.” no me gave and silent, and grave were you “Because

embarrassed.” was I “But

I.” was so “And

dinner.” to came you when more me to talked have might “You

might.” less, felt had who man “A

that and give, to answer reasonable a have should you that unlucky “How
you long how wonder I But it! admit to as reasonable so be should I
when wonder I yourself. to left been had you if on, gone have _would_
of resolution My you! asked not had I if spoken, have _would_ you
effect. great certainly had Lydia to kindness your for you thanking
comfort our if moral, the of becomes what for afraid; am I much_, _Too
the mentioned have to not ought I for promise? of breach a from springs
do.” never will This subject.

Lady fair. perfectly be will moral The yourself. distress not need “You
of means the were us separate to endeavours unjustifiable Catherine’s
to happiness present my for indebted not am I doubts. my all removing
humour a in not was I gratitude. your expressing of desire eager your
me given had intelligence aunt’s My yours. of opening any for wait to
thing.” every know to once at determined was I and hope,

happy, her make to ought which use, infinite of been has Catherine “Lady
to down come you did what me, tell But use. of be to loves she for
embarrassed? be and Longbourn to ride to merely it Was for? Netherfield
consequence?” serious more any intended you had or

I whether could, I if judge, to and _you_, see to was purpose real “My
to avowed I what or one, avowed My me. love you make to hope ever might
Bingley, to partial still were sister your whether see to was myself,
made.” since have I which him to confession the make to were, she if and

to is what Catherine Lady to announce to courage have ever you “Shall
her?” befall

it But Elizabeth. courage, than time more want to likely more am “I
be shall it paper, of sheet a me give will you if and done, be to ought
directly.” done

and you by sit might I myself, write to letter a not had I if “And
But did. once lady young another as writing, your of evenness the admire
neglected.” longer be not must who too, aunt, an have I

Darcy Mr. with intimacy her much how confess to unwillingness an From
Gardiner’s Mrs. answered yet never had Elizabeth over-rated, been had
would knew she which communicate to _that_ having now, but letter; long
and uncle her that find to ashamed almost was she welcome, most be
as wrote immediately and happiness, of days three lost already had aunt
follows:

done, have to ought I as aunt, dear my before, you thanked have would “I
the say to but particulars; of detail satisfactory, kind, long, your for
existed. really than more supposed You write. to cross too was I truth,
your to rein loose a give choose; you as much as suppose _now_ But
the which flight possible every in imagination your indulge fancy,
you married, actually me believe you unless and afford, will subject
a him praise and soon, very again write must You err. greatly cannot
again, and again you, thank I last. your in did you than more deal great
Your it! wish to as silly so be I could How Lakes. the to going not for
I day. every Park the round go will We delightful. is ponies the of idea
so said have people other Perhaps world. the in creature happiest the am
she Jane; than even happier am I justice. such with one not but before,
that world the in love the all you sends Darcy Mr. laugh. I smiles, only
Christmas. at Pemberley to come to all are You me. from spare can he
etc.” Yours,

still and style; different a in was Catherine Lady to letter Darcy’s Mr.
reply in Collins, Mr. to sent Bennet Mr. what was either from different
last. his to

SIR, “DEAR

soon will Elizabeth congratulations. for more once you trouble must “I
can. you as well as Catherine Lady Console Darcy. Mr. of wife the be
give. to more has He nephew. the by stand would I you, were I if But,

etc.” sincerely, “Yours

approaching his on brother, her to congratulations Bingley’s Miss
even wrote She insincere. and affectionate was that all were marriage,
her all repeat and delight, her express to occasion, the on Jane to
was she but deceived, not was Jane regard. of professions former
writing help not could her, on reliance no feeling though and affected;
deserved. was knew she than answer kinder much a her

information, similar receiving on expressed Darcy Miss which joy The
were paper of sides Four it. sending in brother’s her as sincere as was
of desire earnest her all and delight, her all contain to insufficient
sister. her by loved being

congratulations any or Collins, Mr. from arrive could answer any Before
the that heard family Longbourn the wife, his from Elizabeth to
this of reason The Lodge. Lucas to themselves come were Collinses
rendered been had Catherine Lady evident. soon was removal sudden
that letter, nephew’s her of contents the by angry exceedingly so
till away get to anxious was match, the in rejoicing really Charlotte,
friend her of arrival the moment, a such At over. blown was storm the
their of course the in though Elizabeth, to pleasure sincere a was
she when bought, dearly pleasure the think sometimes must she meetings
of civility obsequious and parading the all to exposed Darcy Mr. saw
even could He calmness. admirable with however, it, bore He husband. her
away carrying on him complimented he when Lucas, William Sir to listen
all their of hopes his expressed and country, the of jewel brightest the
did he If composure. decent very with James’s, St. at frequently meeting
sight. of out was William Sir till not was it shoulders, his shrug

his on tax greater, a perhaps and another, was vulgarity Phillips’s Mrs.
in stood sister, her as well as Phillips, Mrs. though and forbearance;
good Bingley’s which familiarity the with speak to him of awe much too
vulgar. be must she speak, _did_ she whenever yet, encouraged, humour
all at quiet, more her made it though him, for respect her was Nor
shield to could she all did Elizabeth elegant. more her make to likely
keep to anxious ever was and either, of notice frequent the from him
converse might he whom with family her of those to and herself, to him
arising feelings uncomfortable the though and mortification; without
it pleasure, its of much courtship of season the from took this all from
to delight with forward looked she and future; the of hope the to added
pleasing little so society from removed be should they when time the
at party family their of elegance and comfort the all to either, to
Pemberley.



61 Chapter


got Bennet Mrs. which on day the was feelings maternal her all for Happy
pride delighted what With daughters. deserving most two her of rid
may Darcy, Mrs. of talked and Bingley, Mrs. visited afterwards she
the that family, her of sake the for say, could I wish I guessed. be
many so of establishment the in desire earnest her of accomplishment
sensible, a her make to as effect an happy so produced children her of
it perhaps though life; her of rest the for woman well-informed amiable,
felicity domestic relished have not might who husband, her for lucky was
and nervous occasionally was still she that form, a unusual so in
silly. invariably

her for affection his exceedingly; daughter second his missed Bennet Mr.
in delighted He do. could else anything than home from oftener him drew
expected. least was he when especially Pemberley, to going

near So twelvemonth. a only Netherfield at remained Jane and Bingley Mr.
to even desirable not was relations Meryton and mother her to vicinity a
his of wish darling The heart. affectionate _her_ or temper, easy _his_
county neighbouring a in estate an bought he gratified; then was sisters
source other every to addition in Elizabeth, and Jane and Derbyshire, to
other. each of miles thirty within were happiness, of

with time her of chief the spent advantage, material very her to Kitty,
generally had she what to superior so society In sisters. elder two her
a ungovernable so of not was She great. was improvement her known,
example, Lydia’s of influence the from removed and, Lydia; as temper
less irritable, less management, and attention proper by became, she
Lydia’s of disadvantage further the From insipid. less and ignorant,
Wickham Mrs. though and kept, carefully course of was she society
of promise the with her, with stay and come to her invited frequently
going. her to consent never would father her men, young and balls

necessarily was she and home; at remained who daughter only the was Mary
quite being Bennet’s Mrs. by accomplishments of pursuit the from drawn
but world, the with more mix to obliged was Mary alone. sit to unable
no was she as and visit; morning every over moralize still could she
own, her and beauty sisters’ her between comparisons by mortified longer
without change the to submitted she that father her by suspected was it
reluctance. much

from revolution no suffered characters their Lydia, and Wickham for As
that conviction the philosophy with bore He sisters. her of marriage the
ingratitude his of whatever with acquainted become now must Elizabeth
every of spite in and her; to unknown been before had falsehood and
on prevailed be yet might Darcy that hope without wholly not was thing,
received Elizabeth which letter congratulatory The fortune. his make to
least, at wife his by that, her to explained marriage, her on Lydia from
this to was letter The cherished. was hope a such himself, by not if
effect:

LIZZY, DEAR “MY

dear my do I as well as half Darcy Mr. love you If joy. you wish “I
so you have to comfort great a is It happy. very be must you Wickham,
us. of think will you hope I do, to else nothing have you when and rich,
not do I and much, very court at place a like would Wickham sure am I
help. some without upon live to enough money quite have shall we think
however, but year; a hundred four or three about of do, would place Any
not. rather had you if it, about Darcy Mr. to speak not do

etc.” “Yours,

in endeavoured she not, rather _much_ had Elizabeth that happened it As
kind. the of expectation and entreaty every to end an put to answer her
practice the by afford, to power her in was it as however, relief, Such
she expences, private own her in economy called be might what of
an such that her to evident been always had It them. sent frequently
in extravagant so persons two of direction the under theirs, as income
to insufficient very be must future, the of heedless and wants, their
or Jane either quarters, their changed they whenever and support; their
assistance little some for to applied being of sure were herself
the when even living, of manner Their bills. their discharging towards
the in unsettled was home, a to them dismissed peace of restoration
cheap a of quest in place to place from moving always were They extreme.
for affection His ought. they than more spending always and situation,
and longer; little a lasted hers indifference; into sunk soon her
to claims the all retained she manners, her and youth her of spite in
her. given had marriage her which reputation

for yet, Pemberley, at _him_ receive never could Darcy Though
was Lydia profession. his in further him assisted he sake, Elizabeth’s
himself enjoy to gone was husband her when there, visitor a occasionally
frequently them of both they Bingleys the with and Bath; or London in
he and overcome, was humour good Bingley’s even that long, so staid
gone. be to hint a them giving of talk to as far so proceeded

she as but marriage; Darcy’s by mortified deeply very was Bingley Miss
she Pemberley, at visiting of right the retain to advisable it thought
as almost Georgiana, of ever than fonder was resentment; her all dropt
civility of arrear every off paid and heretofore, as Darcy to attentive
Elizabeth. to

sisters the of attachment the and home; Georgiana’s now was Pemberley
each love to able were They see. to hoped had Darcy what exactly was
opinion highest the had Georgiana intended. they as well as even other
with listened often she first at though Elizabeth; of world the in
of manner sportive, lively, her at alarm on bordering astonishment an
respect a herself in inspired always had who He, brother. her to talking
open of object the saw now she affection, her overcame almost which
fallen before never had which knowledge received mind Her pleasantry.
that comprehend to began she instructions, Elizabeth’s By way. her in
not will brother a which husband her with liberties take may woman a
himself. than younger years ten than more sister a in allow always

nephew; her of marriage the on indignant extremely was Catherine Lady
in character her of frankness genuine the all to way gave she as and
him sent she arrangement, its announced which letter the to reply her
time some for that Elizabeth, of especially abusive, very so language
persuasion, Elizabeth’s by length, at But end. an at was intercourse all
reconciliation; a seek and offence, the overlook to on prevailed was he
her aunt, his of part the on resistance further little a after and,
curiosity her or him, for affection her to either way, gave resentment
wait to condescended she and herself; conducted wife his how see to
had woods its which pollution that of spite in Pemberley, at them on
the but mistress, a such of presence the from merely not received,
city. the from aunt and uncle her of visits

terms. intimate most the on always were they Gardiners, the With
ever both were they and them; loved really Elizabeth, as well as Darcy,
bringing by who, persons the towards gratitude warmest the of sensible
them. uniting of means the been had Derbyshire, into her
estate Their Sussex. in settled been long had Dashwood of family The
of centre the in Park, Norland at was residence their and large, was
so in lived had they generations, many for where, property, their
their of opinion good general the engage to as manner a respectable
single a was estate this of owner late The acquaintance. surrounding
his of years many for who and age, advanced very a to lived who man,
her But sister. his in housekeeper and companion constant a had life,
great a produced own, his before years ten happened which death,
received and invited he loss, her supply to for home; his in alteration
legal the Dashwood, Henry Mr. nephew his of family the house his into
to intended he whom to person the and estate, Norland the of inheritor
their and niece, and nephew his of society the In it. bequeath
His spent. comfortably were days Gentleman's old the children,
and Mr. of attention constant The increased. all them to attachment
from merely not proceeded which wishes, his to Dashwood Henry Mrs.
solid of degree every him gave heart, of goodness from but interest,
the of cheerfulness the and receive; could age his which comfort
existence. his to relish a added children

present his by son: one had Dashwood Henry Mr. marriage, former a By
was man, young respectable steady a son, The daughters. three lady,
large, been had which mother, his of fortune the by for provided amply
own his By age. of coming his on him on devolved which of half and
his to added he afterwards, soon happened which likewise, marriage,
not was estate Norland the to succession the therefore him To wealth.
independent fortune, their for sisters; his to as important really so
that inheriting father's their from them to arise might what of
their and nothing, had mother Their small. but be could property,
the for disposal; own his in pounds thousand seven only father
her to secured also was fortune wife's first his of moiety remaining
it. in life-interest a only had he and child,

other every almost like and read, was will his died: gentleman old The
so neither was He pleasure. as disappointment much as gave will,
nephew;--but his from estate his leave to as ungrateful, so nor unjust,
the of value the half destroyed as terms such on him to it left he
wife his of sake the for more it for wished had Dashwood Mr. bequest.
his and son, his to son;--but his or himself for than daughters and
as way, a such in secured, was it old, years four of child a son, son's
dear most were who those for providing of power no himself to leave to
or estate, the on charge any by provision a needed most who and him, to
the for up tied was whole The woods. valuable its of sale any by
and father his with visits occasional in who, child, this of benefit
by uncle, his of affections the on gained far so had Norland, at mother
three or two of children in unusual means no by are as attractions such
his having of desire earnest an articulation, imperfect an old; years
outweigh to as noise, of deal great a and tricks, cunning many way, own
received had he years, for which, attention the all of value the all
however, unkind, be to not meant He daughters. her and niece his from
a them left he girls, three the for affection his of mark a as and,
a-piece. pounds thousand

was temper his but severe; first, at was, disappointment Dashwood's Mr.
years, many live to hope reasonably might he and sanguine; and cheerful
produce the from sum considerable a by lay economically, living by and
immediate almost of capable and large, already estate an of
was coming, in tardy so been had which fortune, the But improvement.
ten and longer; no uncle his survived He twelvemonth. one only his
for remained that all was legacies, late the including pounds, thousand
daughters. and widow his

Mr. him to and known, was danger his as soon as for sent was son His
illness which urgency and strength the all with recommended, Dashwood
sisters. and mother-in-law his of interest the command, could

the of rest the of feelings strong the not had Dashwood John Mr.
at nature a such of recommendation a by affected was he but family;
make to power his in thing every do to promised he and time, a such
assurance, an such by easy rendered was father His comfortable. them
might there much how consider to leisure then had Dashwood John Mr. and
them. for do to power his in be prudently

hearted cold rather be to unless man, young ill-disposed an not was He
well general, in was, he but ill-disposed: be to is selfish rather and
of discharge the in propriety with himself conducted he for respected;
might he woman, amiable more a married he Had duties. ordinary his
have even might was:--he he than respectable more still made been have
and married, he when young very was he for himself; amiable made been
caricature strong a was Dashwood John Mrs. But wife. his of fond very
selfish. and narrow-minded himself;--more of

to himself within meditated he father, his to promise his gave he When
thousand a of present the by sisters his of fortunes the increase
The it. to equal himself thought really then He a-piece. pounds
income, present his to addition in a-year, thousand four of prospect
his warmed fortune, mother's own his of half remaining the besides
give would he "Yes, generosity.-- of capable feel him made and heart,
would It handsome! and liberal be would it pounds: thousand three them
he pounds! thousand Three easy. completely them make to enough be
He inconvenience."-- little with sum a considerable so spare could
did he and successively, days many for and long, day all it of thought
repent. not

Dashwood, John Mrs. than over, funeral father's his was sooner No
mother-in-law, her to intention her of notice any sending without
her dispute could one No attendants. their and child her with arrived
his of moment the from husband's her was house the come; to right
the much so was conduct her of indelicacy the but decease; father's
common only with situation, Dashwood's Mrs. in woman a to and greater,
was there mind HER in unpleasing;--but highly been have must feelings,
of offence any that romantic, so generosity a keen, so honor of sense a
of source a her to was received, or given whomsoever by kind, the
with favourite a been never had Dashwood John Mrs. disgust. immovable
the till opportunity, no had had she but family; husband's her of any
of comfort the to attention little how with them shewing of present,
it. required occasion when act could she people other

so and behaviour, ungracious this feel Dashwood Mrs. did acutely So
the on that, it, for daughter-in-law her despise she did earnestly
had ever, for house the quitted have would she latter, the of arrival
the on reflect to first her induced girl eldest her of entreaty the not
children three her all for love tender own her and going, of propriety
breach a avoid sakes their for and stay, to afterwards her determined
brother. their with

possessed effectual, so was advice whose daughter, eldest this Elinor,
qualified which judgment, of coolness and understanding, of strength a
and mother, her of counsellor the be to nineteen, only though her,
all, them of advantage the to counteract, to frequently her enabled
led have generally must which Dashwood Mrs. in mind of eagerness that
was disposition heart;--her excellent an had She imprudence. to
govern to how knew she but strong; were feelings her and affectionate,
which and learn; to yet had mother her which knowledge a was it them:
taught. be to never resolved had sisters her of one

Elinor's. to equal quite respects, many in were, abilities Marianne's
her sorrows, her everything: in eager but clever; and sensible was She
amiable, generous, was She moderation. no have could joys,
between resemblance The prudent. but everything was she interesting:
great. strikingly was mother her and her

but sensibility; sister's her of excess the concern, with saw, Elinor
each encouraged They cherished. and valued was it Dashwood Mrs. by
grief of agony The affliction. their of violence the in now other
sought was renewed, voluntarily was first, at them overpowered which
to wholly up themselves gave They again. and again created was for,
that reflection every in wretchedness of increase seeking sorrow, their
in consolation admitting ever against resolved and it, afford could
could she still but afflicted; deeply was too, Elinor, future.
brother, her with consult could She herself. exert could she struggle,
with her treat and arrival, her on sister-in-law her receive could
similar to mother her rouse to strive could and attention; proper
forbearance. similar to her encourage and exertion,

but girl; well-disposed good-humored, a was sister, other the Margaret,
without romance, Marianne's of deal good a imbibed already had she as
equal to fair bid thirteen, at not, did she sense, her of much having
life. of period advanced more a at sisters her



2 CHAPTER


her and Norland; of mistress herself installed now Dashwood John Mrs.
visitors. of condition the to degraded were sisters-in-law and mother
by and civility; quiet with her by treated were they however, such, As
anybody towards feel could he as kindness much as with husband her
them, pressed really He child. their and wife, his himself, beyond
no as and, home; their as Norland consider to earnestness, some with
she till there remaining as Dashwood Mrs. to eligible so appeared plan
his neighbourhood, the in house a with herself accommodate could
accepted. was invitation

former of her reminded everything where place a in continuance A
cheerfulness, of seasons In mind. her suited what exactly was delight,
greater a in possess, or hers, than cheerful more be could temper no
happiness is which happiness of expectation sanguine that degree,
fancy, her by away carried equally be must she sorrow in But itself.
alloy. beyond was she pleasure in as consolation beyond far as and

intended husband her what of approve all at not did Dashwood John Mrs.
fortune the from pounds thousand three take To sisters. his for do to
most the to him impoverishing be would boy little dear their of
How subject. the on again think to him begged She degree. dreadful
too, child only his and child, his rob to himself to it answer he could
Dashwoods, Miss the could claim possible what And sum? a large so of
no as considered she which blood, half by only him to related were who
It amount. an large so to generosity his on have all, at relationship
exist to supposed ever was affection no that known well very was
he was why and marriages; different by man any of children the between
his all away giving by Harry, little poor their and himself, ruin to
sisters? half his to money

I "that husband, her replied me," to request last father's my was "It
daughters." and widow his assist should

he but one to ten say; dare I of, talking was he what know not did "He
he senses, right his in been he Had time. the at light-headed was
half away give to you begging as thing a such of thought have not could
child." own your from fortune your

only he Fanny; dear my sum, particular any for stipulate not did "He
their make and them, assist to terms, general in me, requested
it Perhaps do. to power his in was it than comfortable more situation
could He myself. to wholly it left had he if well as been have would
promise, the required he as But them. neglect should I suppose hardly
time. the at so thought I least at it; give than less do not could I
Something performed. be must and given, was therefore, promise, The
new a in settle and Norland leave they whenever them for done be must
home."

need something THAT but them; for done be something LET then, "Well,
the when "that added, she Consider," pounds. thousand three be not
will sisters Your return. can never it with, parted once is money
restored be could it indeed, If, ever. for gone be will it and marry,
boy--" little poor our to

make would "that gravely, very husband, her said sure," be to "Why,
so that regret will Harry when come may time The difference. great
for family, numerous a have should he If with. parted was sum a large
addition." convenient very a be would it instance,

would." it sure be "To

were sum the if parties, all for better be would it then, "Perhaps,
prodigious a be would pounds hundred half.--Five one diminished
fortunes!" their to increase

so half do would earth on brother What great! anything beyond "Oh!
is--only it as And sisters! his REALLY if even sisters, his for much
spirit!" generous a such have you blood!--But half

rather, had "One replied. he mean," thing any do to wish not would "I
can least, at one, No little. too than much too do occasions, such on
hardly can they themselves, even them: for enough done not have I think
more." expect

are we "but lady, the said expect," may THEY what knowing no is "There
can you what is, question the expectations: their of think to not
do." to afford

pounds hundred five them give to afford may I think I "Certainly--and
have each will they mine, of addition any without is, it As a-piece.
comfortable very death--a mother's their on pounds thousand three about
woman." young any for fortune

no want can they that me strikes it indeed, and, is; it sure be "To
amongst divided pounds thousand ten have will They all. at addition
do they if and well, doing of sure be will they marry, they If them.
ten of interest the on together comfortably very live all may they not,
pounds." thousand

the upon whether, know not do I therefore, and, true, very is "That
mother their for something do to advisable more be not would it whole,
I kind annuity the of them--something for than rather lives, she while
herself. as well as it of effects good the feel would sisters mean.--My
comfortable." perfectly all them make would year a hundred A

this to consent her giving in however, little, a hesitated wife His
plan.

hundred fifteen with parting than better is "it she, said sure," be "To
years fifteen live should Dashwood Mrs. if then, But, once. at pounds
in." taken completely be shall we

that half worth be cannot life her Fanny; dear my years! "Fifteen
purchase."

when ever for live always people observe, you if but not; "Certainly
healthy, and stout very is she and them; paid be to annuity an is there
over comes it business; serious very a is annuity An forty. hardly and
not are You it. of rid getting no is there and year, every over and
trouble the of deal great a known have I doing. are you what of aware
to three of payment the with clogged was mother my for annuities; of
how amazing is it and will, father's my by servants superannuated old
be to were annuities these year every Twice it. found she disagreeable
then and them; to it getting of trouble the was there then and paid;
be to out turned it afterwards and died, have to said was them of one
her not was income Her it. of sick quite was mother My thing. such no
more the was it and it; on claims perpetual such with said, she own,
been have would money the otherwise, because, father, my in unkind
It whatever. restriction any without disposal, mother's my at entirely
would I sure am I that annuities, of abhorrence an such me given has
world." the all for one of payment the to down myself pin not

have "to Dashwood, Mr. replied thing," unpleasant an certainly is "It
your as fortune, One's income. one's on drains yearly of kind those
regular the to down tied be To own. one's NOT is says, justly mother
it desirable: means no by is day, rent every on sum, a such of payment
independence." one's away takes

think They it. for thanks no have you all after and "Undoubtedly;
raises it and expected, is what than more no do you secure, themselves
at done be should did I whatever you, were I If all. at gratitude no
any them allow to myself bind not would I entirely. discretion own my
a spare to years some inconvenient very be may It yearly. thing
expenses." own our from pounds fifty even or hundred,

should there that better be will it love; my right, are you believe "I
will occasionally them give may I whatever case; the in annuity no be
they because allowance, yearly a than assistance greater far of be
larger a of sure felt they if living of style their enlarge only would
the of end the at it for richer the sixpence be not would and income,
fifty of present A way. best the much be certainly will It year.
for distressed being ever their prevent will then, and now pounds,
father." my to promise my discharging amply be think, I will, and money,

within convinced am I truth, the say to Indeed, will. it sure be "To
at money any them giving your of idea no had father your that myself
might as such only was say, dare I of, thought he assistance The all.
a for out looking as such instance, for you; of expected reasonably be
things, their move to them helping them, for house small comfortable
they whenever forth, so and game, and fish of presents them sending and
indeed, farther; nothing meant he that life my lay I'll season. in are
consider, but Do did. he if unreasonable and strange very be would it
mother-in-law your comfortable excessively how Dashwood, Mr. dear my
pounds, thousand seven of interest the on live may daughters her and
which girls, the of each to belonging pounds thousand the besides
will they course, of and, a-piece, year a pounds fifty in them brings
have will they Altogether, it. of out board their for mother their pay
want women four can earth on what and them, amongst a-year hundred five
will housekeeping Their cheap! so live will that?--They than more for
hardly and horses, no carriage, no have will They all. at nothing be
of expenses no have can and company, no keep will they servants; any
a hundred Five be! will they comfortable how conceive Only kind! any
as and it; of half spend will they how imagine cannot I sure am I year!
will They it. of think to absurd quite is it more, them giving your to
something." YOU give to able more much be

right. perfectly are you believe "I Dashwood, Mr. said word," my "Upon
than me to request his by more nothing mean could certainly father My
fulfil strictly will I and now, it understand clearly I say. you what
you as them to kindness and assistance of acts such by engagement my
services my house another into removes mother my When described. have
little Some can. I as far as her accommodate to given readily be shall
then." acceptable be may too furniture of present

thing ONE however, "But, Dashwood. John Mrs. returned "Certainly,"
Norland, to moved mother and father your When considered. be must
and plate, china, the all sold, was Stanhill of furniture the though
will house Her mother. your to left now is and saved, was linen
it." takes she as soon as up fitted completely almost be therefore

legacy valuable A undoubtedly. consideration material a is "That
pleasant very a been have would plate the of some yet And indeed!
here." stock own our to addition

what as handsome as twice is china breakfast of set the and "Yes;
for opinion, my in handsome, too deal great A house. this to belongs
is. it so however, But, in. live to afford ever can THEY place any
no owe you that this: say must I And THEM. of only thought father Your
very we for wishes; his to attention nor him, to gratitude particular
the in everything almost left have would he could, he if that know well
THEM." to world

of whatever intentions his to gave It irresistible. was argument This
be would it that resolved, finally he and before; wanting was decision
the for more do to indecorous, highly not if unnecessary, absolutely
as acts neighbourly of kind such than father, his of children and widow
out. pointed wife own his



3 CHAPTER


any from not months; several Norland at remained Dashwood Mrs.
ceased spot known well every of sight the when move to disinclination
when for while; a for produced it which emotion violent the raise to
other some of capable became mind her and revive, to began spirits her
melancholy by affliction its heightening of that than exertion
her in indefatigable and gone, be to impatient was she remembrances,
for Norland; of neighbourhood the in dwelling suitable a for inquiries
could she But impossible. was spot beloved that from far remove to
and comfort of notions her answered once at that situation no of hear
steadier whose daughter, eldest her of prudence the suited and ease,
which income, their for large too as houses several rejected judgment
approved. have would mother her

on promise solemn the of husband her by informed been had Dashwood Mrs.
last his to comfort gave which favour, their in son his of part the
no assurance this of sincerity the doubted She reflections. earthly
her for it of thought she and himself, it doubted had he than more
was she herself for as though satisfaction, with sake daughters'
in her support would 7000L than provision smaller much a that persuaded
own his of sake the for too, sake, brother's their For affluence.
his to unjust being for herself reproached she and rejoiced; she heart,
attentive His generosity. of incapable him believing in before, merit
welfare their that her convinced sisters his and herself to behaviour
the on relied firmly she time, long a for and, him, to dear was
intentions. his of liberality

for felt acquaintance, their in early very had, she which contempt The
knowledge farther the by increased much very was daughter-in-law, her
afforded; family her in residence year's a half which character, her of
maternal or politeness of consideration every of spite in perhaps and
it found have might ladies two the former, the of side the on affection
particular a not had long, so together lived have to impossible
to according eligibility, greater still give to occurred circumstance
Norland. at continuance daughters' her to Dashwood, Mrs. of opinions the

and girl eldest her between attachment growing a was circumstance This
young pleasing and gentleman-like a Dashwood, John Mrs. of brother the
sister's his after soon acquaintance their to introduced was who man,
of part greatest the spent since had who and Norland, at establishment
there. time his

of motives from intimacy the encouraged have might mothers Some
died had who man a of son eldest the was Ferrars Edward for interest,
prudence, of motives from it repressed have might some and rich; very
the on depended fortune his of whole the sum, trifling a except for,
either by uninfluenced alike was Dashwood Mrs. But mother. his of will
amiable, be to appeared he that her for enough was It consideration.
partiality. the returned Elinor that and daughter, her loved he that
fortune of difference that hers of doctrine every to contrary was It
of resemblance by attracted were who asunder couple any keep should
by acknowledged be not should merit Elinor's that and disposition;
impossible. comprehension her to was her, knew who one every

any by opinion good their to recommended not was Ferrars Edward
his and handsome, not was He address. or person of graces peculiar
diffident too was He pleasing. them make to intimacy required manners
overcome, was shyness natural his when but himself; to justice do to
heart. affectionate open, an of indication every gave behaviour his
solid it given had education his and good, was understanding His
to disposition nor abilities by fitted neither was he But improvement.
him see to longed who sister, and mother his of wishes the answer
a make to him wanted They what. knew hardly distinguished--as--they
to wished mother His other. or manner some in world the in figure fine
to or parliament, into him get to concerns, political in him interest
John Mrs. day. the of men great the of some with connected him see
these of one till while, mean the in but likewise; it wished Dashwood
her quieted have would it attained, be could blessings superior
for turn no had Edward But barouche. a driving him see to ambition
comfort domestic in centered wishes his All barouches. or men great
brother younger a had he Fortunately life. private of quiet the and
promising. more was who

engaged he before house the in weeks several staying been had Edward
such in time, that at was, she for attention; Dashwood's Mrs. of much
saw She objects. surrounding of careless her rendered as affliction
He it. for him liked she and unobtrusive, and quiet was he that only
conversation. ill-timed by mind her of wretchedness the disturb not did
a by farther, him approve and observe to called first was She
difference the on make to day one chanced Elinor which reflection
him recommended which contrast a was It sister. his and him between
mother. her to forcibly most

enough. is Fanny unlike is he that say "to she; said enough," is "It
already." him love I amiable. everything implies It

him." of more know you "when Elinor, said him," like will you think "I

of sentiment no feel "I smile. a with mother her replied him!" "Like
love." to inferior approbation

him." esteem may "You

love." and esteem separate to was it what known yet never have "I

manners Her him. with acquainted get to pains took now Dashwood Mrs.
speedily She reserve. his banished soon and attaching, were
Elinor for regard his of persuasion the merits; his all comprehended
his of assured felt really she but penetration; her assisted perhaps
all against militated which manner, of quietness that even and worth:
no was be, to ought address man's young a what of ideas established her
temper his and warm be to heart his knew she when uninteresting longer
affectionate.

to behaviour his in love of symptom any perceive she did sooner No
and certain, as attachment serious their considered she than Elinor,
approaching. rapidly as marriage their to forward looked

all in will, "Elinor she, said Marianne." dear my months, few a "In
be will SHE but her; miss shall We life. for settled be probability
happy."

her?" without do we shall how Mama, "Oh!

few a within live shall We separation. a scarcely be will it love, "My
will You lives. our of day every meet shall and other, each of miles
highest the have I brother. affectionate real, a brother, a gain
Marianne; grave, look you But heart. Edward's of world the in opinion
choice?" sister's your disapprove you do

surprise. some with it consider may "I Marianne, said "Perhaps,"
not is yet--he But tenderly. him love I and amiable, very is Edward
not is figure wanting--his something is man--there young of kind the
man the in expect should I which grace that of none has it striking;
spirit, that all want eyes His sister. my attach seriously could who
besides And intelligence. and virtue announce once at which fire, that
seems Music taste. real no has he Mama, afraid, am I this, all
very drawings Elinor's admires he though and him, attract to scarcely
their understand can who person a of admiration the not is it much,
while her to attention frequent his of spite in evident, is It worth.
as admires He matter. the of nothing knows he fact in that draws, she
be must characters those me, satisfy To connoisseur. a as not lover, a
every in not did taste whose man a with happy be not could I united.
the feelings; my all into enter must He own. my with coincide point
how mama, Oh! both. us charm must music same the books, same
night! last us to reading in manner Edward's was tame how spiritless,
much so with it bore she Yet severely. most sister my for felt I
my keep hardly could I it. notice to scarcely seemed she composure,
almost frequently have which lines beautiful those hear To seat.
such calmness, impenetrable such with pronounced wild, me driven
indifference!" dreadful

prose. elegant and simple to justice more done have certainly would "He
Cowper." him give WOULD you but time; the at so thought I

allow must we Cowper!--but by animated be to not is he if Mama, "Nay,
she therefore and feelings, my not has Elinor taste. of difference for
MY broke have would it But him. with happy be and it, overlook may
sensibility. little so with read him hear to him, loved I had heart,
I that convinced I am more the world, the of know I more the Mama,
He much! so require I love. really can I whom man a see never shall
must manners and person his and virtues, Edward's all have must
charm." possible every with goodness his ornament

in early too yet is It seventeen. not are you that love, my "Remember,
fortunate less be you should Why happiness. a such of despair to life
your may Marianne, my only, circumstance one In mother? your than
hers!" from different be destiny



4 CHAPTER


no have should Edward "that Marianne, said Elinor," is, it pity a "What
drawing." for taste

He so? think you should "why Elinor, replied drawing!" for taste "No
the seeing in pleasure great has he but indeed, himself, draw not does
means no by is he you assure I and people, other of performances
of opportunities had not has he though taste, natural in deficient
he think I learning, of way the in been ever he Had it. improving
such in judgment own his distrusts He well. very drawn have would
any on opinion his give to unwilling always is he that much, so matters
which taste, of simplicity and propriety innate an has he but picture;
right." perfectly him direct general in

but subject; the on more no said and offending, of afraid was Marianne
the by him in excited as described Elinor which approbation of kind the
delight, rapturous that from far very was people, other of drawings
though Yet, taste. called be alone could opinion, her in which,
that for sister her honoured she mistake, the at herself within smiling
it. produced which Edward to partiality blind

as him consider not do "you Elinor, continued Marianne," hope, "I
cannot, you that say may I think I Indeed, taste. general in deficient
your were THAT if and cordial, perfectly is him to behaviour your for
him." to civil be never could you sure am I opinion,

of feelings the wound not would She say. to what knew hardly Marianne
was believe not did she what say to yet and account, any on sister her
replied: she length At impossible.

thing every in not is him of praise my if Elinor, offended, be not "Do
many so had not have I merits. his of sense your to equal
his mind, his of propensities minuter the estimating of opportunities
in opinion highest the have I but have; you as tastes, and inclinations
is that thing every him think I sense. and goodness his of world the
amiable." and worthy

friends dearest his "that smile, a with Elinor, replied sure," am "I
not do I that. as commendation such with dissatisfied be not could
warmly." more yourself express could you how perceive

pleased. easily so sister her find to rejoiced was Marianne

I can, one "no Elinor, continued goodness," his and sense his "Of
in him engage to enough often him seen has who doubt, in be think,
his and understanding his of excellence The conversation. unreserved
keeps often too which shyness that by only concealed be can principles
worth. solid his to justice do to him of enough know You silent. him
from have you them call you as propensities, minuter his of But
I and He myself. than ignorant more kept been circumstances peculiar
been have you while together, deal good a thrown times at been have
I mother. my by principle affectionate most the on engrossed wholly
heard and sentiments his studied have him, of deal great a seen have
I whole, the upon and, taste; and literature of subjects on opinion his
books of enjoyment well-informed, is mind his that pronounce to venture
and just observation his lively, imagination his great, exceedingly
every in abilities His pure. and delicate taste his and correct,
person. and manners his as acquaintance upon much as improve respect
person his and striking; not certainly is address his sight, first At
which eyes, his of expression the till handsome, called be hardly can
is countenance, his of sweetness general the and good, uncommonly are
really him think I that well, so him know I present, At perceived.
Marianne?" you, say What so. almost least, at or handsome;

When now. not do I if Elinor, handsome, him think soon very shall "I
imperfection see more no shall I brother, a as him love to me tell you
heart." his in do now I than face, his in

she warmth the for sorry was and declaration, this at started Elinor
stood Edward that felt She him. of speaking in into, betrayed been had
but mutual; be to regard the believed She opinion. her in high very
of conviction Marianne's make to it of certainty greater required she
her and Marianne what that knew She her. to agreeable attachment their
them, with next--that the believed they moment, one conjectured mother
explain to tried She expect. to was hope to and hope, to was wish to
sister. her to case the of state real the

of highly very think I "that she, said deny," to attempt not do "I
him." like I that esteem, greatly I him--that

indignation-- with forth burst here Marianne

than worse Oh! Elinor! Cold-hearted him! Like him! "Esteem
I and again, words those Use otherwise. being of Ashamed cold-hearted!
moment." this room the leave will

assured be "and she; said me," "Excuse laughing. help not could Elinor
my of way, a quiet so in speaking, by you, to offence no meant I that
declared; have I than stronger be to them Believe feelings. own
suspicion--the the and merit, his as such be to short, in them, believe
folly. or imprudence without warrant, may me for affection his of hope
assured means no by am I believe. not must you this than farther But
seems it of extent the when moments are There me. for regard his of
at wonder cannot you known, fully are sentiments his till and doubtful;
by partiality, own my of encouragement any avoid to wishing my
feel I heart my In is. it than more it calling or believing
other are there But preference. his of doubt any little--scarcely
from far very is He inclination. his besides considered be to points
from but, know; cannot we is really mother his What independent. being
never have we opinions, and conduct her of mention occasional Fanny's
if mistaken much very am I and amiable; her think to disposed been
in difficulties many be would there that aware himself not is Edward
great a either not had who woman a marry to wish to were he if way, his
rank." high or fortune

mother her of imagination the much how find to astonished was Marianne
truth. the outstripped had herself and

certainly it "Yet she. said him!" to engaged not are really you "And
I delay. this from proceed will advantages two But happen. will soon
of opportunity greater have will Edward and soon, so you lose not shall
be must which pursuit favourite your for taste natural that improving
should he if Oh! felicity. future your to necessary indispensably so
how himself, draw to learn to as genius your by stimulated far so be
be!" would it delightful

not could She sister. her to opinion real her given had Elinor
Marianne as state a prosperous so in Edward for partiality her consider
him about spirits of want a times, at was, There it. believed had
as almost something of spoke indifference, denote not did it if which,
not need it, feel to him supposing regard, her of doubt A unpromising.
that produce to likely be not would It inquietude. than more him give
reasonable more A him. attended frequently which mind of dejection
the forbade which situation dependent the in found be might cause
behaved neither mother his that knew She affection. his of indulgence
him give to nor present, at comfortable home his make to as so him to
strictly without himself, for home a form might he that assurance any
knowledge a such With aggrandizement. his for views her to attending
She subject. the on easy feel to Elinor for impossible was it this, as
which her, of preference his of result that on depending from far was
longer the Nay, certain. as considered still sister and mother her
regard; his of nature the seemed doubtful more the together were they
more no be to it believed she minutes, painful few a for sometimes, and
friendship. than

perceived when enough, was it limits, its be really might whatever But,
was (which time, same the at and uneasy, her make to sister, his by
first the took She uncivil. her make to common,) more still
to talking occasion, the on mother-in-law her affronting of opportunity
Mrs. of expectations, great brother's her of expressively so her
the of and well, marry should sons her both that resolution Ferrars's
that IN; HIM DRAW to attempted who woman young any attending danger
to endeavor nor unconscious, be to pretend neither could Dashwood Mrs.
and contempt, her marked which answer an her gave She calm. be
the be might whatever that, resolving room, the left instantly
Elinor beloved her removal, a sudden so of expense or inconvenience
insinuations. such to week another exposed be not should

the from her to delivered was letter a spirits, her of state this In
the was It timed. well particularly proposal a contained which post,
of relation a to belonging terms, easy very on house, small a of offer
The Devonshire. in property and consequence of gentleman a own, her
spirit true the in written and himself, gentleman this from was letter
a of need in was she that understood He accommodation. friendly of
cottage, a merely was her offered now he house the though and dwelling;
might she which it to done be should everything that her assured he
pressed earnestly He her. pleased situation the if necessary, think
with come to garden, and house the of particulars the giving after her,
from residence, own his of place the Park, Barton to daughters her
houses the for Cottage, Barton whether herself, judge, might she whence
comfortable made be alteration, any by could, parish, same the in were
of whole the and them accommodate to anxious really seemed He her. to
of fail not could as style a friendly so in written was letter his
was she when moment a at especially more cousin; his to pleasure giving
nearer her of behaviour unfeeling and cold the under suffering
Her inquiry. or deliberation for time no needed She connections.
a in Barton, of situation The read. she as formed was resolution
hours few a but which, Devonshire, as Sussex from distant far so county
every outweigh to objection sufficient a been have would before,
first its now was place, the to belonging advantage possible
an longer no was Norland of neighbourhood the quit To recommendation.
of comparison in blessing, a was it desire; of object an was it evil;
for remove to and guest; daughter-in-law's her continuing of misery the
or inhabit to than painful less be would place beloved that from ever
Sir wrote instantly She mistress. its was woman a such while it visit
acceptance her and kindness, his of acknowledgment her Middleton John
her to letters both shew to hastened then and proposal; his of
her before approbation their of secure be might she that daughters,
sent. were answer

settle to them for prudent more be would it thought always had Elinor
present their amongst immediately than Norland, from distance some at
oppose to her for not was it therefore, head, THAT On acquaintance.
as too, house, The Devonshire. into removing of intention mother's her
so rent the and scale, a simple so on was John, Sir by described
either on objection of right no her leave to as moderate, uncommonly
charm any brought which plan a not was it though therefore, and, point;
Norland of vicinity the from removal a was it though fancy, her to
from mother her dissuade to attempt no made she wishes, her beyond
acquiescence. of letter a sending



5 CHAPTER


herself indulged Dashwood Mrs. than dispatched, answer her was sooner No
she that wife his and son-in-law her to announcing of pleasure the in
till than longer no them incommode should and house, a with provided was
with her heard They it. inhabiting her for ready were thing every
hoped civilly husband her but nothing; said Dashwood John Mrs. surprise.
great had She Norland. from far settled be not would she that
Devonshire.--Edward into going was she that replying in satisfaction
surprise of voice a in and, this, hearing on her, towards hastily turned
repeated, her, to explanation no required which concern, and
to And hence! from far So there? going indeed, you, Are "Devonshire!
miles four within was It situation. the explained She it?" of part what
Exeter. of northward

my of many see to hope I "but continued, she cottage," a but is "It
friends my if and added; be easily can two or room A it. in friends
will I sure am I me, see to far so travelling in difficulty no find
them." accommodating in none find

Dashwood John Mrs. and Mr. to invitation kind very a with concluded She
greater still with one gave she Edward to and Barton; at her visit to
had daughter-in-law her with conversation late her Though affection.
was than longer no Norland at remaining on resolve her made
that in her on effect smallest the produced not had it unavoidable,
Elinor and Edward separate To tended. principally it which to point
Mrs. show to wished she and ever; as object her being from far as was
totally how brother, her to invitation pointed this by Dashwood, John
match. the of disapprobation her disregarded she

sorry exceedingly how again and again mother his told Dashwood John Mr.
to as Norland from distance a such at house a taken had she that was he
He furniture. her removing in her to service any of being his prevent
very the for occasion; the on vexed conscientiously felt really
his to promise his of performance the limited had he which to exertion
furniture The impracticable.-- rendered arrangement this by was father
linen, household of consisted chiefly It water. by around sent all was
Marianne's. of pianoforte handsome a with books, and china, plate,
not could she sigh: a with depart packages the saw Dashwood John Mrs.
so be would income Dashwood's Mrs. as that hard it feeling help
handsome any have should she own, their with comparison in trifling
furniture. of article

furnished, ready was it twelvemonth; a for house the took Dashwood Mrs.
either on arose difficulty No possession. immediate have might she and
her of disposal the for only waited she and agreement; the in side
she before household, future her determine to and Norland, at effects
the in rapid exceedingly was she as this, and west; the for off set
done.--The soon was her, interested that everything of performance
his after soon sold been had husband her by her left were which horses
carriage, her of disposing of offering now opportunity an and death,
eldest her of advice earnest the at likewise that sell to agreed she
her only consulted she had children, her of comfort the For daughter.
Elinor of discretion the but it; kept have would she wishes, own
to servants their of number the limited too wisdom HER prevailed.
from provided speedily were they whom with man, a and maids two three;
Norland. at establishment their formed had who those amongst

Devonshire, into immediately off sent were maids the of one and man The
Lady as for arrival; mistress's their for house the prepare to
going preferred she Dashwood, Mrs. to unknown entirely was Middleton
she and Park; Barton at visitor a being to cottage the to directly
to as house, the of description John's Sir on undoubtingly so relied
own. her as it entered she till herself it examine to curiosity no feel
by diminution from preserved was Norland from gone be to eagerness Her
her of prospect the in daughter-in-law her of satisfaction evident the
concealed be to attempted feebly but was which satisfaction a removal;
the was Now departure. her defer to her to invitation cold a under
particular with might father his to promise son-in-law's her when time
first on it do to neglected had he Since fulfilled. be propriety
as on looked be might house his quitting their estate, the to coming
Dashwood Mrs. But accomplishment. its for period suitable most the
convinced, be to and kind, the of hope every over give to shortly began
extended assistance his that discourse, his of drift general the from
so He Norland. at months six for maintenance their than farther no
of and housekeeping, of expenses increasing the of talked frequently
in consequence any of man a which purse, his upon demands perpetual the
to rather seemed he that to, exposed calculation beyond was world the
giving of design any have to than himself money more of need in stand
away. money

Middleton's John Sir brought which day the from weeks few very a In
future their in settled far so was thing every Norland, to letter first
their begin to daughters her and Dashwood Mrs. enable to as abode
journey.

so place a to adieus last their in them by shed tears the were Many
wandered she as Marianne, said Norland!" dear "Dear, beloved. much
"when there; being their of evening last the on house, the before alone
elsewhere!--Oh! home a feel to learn you!--when regret to cease I shall
this from you viewing now in suffer I what know you could house, happy
ye you, more!--And no you view may I perhaps whence from spot,
decay will leaf same.--No the continue will you trees!--but well-known
we although motionless become branch any nor removed, are we because
unconscious same; the continue will you longer!--No; no you observe can
any of insensible and occasion, you regret the or pleasure the of
to remain will who shade!--But your under walk who those in change
you?" enjoy



6 CHAPTER


a melancholy too in performed was journey their of part first The
they as But unpleasant. and tedious than otherwise be to disposition
a of appearance the in interest their it, of end the towards drew
view a and dejection, their overcame inhabit to were they which country
a was It cheerfulness. them gave it entered they as Valley Barton of
winding After pasture. in rich and wooded, well spot, fertile pleasant
small A house. own their reached they mile, a than more for it along
wicket neat a and front; in demesne its of whole the was court green
it. into them admitted gate

compact; and comfortable was small, though Cottage, Barton house, a As
the regular, was building the for defective, was it cottage a as but
were nor green, painted not were shutters window the tiled, was roof
directly led passage narrow A honeysuckles. with covered walls the
entrance the of side each On behind. garden the into house the through
the were them beyond and square; feet sixteen about room, sitting a was
rest the formed garrets two and bed-rooms Four stairs. the and offices
repair. good in was and years many built been not had It house. the of
tears the indeed!--but small and poor was it Norland, of comparison In
soon were house the entered they as forth called recollection which
their on servants the of joy the by cheered were They away. dried
happy. appear to resolved others the of sake the for each and arrival,
first from and fine, was season the September; in early very was It
an received they weather, good of advantage the under place the seeing
recommending in service material of was which favour its in impression
approbation. lasting their to it

immediately rose hills High good. was house the of situation The
open were which of some side; each on distance great no at and behind,
was Barton of village The woody. and cultivated others the downs,
the from view pleasant a formed and hills, these of one on chiefly
it extensive; more was front in prospect The windows. cottage
beyond. country the into reached and valley, the of whole the commanded
that in valley the terminated cottage the surrounded which hills The
out branched it course, another in and name, another under direction;
them. of steepest the of two between again

the upon was Dashwood Mrs. house the of furniture and size the With
many rendered life of style former her though for satisfied; well whole
a was improve and add to yet indispensable, latter the to additions
supply to enough money ready time this at had she and her; to delight
the for "As apartments. the to elegance greater of wanted was that all
family, our for small too is "it she, said sure," be to itself, house
it as present, the for comfortable tolerably ourselves make will we but
I if spring, the in Perhaps improvements. for year the in late too is
about think may we shall, I say dare I as money, of plenty have
our of parties such for small too both are parlors These building.
thoughts some have I and here; collected often see to hope I as friends
the of part a perhaps with them of one into passage the throwing of
this, entrance; an for other that of remainder the leave so and other,
bed-chamber a and added, easily be may which room drawing new a with
could I cottage. little snug very a it make will above, garret and
thing; every expect not must one But handsome. were stairs the wish
I them. widen to matter difficult no be would it suppose I though
and spring, the in world the with before-hand am I much how see shall
accordingly." improvements our plan will we

the from made be could alterations these all till time, mean the In
saved never who woman a by a-year hundred five of income an of savings
it as house the with contented be to enough wise were they life, her in
concerns, particular their arranging in busy was them of each and was;
to possessions, other and books them around placing by endeavoring, and
and unpacked was pianoforte Marianne's home. a themselves form
walls the to affixed were drawings Elinor's and of; disposed properly
room. sitting their of

breakfast after soon interrupted were they these as employments such In
welcome to called who landlord, their of entrance the by day next the
own his from accommodation every them offer to and Barton, to them
Sir deficient. be present at might theirs which in garden and house
formerly had He forty. about man looking good a was Middleton John
to cousins young his for long too was it but Stanhill, at visited
his and good-humoured; thoroughly was countenance His him. remember
arrival Their letter. his of style the as friendly as were manners
an be to comfort their and satisfaction, real him afford to seemed
desire earnest his of much said He him. to solicitude real of object
pressed and family, his with terms sociable most the in living their of
were they till day every Park Barton at dine to cordially so them
a to carried were entreaties his though that, home, at settled better
offence. give not could they civility, beyond perseverance of point
he after hour an within for words; to confined not was kindness His
from arrived fruit and stuff garden of full basket large a them, left
of present a by day the of end the before followed was which park, the
and to letters their all conveying on moreover, insisted, He game.
of satisfaction the denied be not would and them, for post the from
day. every newspaper his them sending

her denoting him, by message civil very a sent had Middleton Lady
assured be could she as soon as Dashwood Mrs. on waiting of intention
was message this as and inconvenience; no be would visit her that
introduced was ladyship her polite, equally invitation an by answered
day. next the them to

of much so whom on person a see to anxious very course, of were, They
appearance her of elegance the and depend; must Barton at comfort their
six than more not was Middleton Lady wishes. their to favourable was
and tall figure her handsome, was face her twenty; and seven or
elegance the all had manners Her graceful. address her and striking,
some by improved been have would they But wanted. husband's her which
to enough long was visit her and warmth; and frankness his of share
though that, shewing by admiration, first their from something detract
for say to nothing had and cold, reserved, was she well-bred, perfectly
remark. or inquiry common-place most the beyond herself

and chatty, very was John Sir for wanted, not was however Conversation
their her with bringing of precaution wise the taken had Middleton Lady
means which by old, years six about boy little fine a child, eldest
of case in ladies the by to recurred be to always subject one was there
beauty, his admire age, and name his enquire to had they for extremity,
hung he while him, for answered mother his which questions him ask and
her of surprise great the to head, his down held and her about
could he as company, before shy so being his at wondered who ladyship,
be to ought child a visit formal every On home. at enough noise make
case present the In discourse. for provision of way by party, the of
his like most were boy the whether determine to minutes ten up took it
of for either, resembled he particular what in and mother, or father
the at astonished was body every and differed, body every course
others. the of opinion

the on debating of Dashwoods the to given be to soon was opportunity An
without house the leave not would John Sir as children, the of rest
day. next the park the at dining of promise their securing



7 CHAPTER


had ladies The cottage. the from mile a half about was Park Barton
from screened was it but valley, the along way their in it near passed
large was house The hill. a of projection the by home at view their
hospitality equal of style a in lived Middletons the and handsome; and
latter the gratification, John's Sir for was former The elegance. and
friends some without ever scarcely were They lady. his of that for
every of company more kept they and house, the in them with staying
to necessary was It neighbourhood. the in family other any than kind
outward and temper in dissimilar however for both; of happiness the
of want total that in other each resembled strongly they behaviour,
with unconnected employments, their confined which taste and talent
a was John Sir compass. narrow very a within produced, society as such
she and shot, and hunted He mother. a Middleton Lady sportsman,
Lady resources. only their were these and children; her humoured
the all children her spoil to able being of advantage the had Middleton
existence in were employments independent John's Sir while round, year
however, abroad, and home at engagements Continual time. the half only
the supported education; and nature of deficiencies the all supplied
his of breeding good the to exercise gave and John, Sir of spirits good
wife.

of and table, her of elegance the upon herself piqued Middleton Lady
her was vanity of kind this from and arrangements; domestic her all
John's Sir But parties. their of any in enjoyment greatest
collecting in delighted he real; more much was society in satisfaction
noisier the and hold, would house his than people young more him about
the all to blessing a was He pleased. he was better the were they
ever for was he summer in for neighbourhood, the of part juvenile
winter in and doors, of out chicken and ham cold eat to parties forming
not was who lady young any for enough numerous were balls private his
fifteen. of appetite unsatiable the under suffering

joy of matter a always was country the in family new a of arrival The
inhabitants the with charmed was he view of point every in and him, to
were Dashwoods Miss The Barton. at cottage his for procured now had he
good his secure to enough was It unaffected. and pretty, young,
to want could girl pretty a that all was unaffected be to for opinion;
his of friendliness The person. her as captivating as mind her make
situation whose those, accommodating in happy him made disposition
In unfortunate. as past, the with comparison in considered, be might
satisfaction real the had he therefore cousins his to kindness showing
his in only females of family a settling in and heart; good a of
sportsman, a for sportsman; a of satisfaction the all had he cottage,
is likewise, sportsmen are who sex his of those only esteems he though
a to them admitting by taste their encouraging of desirous often not
manor. own his within residence

by house the of door the at met were daughters her and Dashwood Mrs.
sincerity; unaffected with Park Barton to them welcomed who John, Sir
young the to repeated room drawing the to them attended he as and
day the him from drawn had subject same the which concern the ladies
They them. meet to men young smart any get to unable being at before,
a himself; besides there gentleman one only said, he see, would
very neither was who but park, the at staying was who friend particular
of smallness the excuse all would they hoped He gay. very nor young
He again. so happen never should it them assure could and party, the
some procuring of hopes in morning that families several to been had
full was body every and moonlight was it but number, their to addition
Barton at arrived had mother Middleton's Lady Luckily engagements. of
woman, agreeable cheerful very a was she as and hour, last the within
might they as dull very so it find not would ladies young the hoped he
perfectly were mother, their as well as ladies, young The imagine.
for wished and party, the of strangers entire two having with satisfied
more. no

merry, good-humoured, a was mother, Middleton's Lady Jennings, Mrs.
and happy, very seemed deal, great a talked who woman, elderly fat,
dinner before and laughter, and jokes of full was She vulgar. rather
and lovers of subject the on things witty many said had over was
Sussex, in them behind hearts their left not had they hoped husbands;
was Marianne not. or did they whether blush them see to pretended and
Elinor towards eyes her turned and sake, sister's her for it at vexed
gave which earnestness an with attacks, these bore she how see to
raillery common-place such from arise could than pain more far Elinor
Jennings's. Mrs. as

by adapted more no seemed John, Sir of friend the Brandon, Colonel
be to was Middleton Lady than friend, his be to manner of resemblance
was He mother. Middleton's Lady be to Jennings Mrs. or wife, his
spite in unpleasing, not was however appearance His grave. and silent
old absolute an Margaret and Marianne of opinion the in being his of
though but thirty; and five of side wrong the on was he for bachelor,
his and sensible, was countenance his handsome, not was face his
gentlemanlike. particularly was address

as them recommend could which party the of any in nothing was There
Middleton Lady of insipidity cold the but Dashwoods; the to companions
of gravity the it of comparison in that repulsive, particularly so was
his and John Sir of mirth boisterous the even and Brandon, Colonel
to roused be to seemed Middleton Lady interesting. was mother-in-law
dinner, after children noisy four her of entrance the by only enjoyment
of kind every to end an put and clothes, her tore about, her pulled who
themselves. to related what except discourse

was she musical, be to discovered was Marianne as evening, the In
to prepared body every unlocked, was instrument The play. to invited
went request their at well, very sang who Marianne, and charmed, be
into brought had Middleton Lady which songs the of chief the through
in since ever lain had perhaps which and marriage, her on family the
celebrated had ladyship her for pianoforte, the on position same the
she account, mother's her by although music, up giving by event that
it. of fond very was own her by and well, extremely played had

his in loud was John Sir applauded. highly was performance Marianne's
conversation his in loud as and song, every of end the at admiration
frequently Middleton Lady lasted. song every while others the with
diverted be could attention one's any how wondered order, to him called
song particular a sing to Marianne asked and moment, a for music from
the all of alone, Brandon Colonel finished. just had Marianne which
the only her paid He raptures. in being without her heard party,
the on him for respect a felt she and attention; of compliment
shameless their by forfeited reasonably had others the which occasion,
that to not amounted it though music, in pleasure His taste. of want
was own, her with sympathize could alone which delight ecstatic
the of insensibility horrible the against contrasted when estimable
and five of man a that allow to enough reasonable was she and others;
every and feeling of acuteness all outlived have well might thirty
every make to disposed perfectly was She enjoyment. of power exquisite
humanity which life of state advanced colonel's the for allowance
required.



8 CHAPTER


two only had She jointure. ample an with widow a was Jennings Mrs.
and married, respectably see to lived had she whom of both daughters,
the of rest the all marry to but do to nothing therefore now had she
as active, zealously was she object this of promotion the In world.
projecting of opportunity no missed and reached; ability her as far
was She acquaintance. her of people young the all among weddings
the enjoyed had and attachments, of discovery the in quick remarkably
by lady young a many of vanity the and blushes the raising of advantage
of kind this and man; young a such over power her of insinuations
to decisively Barton at arrival her after soon her enabled discernment
Marianne with love in much very was Brandon Colonel that pronounce
evening first very the on so, be to it suspected rather She Dashwood.
she while attentively so listening his from together, being their of
dining Middletons' the by returned was visit the when and them; to sang
again. her to listening his by ascertained was fact the cottage, the at
an be would It it. of convinced perfectly was She so. be must It
Jennings Mrs. handsome. was SHE and rich, was HE for match, excellent
her since ever married, well Brandon Colonel see to anxious been had
she and knowledge; her to him brought first John Sir with connection
girl. pretty every for husband good a get to anxious always was

for inconsiderable, means no by was herself to advantage immediate The
she park the At both. them against jokes endless with her supplied it
former the To Marianne. at cottage the in and colonel, the at laughed
himself, only regarded it as far as probably, was raillery her
first at was it latter the to but indifferent; perfectly
knew hardly she understood, was object its when and incomprehensible;
impertinence, its censure or absurdity, its at laugh to most whether
colonel's the on reflection unfeeling an as it considered she for
bachelor. old an as condition forlorn his on and years, advanced

than younger years five man a think not could who Dashwood, Mrs.
of fancy youthful the to appeared he as ancient exceedingly so herself,
of probability the from Jennings Mrs. clear to ventured daughter, her
age. his on ridicule throw to wishing

accusation, the of absurdity the deny cannot you Mama, least, at "But
Brandon Colonel ill-natured. intentionally it think not may you though
MY be to enough old is he but Jennings, Mrs. than younger certainly is
have must love, in be to enough animated ever were he if and father;
When ridiculous! too is It kind. the of sensation every outlived long
not will infirmity and age if wit, such from safe be to man a is
him?" protect

can I infirm? Brandon Colonel call you "do Elinor, said "Infirmity!"
my to than you to greater much appear may age his that suppose easily
of use the having his to as yourself deceive hardly can you but mother;
limbs!" his

the that not is and rheumatism? the of complain him hear you not "Did
life?" declining of infirmity commonest

must you rate this "at laughing, mother, her said child," dearest "My
miracle a you to seem must it and decay; MY of terror continual in be
forty." of age advanced the to extended been has life my that

Colonel that well very know I justice. me doing not are you "Mama,
of apprehensive yet friends his make to enough old not is Brandon
longer. years twenty live may He nature. of course the in him losing
matrimony." with do to nothing has thirty-five But

have not better had seventeen and "thirty-five Elinor, said "Perhaps,"
any by should there if But together. matrimony with do to thing any
should I twenty, and seven at single is who woman a be to happen chance
his to objection any thirty-five being Brandon's Colonel think not
HER." marrying

moment, a pausing after Marianne, said twenty," and seven of woman "A
be home her if and again, affection inspire or feel to hope never "can
bring might she that suppose can I small, fortune her or uncomfortable,
the of sake the for nurse, a of offices the to submit to herself
woman a such marrying his In wife. a of security and provision
of compact a be would It unsuitable. nothing be would there therefore
be would it eyes my In satisfied. be would world the and convenience,
seem would it me To nothing. be would that but all, at marriage no
the at benefited be to wished each which in exchange, commercial a only
other." the of expense

that you convince "to Elinor, replied know," I impossible, be would "It
thirty-five of man a for feel could twenty and seven of woman a
her. to companion desirable a him make to love, to enough near anything
the to wife his and Brandon Colonel dooming your to object must I But
to chanced he because merely chamber, sick a of confinement constant
in feel rheumatic slight a of day) damp cold very (a yesterday complain
shoulders." his of one

a me with "and Marianne; said waistcoats," flannel of talked he "But
cramps, aches, with connected invariably is waistcoat flannel
and old the afflict can that ailment of species every and rheumatisms,
feeble." the

him despised have not would you fever, violent a in only been he "Had
to interesting something there not is Marianne, Confess, much. so half
fever?" a of pulse quick and eye, hollow cheek, flushed the in you

said "Mama," room, the leaving Elinor's upon this, after Soon
cannot I which illness of subject the on alarm an have "I Marianne,
now have We well. not is Ferrars Edward sure am I you. from conceal
but Nothing come. not does he yet and fortnight, a almost here been
else What delay. extraordinary this occasion could indisposition real
Norland?" at him detain can

had "I Dashwood. Mrs. said soon?" so coming his of idea any you "Had
the on all at anxiety any felt have I if contrary, the On none.
of want a showed sometimes he that recollecting in been has it subject,
his of talked I when invitation, my accepting in readiness and pleasure
already?" him expect Elinor Does Barton. to coming

must." she course of but her, to it mentioned never have "I

her to talking was I when for mistaken, are you think rather "I
observed she bedchamber, spare the for grate new a getting of yesterday
the that likely not was it as it, for hurry immediate no was there that
time." some for wanted be would room

of whole the But it! of meaning the be can what is! this strange "How
how cold, How unaccountable! been has other each to behaviour their
the conversation their languid How adieus! last their were composed
no was there farewell Edward's In together! being their of evening last
an of wishes good the was it me: and Elinor between distinction
purposely them leave I did Twice both. to brother affectionate
most he did time each and morning, last the of course the in together
quitting in Elinor, And room. the of out me follow unaccountably
is self-command her now Even did. I as not cried Edward, and Norland
to try she does When melancholy? or dejected she is When invariable.
it?" in dissatisfied and restless appear or society, avoid



9 CHAPTER


to comfort tolerable with Barton at settled now were Dashwoods The
surrounding objects the all with garden, the and house The themselves.
had which pursuits ordinary the and familiar, become now were them,
greater far with again in engaged were charms its half Norland to given
their of loss the since afford, to able been had Norland than enjoyment
first the for day every them on called who Middleton, John Sir father.
at occupation much seeing of habit the in not was who and fortnight,
employed. always them finding on amazement his conceal not could home,

in for, many; not were Park, Barton from those except visitors, Their
the in more mix would they that entreaties urgent John's Sir of spite
at always being carriage his of assurances repeated and neighbourhood,
the overcame spirit Dashwood's Mrs. of independence the service, their
to declining in resolute was she and children; her for society of wish
who few but were There walk. a of distance the beyond family any visit
attainable. were that them of all not was it and classed; so be could
winding narrow the along cottage, the from half a and mile a About
formerly as Barton, of that from issued which Allenham, of valley
an discovered walks, earliest their of one in had, girls the described,
little a them reminding by which, mansion looking respectable ancient
be to wish them made and imagination their interested Norland, of
its that enquiry, on learnt, they But it. with acquainted better
unfortunately was character, good very of lady elderly an possessor,
home. from stirred never and world, the with mix to infirm too

high The walks. beautiful in abounded them about country whole The
to cottage the of window every almost from them invited which downs
happy a were summits, their on air of enjoyment exquisite the seek
superior their up shut beneath valleys the of dirt the when alternative
one Margaret and Marianne did hills these of one towards and beauties;
sunshine partial the by attracted steps, their direct morning memorable
the which confinement the bear to longer unable and sky, showery a of
was weather The occasioned. had days preceding two the of rain settled
their and pencil their from others two the draw to enough tempting not
be would day the that declaration Marianne's of spite in book,
off drawn be would cloud threatening every that and fair, lastingly
together. off set girls two the and hills; their from

at penetration own their in rejoicing downs, the ascended gaily They
the faces their in caught they when and sky; blue of glimpse every
fears the pitied they wind, south-westerly high a of gales animating
such sharing from Elinor and mother their prevented had which
sensations. delightful

to "superior Marianne, said world," the in felicity a there "Is
hours." two least at here walk will we this?--Margaret,

resisting wind, the against way their pursued they and agreed, Margaret
suddenly when longer, minutes twenty about for delight laughing with it
in full set rain driving a and heads, their over united clouds the
though obliged, were they surprised, and Chagrined face.-- their
own their than nearer was shelter no for back, turn to unwillingly,
the which to them, for remained however consolation One house.
of that was it propriety; usual than more gave moment the of exigence
which hill the of side steep the down speed possible all with running
gate. garden their to immediately led

step false a but advantage, the first at had Marianne off. set They
stop to unable Margaret, and ground; the to suddenly her brought
the reached and along, hurried involuntarily was her, assist to herself
safety. in bottom

was him, round playing pointers two with gun, a carrying gentleman A
her when Marianne, of yards few a within and hill the up passing
She assistance. her to ran and gun his down put He happened. accident
in twisted been had foot her but ground, the from herself raised had
offered gentleman The stand. to able scarcely was she and fall, her
her what declined modesty her that perceiving and services; his
farther without arms his in up her took necessary, rendered situation
garden, the through passing Then hill. the down her carried and delay,
directly her bore he Margaret, by open left been had which of gate the
his not quitted and arrived, just was Margaret whither house, the into
parlour. the in chair a in her seated had he till hold

while and entrance, their at amazement in up rose mother her and Elinor
secret a and wonder evident an with him on fixed were both of eyes the
for apologized he appearance, his from sprung equally which admiration
so and frank so manner a in cause, its relating by intrusion his
received handsome, uncommonly was which person, his that graceful
old, even been he Had expression. and voice his from charms additional
would Dashwood Mrs. of kindness and gratitude the vulgar, and ugly,
the but child; her to attention of act any by secured been have
the to interest an gave elegance, and beauty, youth, of influence
feelings. her to home came which action

which address of sweetness a with and, again; and again him thanked She
declined, he this But seated. be to him invited her, attended always
she whom to know to begged then Dashwood Mrs. wet. and dirty was he as
present his and Willoughby, was replied, he name, His obliged. was
the him allow would she hoped he whence from Allenham, at was home
honour The Dashwood. Miss after enquire to tomorrow calling of honour
more still himself make to departed, then he and granted, readily was
rain. heavy a of midst the in interesting,

the instantly were gracefulness common than more and beauty manly His
raised gallantry his which laugh the and admiration, general of theme
exterior his from spirit particular received Marianne against
the Mama his of less seen had herself Marianne attractions.--
lifting his on face, her over crimsoned which confusion the for rest,
their after him regarding of power the of her robbed had up, her
the all in join to him of enough seen had she But house. the entering
her adorned always which energy an with and others, the of admiration
drawn ever had fancy her what to equal were air and person His praise.
the into her carrying his in and story; favourite a of hero the for
of rapidity a was there formality, previous little so with house
Every her. to action the recommended particularly which thought
his good, was name His interesting. was him to belonging circumstance
that out found soon she and village, favourite their in was residence
Her becoming. most the was shooting-jacket a dresses manly all of
a of pain the and pleasant, were reflections her busy, was imagination
disregarded. was ankle sprained

weather fair of interval next the as soon as them on called John Sir
accident Marianne's and doors; of out get to him allowed morning that
any knew he whether asked eagerly was he him, to related being
Allenham. at Willoughby of name the of gentleman

good is That country? the in HE is "what, John; Sir cried "Willoughby!"
on dinner to him ask and tomorrow, over ride will I however; news
Thursday."

Dashwood. Mrs. said then," him know "You

year." every here down is he Why, do. I sure be to him! "Know

he?" is man young a of sort what "And

decent very A you. assure I lived, ever as fellow of kind a good "As
England." in rider bolder a not is there and shot,

indignantly. Marianne, cried him?" for say can you all that is "And
his What acquaintance? intimate more on manners his are what "But
genius?" and talents, his pursuits,

puzzled. rather was John Sir

THAT. all to as him about much know not do "I he, said soul," my "Upon
nicest the got has and fellow, humoured good pleasant, a is he But
him with out she Was saw. ever I pointer a of bitch black little
today?"

Mr. of colour the to as him satisfy more no could Marianne But
his of shades the her to describe could he than pointer, Willoughby's
mind.

a he Has from? come he does "Where Elinor. said he?" is who "But
Allenham?" at house

he and intelligence; certain more give could John Sir point this On
the in own his of property no had Willoughby Mr. that them told
lady old the visiting was he while only there resided he that country;
was he possessions whose and related, was he whom to Court, Allenham at
can I catching worth well very is he yes, "Yes, adding, inherit; to
in own his of estate little pretty a has he Dashwood; Miss you, tell
my to up him give not would I you, were I if and besides; Somersetshire
Miss hills. down tumbling this all of spite in sister, younger
will Brandon herself. to men the all have to expect not must Marianne
care." take not does she if jealous, be

smile, humoured good a with Dashwood, Mrs. said believe," not do "I
MY of either of attempts the by incommoded be will Willoughby Mr. "that
employment an not is It him. CATCHING call you what towards daughters
let us, with safe very are Men up. brought been have they which to
say, you what from however, find, to glad am I rich. so ever be them
not will acquaintance whose one and man, young respectable a is he that
ineligible." be

repeated lived," ever as believe, I fellow, of sort a good as is "He
he park, the at hop little a at Christmas last remember "I John. Sir
down." sitting once without four, till o'clock eight from danced

with "and eyes, sparkling with Marianne cried indeed?" he "Did
spirit?" with elegance,

covert." to ride to eight at again up was he and "Yes;

Whatever be. to ought man young a what is that like; I what is "That
and moderation, no know should them in eagerness his pursuits, his be
fatigue." of sense no him leave

be. will it how see "I John, Sir said be," will it how see I aye, "Aye,
poor of think never and now, him at cap your setting be will You
Brandon."

I "which warmly, Marianne, said John," Sir expression, an is "That
wit which by phrase common-place every abhor I dislike. particularly
conquest,' a 'making or man,' a at cap one's 'setting and intended; is
and illiberal; and gross is tendency Their all. of odious most the are
ago long has time clever, deemed be ever could construction their if
ingenuity." its all destroyed

as laughed he but reproof; this understand much not did John Sir
replied, then and did, he if as heartily

other. or way one say, dare I enough, conquests make will you "Ay,
worth well very is he and already, smitten quite is he Brandon! Poor
tumbling this all of spite in you, tell can I at, cap your setting
ankles." of spraining and about



10 CHAPTER


precision, than elegance more with Margaret, as preserver, Marianne's
make to morning next the early cottage the at called Willoughby, styled
more with Dashwood Mrs. by received was He enquiries. personal his
and him of account John's Sir which kindness a with politeness; than
the during passed that thing every and prompted; gratitude own her
affection, mutual elegance, sense, the of him assure to tended visit
introduced now had accident whom to family the of comfort domestic and
interview second a required not had he charms personal their Of him.
convinced. be to

a and features, regular complexion, delicate a had Dashwood Miss
form, Her handsomer. still was Marianne figure. pretty remarkably
of advantage the having in sister's, her as correct so not though
the in when that lovely, so was face her and striking; more was height,
less was truth girl, beautiful a called was she praise, of cant common
but, brown, very was skin Her happens. usually than outraged violently
her brilliant; uncommonly was complexion her transparency, its from
her in and attractive; and sweet was smile her good; all were features
eagerness, an spirit, a life, a was there dark, very were which eyes,
their Willoughby From delight. without seen be hardily could which
the which embarrassment the by back, held first at was expression
when away, passed this when But created. assistance his of remembrance
perfect the to that saw she when collected, became spirits her
and vivacity, and frankness united he gentleman, the of good-breeding
was he dancing and music of that declare, him heard she when all, above
secured as approbation of look a such him gave she fond, passionately
stay. his of rest the for herself to discourse his of share largest the

her engage to amusement favourite any mention to necessary only was It
and introduced, were points such when silent be not could She talk. to
speedily They discussion. their in reserve nor shyness neither had she
and mutual, was music and dancing of enjoyment their that discovered
related that all in judgment of conformity general a from arose it that
his of examination further a to this by Encouraged either. to
her books; of subject the on him question to proceeded she opinions,
rapturous so with upon dwelt and forward brought were authors favourite
been have must twenty and five of man young any that delight, a
excellence the to convert immediate an become to not indeed, insensible
strikingly was taste Their before. disregarded however works, such of
if each--or by idolized were passages same the books, same The alike.
than longer no lasted it arose, objection any appeared, difference any
be could eyes her of brightness the and arguments her of force the till
her all caught decisions, her all in acquiesced He displayed.
with conversed they concluded, visit his before long and enthusiasm;
acquaintance. long-established a of familiarity the

ONE "for them, left had he as soon as Elinor, said Marianne," "Well,
already have You well. pretty done have you think I morning
of matter every almost in opinion Willoughby's Mr. ascertained
are you Scott; and Cowper of thinks he what know You importance.
have you and ought, he as beauties their estimating his of certain
proper. is than more no Pope admiring his of assurance every received
such under supported, long be to acquaintance your is how But
soon will You discourse? for subject every of despatch extraordinary
to suffice will meeting Another topic. favourite each exhausted have
and marriages, second and beauty, picturesque on sentiments his explain
ask."-- to farther nothing have can you then

so ideas my are just? this is fair? this "is Marianne, cried "Elinor,"
too ease, my at much too been have I mean. you what see I But scanty?
of notion common-place every against erred have I frank. too happy,
been have to ought I where sincere and open been have I decorum;
the of only talked I deceitful--had and dull, spiritless, reserved,
this minutes, ten in once only spoken I had and roads, the and weather
spared." been have would reproach

Elinor--she with offended be not must "you mother, her said love," "My
of capable were she if myself, her scold should I jest. in only was
new our with conversation your of delight the check to wishing
moment. a in softened was Marianne friend."--

their in pleasure his of proof every gave side, his on Willoughby,
He offer. could it improving of wish evident an which acquaintance,
his first at was Marianne after enquire To day. every them to came
gave day every which to reception, his of encouragement the but excuse;
ceased had it before unnecessary excuse an such made kindness, greater
for confined was She recovery. perfect Marianne's by possible, be to
less been confinement any had never but house; the to days some
quick abilities, good of man young a was Willoughby irksome.
was He manners. affectionate open, and spirits, lively imagination,
joined he this, all with for heart, Marianne's engage to formed exactly
was which mind of ardour natural a but person, captivating a only not
which and own, her of example the by increased and roused now
else. thing every beyond affection her to him recommended

read, They enjoyment. exquisite most her gradually became society His
considerable; were talents musical his together; sang they talked, they
had Edward which spirit and sensibility the all with read he and
wanted. unfortunately

and Marianne's; in as faultless as was he estimation Dashwood's Mrs. In
he which in propensity, a but him in censure to nothing saw Elinor
too saying of sister, her delighted peculiarly and resembled strongly
or persons to attention without occasion, every on thought he what much
other of opinion his giving and forming hastily In circumstances.
undivided of enjoyment the to politeness general sacrificing in people,
the easily too slighting in and engaged, was heart his where attention
Elinor which caution of want a displayed he propriety, worldly of forms
in say could Marianne and he that all of spite in approve, not could
support. its

seized had which desperation the that perceive to now began Marianne
her satisfy could who man a seeing ever of half, a and sixteen at her
was Willoughby unjustifiable. and rash been had perfection, of ideas
every in and hour unhappy that in delineated had fancy her that all
behaviour his and her; attaching of capable as period, brighter
abilities his as earnest, as respect that in be to wishes his declared
strong. were

their of thought speculative one not mind whose in too, mother Her
the before led was riches, of prospect his by raised, been had marriage
congratulate to secretly and it; expect and hope to week a of end
Willoughby. and Edward as sons-in-law such two gained having on herself

been early so had which Marianne, for partiality Brandon's Colonel
when Elinor, to perceptible became first now friends, his by discovered
drawn were wit and attention Their them. by noticed be to ceased it
had other the which raillery the and rival; fortunate more his to off
feelings his when removed was arose, partiality any before incurred
sensibility. to annexed justly so ridicule the for call to really began
sentiments the that believe to unwillingly, though obliged, was Elinor
now were satisfaction, own her for him assigned had Jennings Mrs. which
resemblance general a however that and sister; her by excited actually
Mr. of affection the forward might parties the between disposition of
no was character of opposition striking equally an Willoughby,
concern; with it saw She Brandon. Colonel of regard the to hindrance
a to opposed when hope, thirty and five of man silent a could what for
him wish even not could she as and twenty? and five of one lively very
him--in liked She indifferent. him wished heartily she successful,
of object an him in beheld she reserve, and gravity his of spite
reserve his and mild; were serious, though manners, His interest.
any of than spirits of oppression some of result the rather appeared
past of hints dropped had John Sir temper. of gloominess natural
being his of belief her justified which disappointments, and injuries
compassion. and respect with him regarded she and man, unfortunate an

by slighted was he because more the him esteemed and pitied she Perhaps
neither being for him against prejudiced who, Marianne, and Willoughby
merits. his undervalue to resolved seemed young, nor lively

they when day, one Willoughby said man," of kind the just is "Brandon
and of, well speaks body every "whom together, him of talking were
remembers nobody and see, to delighted are all whom about; cares nobody
to." talk to

Marianne. cried him," of think I what exactly is "That

in injustice is it "for Elinor, said however," it, of boast not "Do
and park, the at family the all by esteemed highly is He you. of both
him." with converse to pains taking without myself him see never I

in certainly "is Willoughby, replied YOU," by patronised is he "That
in reproach a is it others, the of esteem the for as but favour; his
a such by approved being of indignity the to submit would Who itself.
the command could that Jennings, Mrs. and Middleton Lady as woman
else?" body any of indifference

will Marianne and yourself as people such of abuse the perhaps "But
their If mother. her and Middleton Lady of regard the for amends make
more not are they for praise, be may censure your censure, is praise
unjust." and prejudiced are you than undiscerning,

saucy." be even can you protege your of defence "In

always will sense and man; sensible a is him, call you as protege, "My
thirty between man a in even Marianne, Yes, me. for attractions have
has abroad, been has world; the of deal great a seen has He forty. and
me giving of capable him found have I mind. thinking a has and read,
my answered always has he and subjects; various on information much
nature." good and good-breeding of readiness with inquiries

that you, told has "he contemptuously, Marianne cried say," to is "That
are mosquitoes the and hot, is climate the Indies East the in
troublesome."

inquiries, such any made I had not, doubt I so, me told have WOULD "He
informed." previously been had I which on points be to happened they but

the to extended have may observations "his Willoughby, said "Perhaps,"
palanquins." and mohrs, gold nabobs, of existence

further much stretched have observations HIS that say to venture may "I
him?" dislike you should why But candour. your than

very a as contrary, the on him, consider I him. dislike not do "I
notice; nobody's and word, good body's every has who man, respectable
to how knows he than time more spend, can he than money more has who,
year." every coats new two and employ,

nor taste, genius, neither has he "that Marianne, cried which," to "Add
no feelings his brilliancy, no has understanding his That spirit.
expression." no voice his and ardour,

Elinor, replied mass," the in much so imperfections his on decide "You
the that imagination, own your of strength the on much so "and
and cold comparatively is him of give to able am I commendation
well-bred, man, sensible a be to him pronounce only can I insipid.
amiable an possessing believe, I and, address, gentle of well-informed,
heart."

You unkindly. me using now are "you Willoughby, cried Dashwood," "Miss
my against me convince to and reason, by me disarm to endeavouring are
be can you as stubborn as me find shall You do. not will it But will.
Colonel disliking for reasons unanswerable three have I artful.
has he fine; be to it wanted I when rain with me threatened he Brandon;
him persuade cannot I and curricle, my of hanging the with fault found
however, you, to satisfaction any be will it If mare. brown my buy to
respects other in be to character his believe I that told, be to
an for return in And it. confess to ready am I irreproachable,
the me deny cannot you pain, some me give must which acknowledgment,
ever." as much as him disliking of privilege



11 CHAPTER


came first they when imagined daughters her or Dashwood Mrs. had Little
their occupy to arise would engagements many so that Devonshire, into
such have should they that or themselves, presented shortly as time
little them leave to as visitors constant such and invitations frequent
Marianne When case. the was such Yet employment. serious for leisure
Sir which abroad, and home at amusement of schemes the recovered, was
private The execution. into put were forming, previously been had John
and made were water the on parties and began; then park the at balls
every In allow. would October showery a as often as accomplished
and ease the and included; was Willoughby kind the of meeting
exactly were parties these attended naturally which familiarity
the with acquaintance his to intimacy increasing give to calculated
of excellencies the witnessing of opportunity him afford to Dashwoods,
receiving, of and her, of admiration animated his marking of Marianne,
her of assurance pointed most the himself, to behaviour her in
affection.

wished only She attachment. their at surprised be not could Elinor
to venture did twice or once and shewn; openly less were it that
Marianne But Marianne. to self-command some of propriety the suggest
unreserve; attend could disgrace real no where concealment all abhorred
themselves in not were which sentiments of restraint the at aim to and
a but effort, unnecessary an merely not her to appeared illaudable,
notions. mistaken and common-place to reason of subjection disgraceful
an was times, all at behaviour their and same; the thought Willoughby
opinions. their of illustration

he thing Every else. one any for eyes no had she present was he When
at evenings their If clever. was said, he thing Every right. was did,
rest the all and himself cheated he cards, with concluded were park the
amusement the formed dancing If hand. good a her get to party the of
to obliged when and time; the half for partners were they night, the of
and together stand to careful were dances, of couple a for separate
of them made conduct Such else. body any to word a spoke scarcely
and shame, not could ridicule but at; laughed exceedingly most course
them. provoke to hardly seemed

left which warmth a with feelings their all into entered Dashwood Mrs.
her To them. of display excessive this checking for inclination no her
and young a in affection strong a of consequence natural the but was it
mind. ardent

to devoted was heart Her Marianne. to happiness of season the was This
with brought she which Norland, to attachment fond the and Willoughby,
it thought had she than softened be to likely more was Sussex, from her
her on bestowed society his which charms the by before, possible
home. present

at much so not was heart Her great. so not was happiness Elinor's
afforded They pure. so amusements their in satisfaction her nor ease,
behind, left had she what for amends make could that companion no her
than regret less with Norland of think to her teach could that nor
the her to supply could Jennings Mrs. nor Middleton Lady Neither ever.
talker, everlasting an was latter the although missed; she conversation
a her ensured which kindness a with her regarded had first the from and
history own her repeated already had She discourse. her of share large
to equal been memory Elinor's had and times; four or three Elinor to
their in early very known have might she improvement, of means her
and illness, last Jennings's Mr. of particulars the all acquaintance
Middleton Lady died. he before minutes few a wife his to said he what
Elinor silent. more being in only mother her than agreeable more was
mere a was reserve her that perceive to observation little needed
her Towards do. to nothing had sense which with manner of calmness
was intimacy and them; to as same the was she mother and husband
say to nothing had She desired. nor for looked be to neither therefore
was insipidity Her before. day the said not had she that day one
she though and same; the always were spirits her even for invariable,
every provided husband, her by arranged parties the oppose not did
her, attended children eldest two her and style in conducted were thing
might she than them from enjoyment more receive to appeared never she
presence her did little so home;--and at sitting in experienced have
conversation, their in share any by others, the of pleasure the to add
her by them amongst being her of reminded only sometimes were they that
boys. troublesome her about solicitude

find Elinor did acquaintance, new her all of alone, Brandon Colonel In
excite abilities, of respect the claim degree any in could who person a
companion. a as pleasure give or friendship, of interest the
even regard, and admiration Her question. the of out was Willoughby
his lover; a was he but own; his all was regard, sisterly her
might man agreeable less far a and Marianne's, wholly were attentions
for unfortunately Brandon, Colonel pleasing. generally more been have
in and Marianne, of only think to encouragement such no had himself,
the for consolation greatest the found he Elinor with conversing
sister. her of indifference

suspect to reason had she as increased, him for compassion Elinor's
him. to known been already had love disappointed of misery the that
from dropped accidentally which words some by given was suspicion This
by together down sitting were they when park, the at evening one him
on fixed were eyes His dancing. were others the while consent, mutual
faint a with said, he minutes, some of silence a after and, Marianne,
second of approve not does understand, I sister, "Your smile,
attachments."

romantic." all are opinions "her Elinor, replied "No,"

exist." to impossible them considers she believe, I as rather, "Or

on reflecting without it contrives she how But does. she believe "I
not. know I wives, two himself had who father, own her of character the
of basis reasonable the on opinions her settle will however years few A
define to easy more be may they then and observation; and sense common
herself." but body any by are, now they than justify to and

is there yet "and replied; he case," the be probably will "This
is one that mind, young a of prejudices the in amiable so something
opinions." general more of reception the to way give them see to sorry

are "There Elinor. said there," you with agree cannot "I
the all which Marianne's, as feelings such attending inconveniences
Her for. atone cannot world the of ignorance and enthusiasm of charms
at propriety setting of tendency unfortunate the all have systems
forward look I what is world the with acquaintance better a and nought;
advantage." possible greatest her as to

saying,-- by conversation the resumed he pause short a After

a against objections her in distinction no make sister your "Does
those Are body? every in criminal equally it is or attachment? second
the from whether choice, first their in disappointed been have who
be to circumstances, of perverseness the or object, its of inconstancy
lives?" their of rest the during indifferent equally

principles. her of minutiae the with acquainted not am I word, my "Upon
second a of instance any admit her heard yet never I that know only I
pardonable." being attachment's

of change total a change, a but hold; "cannot he, said "This,"
refinements romantic the when for it; desire not do no, sentiments--No,
they are frequently how way, give to obliged are mind young a of
I dangerous! too and common, too but are as opinions such by succeeded
mind and temper in who lady a knew once I experience. from speak
who but her, like judged and thought who sister, your resembled greatly
circumstances"-- unfortunate of series a change--from inforced an from
much, too said had he that think to appeared suddenly; stopt he Here
not might which conjectures, to rise gave countenance his by and
have probably would lady The head. Elinor's entered have otherwise
what that Dashwood Miss convinced not he had suspicion, without passed
but required it was, it As lips. his escape to not ought her concerned
tender the with emotion his connect to fancy of effort slight a
Marianne, But more. no attempted Elinor regard. past of recollection
would story whole The little. so done have not would place, her in
thing every and imagination; active her under formed speedily been have
love. disastrous of order melancholy most the in established



12 CHAPTER


the morning next the together walking were Marianne and Elinor As
of spite in which sister, her to news of piece a communicated latter
thought, of want and imprudence Marianne's of before knew she that all
her, told Marianne both. of testimony extravagant its by her surprised
one horse, a her given had Willoughby that delight, greatest the with
was which and Somersetshire, in estate his on himself bred had he that
was it that considering Without woman. a carry to calculated exactly
alter to were she if that horse, any keep to plan mother's her in not
the for another buy must she gift, this of favour in resolution her
stable a build all, after and it, ride to servant a keep and servant,
and hesitation, without present the accepted had she them, receive to
raptures. in it of sister her told

it," for immediately Somersetshire into groom his send to intends "He
shall You day. every ride will we arrives it when "and added, she
the Elinor, dear my yourself, to Imagine me. with use its share
downs." these of some on gallop a of delight

to felicity of dream a such from awaken to she was unwilling Most
for and affair; the attended which truths unhappy the all comprehend
servant, additional an to As them. to submit to refused she time some
to object never would sure was she Mama trifle; a be would expense the
the at one get always might he HIM; for do would horse any and it;
then Elinor sufficient. be would shed merest the stable, a to as park;
a from present a such receiving her of propriety the doubt to ventured
much. too was This her. to known lately so least at or little, so man

very know I supposing "in warmly, she said Elinor," mistaken, are "You
much am I but indeed, long him known not have I Willoughby. of little
the in creature other any with am I than him, with acquainted better
is that opportunity or time not is It mama. and yourself except world,
be would years Seven alone. disposition is intimacy;--it determine to
seven and other, each with acquainted people some make to insufficient
of guilty myself hold should I others. for enough than more are days
from than brother, my from horse a accepting in impropriety greater
together lived have we though little, very know I John Of Willoughby.
formed." been long has judgment my Willoughby of but years; for

her knew She more. no point that touch to wisest it thought Elinor
attach only would subject a tender so on Opposition temper. sister's
for affection her to appeal an by But opinion. own her to more the her
indulgent that which inconveniences the representing by mother, her
she case) the be probably would (as if herself, on draw must mother
shortly was Marianne establishment, of increase this to consented
imprudent such to mother her tempt to not promised she and subdued;
saw she when Willoughby tell to and offer, the mentioning by kindness
declined. be must it that next, him

the at called Willoughby when and word; her to faithful was She
to disappointment her express her heard Elinor day, same the cottage,
his of acceptance the forego to obliged being on voice, low a in him
time same the at were alteration this for reasons The present.
side his on entreaty further make to as such were they and related,
after and apparent; very was however concern His impossible.
voice,--"But, low same the in added, he earnestness, with it expressing
I now. it use cannot you though yours, still is horse the Marianne,
to Barton leave you When it. claim can you till only it keep shall
shall Mab Queen home, lasting more a in establishment own your form
you." receive

the of whole the in and Dashwood; Miss by overheard all was This
her addressing his in and it, pronouncing of manner his in sentence,
so intimacy an saw instantly she alone, name Christian her by sister
between agreement perfect a marked as direct, so meaning a decided,
each to engaged being their of not doubted she moment that From them.
or she, that than surprise other no created it of belief the and other;
discover to frank, so tempers by left be should friends, their of any
accident. by it

this placed which day, next the her to something related Margaret
preceding the spent had Willoughby light. clearer still a in matter
parlour the in time some left being by Margaret, and them, with evening
observations, for opportunity had had Marianne, and him only with
eldest her to communicated she face, important most a with which,
themselves. by next were they when sister,

about you tell to secret a such have "I cried, she Elinor!" "Oh,
soon." very Willoughby Mr. to married be will she sure am I Marianne.

first they since day every "almost Elinor, replied so," said have "You
I week, a other each known not had they and Down; High-church on met
round picture his wore Marianne that certain were you before believe,
great our of miniature the only be to out turned it but neck; her
uncle."

be will they sure am I thing. another quite is this indeed "But
hair." her of lock a got has he for soon, very married

of uncle great some of hair the only be may It Margaret. care, "Take
HIS."

I for is, it sure almost am I Marianne's. is it Elinor, indeed, "But,
out went mama and you when tea, after night Last off. it cut him saw
could as fast as together talking and whispering were they room, the of
took he presently and her, of something begging be to seemed he and be,
all was it for hair, her of lock long a off cut and scissors her up
of piece a in up it folded and it, kissed he and back; her down tumbled
pocket-book." his into it put and paper; white

not could Elinor authority, such on stated particulars, such For
circumstance the for it, to disposed she was nor credit; her withhold
herself. seen and heard had she what with unison perfect in was

satisfactory so way a in displayed always not was sagacity Margaret's
the at evening one her attacked Jennings Mrs. When sister. her to
particular Elinor's was who man young the of name the give to park,
her, to curiosity great of matter a long been had which favourite,
not must "I saying, and sister, her at looking by answered Margaret
Elinor?" I, may tell,

too. laugh to tried Elinor and laugh; body every made course of This
fixed had Margaret that convinced was She painful. was effort the But
a become to composure with bear not could she name whose person a on
Jennings. Mrs. with joke standing

good than harm more did she but sincerely; most her for felt Marianne
to manner angry an in saying and red very turning by cause, the to
Margaret,

to right no have you be, may conjectures your whatever that "Remember
them." repeat

you was "it Margaret; replied it," about conjectures any had never "I
yourself." it of me told who

eagerly was Margaret and company, the of mirth the increased This
more. something say to pressed

Mrs. said it," about all know us let Margaret, Miss pray, "Oh!
name?" gentleman's the is "What Jennings.

know I and is; it what well very know I But ma'am. tell, not must "I
too." is he where

be to Norland at house own his at is; he where guess can we yes, "Yes,
say." dare I parish the of curate the is He sure.

all." at profession no of is He not. is he THAT "No,

is this all that know "you warmth, great with Marianne said "Margaret,"
in person such no is there that and own, your of invention an
existence."

such was there sure am I for Marianne, dead, lately is he then, "Well,
F." an with begins name his and once, man a

this at observing, for Middleton Lady to feel Elinor did grateful Most
the believed she though hard," very rained it "that moment,
her from than her, to attention any from less proceed to interruption
as raillery of subjects inelegant such all of dislike great ladyship's
was her, by started however idea The mother. and husband her delighted
occasion every on was who Brandon, Colonel by pursued immediately
of subject the on said was much and others; of feelings the of mindful
asked and piano-forte, the opened Willoughby them. of both by rain
of endeavours various the amidst thus and it; to down sit to Marianne
so not But ground. the to fell it topic, the quit to people different
her. thrown had it which into alarm the from recover Elinor did easily

a see to day following the on going for evening this formed was party A
a to belonging Barton, from miles twelve about place fine very
not could it interest whose without Brandon, Colonel of brother-in-law
orders strict left had abroad, then was who proprietor, the as seen, be
and beautiful, highly be to declared were grounds The head. that on
allowed be might praise, their in warm particularly was who John, Sir
at them, visit to parties formed had he for judge, tolerable a be to
a contained They years. ten last the for summer every twice least,
the of part great a form a to was which on sail a water; of piece noble
carriages open taken, be to were provisions cold amusement; morning's
a of style usual the in conducted thing every and employed, be to only
pleasure. of party complete

undertaking, bold a rather appeared it company the of few some To
the for day every rained had it that and year, of time the considering
was cold, a already had who Dashwood, Mrs. fortnight;--and last
home. at stay to Elinor by persuaded



13 CHAPTER


from different very out turned Whitwell to excursion intended Their
through, wet be to prepared was She expected. had Elinor what
for unfortunate, more still was event the but frightened; and fatigued,
all. at go not did they

they where park, the at assembled was party whole the o'clock ten By
had it though favourable, rather was morning The breakfast. to were
sky, the across dispersing then were clouds the as night, all rained
and spirits high in all were They appeared. frequently sun the and
the to submit to determined and happy, be to eager humour, good
otherwise. be than rather hardships and inconveniences greatest

the Among in. brought were letters the breakfast at were they While
the at looked it, took Brandon;--he Colonel for one was there rest
room. the left immediately and colour, changed direction,

John. Sir said Brandon?" with matter the is "What

tell. could Nobody

be must "It Middleton. Lady said news," bad no had has he hope "I
my leave Brandon Colonel make could that extraordinary something
suddenly." so table breakfast

returned. he minutes five about In

he as soon as Jennings, Mrs. said hope;" I Colonel, news, bad "No
room. the entered

you." thank I ma'am, all, at "None

is sister your that say to not is it hope I Avignon? from it "Was
worse."

business." of letter a merely is and town, from came It ma'am. "No,

a only was it if much, so you discompose to hand the came how "But
hear us let so Colonel; do, won't this come, Come, business? of letter
it." of truth the

saying." are you what "recollect Middleton, Lady said madam," dear "My

said married?" is Fanny cousin your that you tell to is it "Perhaps
reproof. daughter's her to attending without Jennings, Mrs.

not." is it indeed, "No,

well." is she hope I And Colonel. from, is it who know I then, "Well,

little. a colouring he, said ma'am?" mean, you do "Whom

mean." I who know you "Oh!

Middleton, Lady addressing he, said ma'am," sorry, particularly am "I
which business on is it for today, letter this receive should I "that
town." in attendance immediate my requires

at town in do to have you can "What Jennings. Mrs. cried town!" "In
year?" of time this

so leave to obliged being "in continued, he great," is loss own "My
presence my fear I as concerned, more the am I but party; a agreeable
Whitwell." at admittance your gain to necessary is

this! was all them upon blow a What

said Brandon," Mr. housekeeper, the to note a write you if "But
sufficient?" be not it "will eagerly, Marianne,

head. his shook He

so are we when off put be not shall John.--"It Sir said go," must "We
all." is that Brandon, tomorrow, till town to go cannot You it. near

to power my in not is it But settled. easily so be could it wish "I
day!" one for journey my delay

Mrs. said is," business your what know us let but would you "If
not." or off put be could it whether see might "we Jennings,

to were you "if Willoughby, said later," hours six be not would "You
return." our till journey your defer

hour."-- ONE lose to afford cannot "I

"There Marianne, to voice low a in say, Willoughby heard then Elinor
of one is Brandon pleasure. of party a bear cannot who people some are
this invented and say, dare I cold catching of afraid was He them.
was letter the guineas fifty lay would I it. of out getting for trick
writing." own his of

Marianne. replied it," of doubt no have "I

of know I Brandon, mind, your change to you persuading no is "There
But, anything. on determined are you once "when John, Sir said old,"
the are here Consider, it. of better think will you hope I however,
walked Dashwoods Miss three the Newton, from over come Careys Miss two
his before hours two up got Willoughby Mr. and cottage, the from up
Whitwell." to go to purpose on time, usual

of cause the being at sorrow his repeated again Brandon Colonel
be to it declared time same the at but party; the disappointing
unavoidable.

again?" back come you will when then, "Well,

as soon "as ladyship, her added Barton," at you see shall we hope "I
to party the off put must we and town; leave conveniently can you
return." you till Whitwell

in it have may I when uncertain, so is it But obliging. very are "You
all." at it for engage not dare I that return, to power my

here not is he "If John. Sir cried back," come shall and must he "Oh!
him." after go shall I week, the of end the by

may you perhaps then "and Jennings, Mrs. cried John," Sir do, so "Ay,
is." business his what out find

is it suppose I concerns. men's other into pry to want not do "I
of." ashamed is he something

announced. were horses Brandon's Colonel

John. Sir added you?" do horseback, on town to go not do "You

post." go then shall I Honiton. to Only "No.

you But journey. good a you wish I go, to resolved are you as "Well,
mind." your change better had

power." my in not is it you assure "I

party. whole the of leave took then He

this town in sisters your and you seeing my of chance no there "Is
Dashwood?" Miss winter,

all." at none afraid, am "I

to wish should I than time longer a for farewell you bid must I "Then
do."

nothing. said and bowed merely he Marianne, To

what know us let do go, you "before Jennings, Mrs. said Colonel," "Come
about." going are you

room. the left John, Sir by attended and, morning, good a her wished He

hitherto had politeness which lamentations and complaints The
and again agreed all they and universally; forth burst now restrained,
disappointed. so be to was it provoking how again

Jennings Mrs. said however," is, business his what guess can "I
exultingly.

body. every almost said ma'am?" you, "Can

sure." am I Williams, Miss about is it "Yes;

Marianne. asked Williams?" Miss is who "And

have must you sure am I is? Williams Miss who know you not do "What!
a dear; my Colonel's, the of relation a is She before. her of heard
the shocking of fear for near, how say not will We relation. near very
Elinor, to said she little, a voice her lowering Then, ladies." young
daughter." natural his is "She

"Indeed!"

Colonel the say dare I stare. can she as him like as and yes; "Oh,
fortune." his all her leave will

regret general the in heartily most joined he returned, John Sir When
as that observing, by however concluding event; an unfortunate so on
being of way by something do must they together, got all were they
although that agreed, was it consultation some after and happy;
a procure might they Whitwell, at enjoyed be only could happiness
The country. the about driving by mind of composure tolerable
never Marianne and first, was Willoughby's ordered; then were carriages
park the through drove He it. into got she when than happier looked
them of more nothing and sight; of out soon were they and fast, very
return the after till happen not did which return, their till seen was
said but drive; their with delighted seemed both They rest. the all of
others the while lanes, the in kept had they that terms general in only
downs. the on went

that and evening, the in dance a be should there that settled was It
the of more Some long. day all merry extremely be should body every
nearly down sitting of pleasure the had they and dinner, to came Careys
contentment. great with observed John Sir which table, to twenty
Dashwoods. Miss elder two the between place usual his took Willoughby
long been not had they and hand; right Elinor's on sat Jennings Mrs.
to said and Willoughby, and her behind leant she before seated,
in out you found have "I hear, to both them for enough loud Marianne,
morning." the spent you where know I tricks. your all of spite

pray?"-- "Where, hastily, very replied and coloured, Marianne

my in out been had we "that Willoughby, said know," you not "Did
curricle?"

determined was I and well, very that know I Impudence, Mr. yes, "Yes,
Miss house, your like you hope I to.-- been had you WHERE out find to
you, see to come I when and know; I one, large very a is It Marianne.
when much very it wanted it for it, new-furnished have will you hope I
ago." years six there was I

laughed Jennings Mrs. confusion. great in away turned Marianne
they where know to resolution her in that found Elinor and heartily;
Mr. of enquire woman own her made actually had she been, had
that informed been method that by had she that and groom; Willoughby's
in there time considerable a spent and Allenham, to gone had they
house. the over all going and garden the about walking

unlikely very seemed it as true, be to this believe hardly could Elinor
house the enter to consent, Marianne or propose, should Willoughby that
smallest the not had Marianne whom with it, in was Smith Mrs. while
acquaintance.

it; about her of enquired Elinor dining-room, the left they as soon As
circumstance every that found she when surprise her was great and
angry quite was Marianne true. perfectly was Jennings Mrs. by related
it. doubting for her with

we that or there, go not did we that Elinor, imagine, you should "Why
do to wished often have you what it not Is house? the see not did
yourself?"

with and there, was Smith Mrs. while go not would I but Marianne, "Yes,
Willoughby." Mr. than companion other no

shew to right a have can who person only the is however Willoughby "Mr.
to impossible was it carriage, open an in went he as and house; that
my in morning pleasanter a spent never I companion. other any have
life."

employment an of pleasantness the "that Elinor, replied afraid," am "I
propriety." its evince always not does

if for Elinor; it, of proof stronger a be can nothing contrary, the "On
been have should I did, I what in impropriety real any been had there
acting are we when know always we for time, the at it of sensible
pleasure." no had have could I conviction a such with and wrong,

very some to you exposed already has it as Marianne, dear my "But,
of discretion the doubt to begin now not you do remarks, impertinent
conduct?" own your

of proof the be to are Jennings Mrs. of remarks impertinent the "If
lives. our of moment every offending all are we conduct, in impropriety
I commendation. her do should I than more any censure her not value I
Mrs. over walking in wrong anything done having of sensible not am
Mr. be day one will They house. her seeing in or grounds, Smith's
and--" Willoughby's,

be not would you Marianne, own, your be to day one were they "If
done." have you what in justified

her; to gratifying visibly even was it but hint; this at blushed She
her to came she thought, earnest of interval minutes' ten a after and
WAS it Elinor, "Perhaps, humour, good great with said and again, sister
wanted Willoughby Mr. but Allenham; to go to me in ill-judged rather
assure I house, charming a is it and place; the me shew to particularly
nice a of stairs; up room sitting pretty remarkably one is you.--There
would it furniture modern with and use, constant for size comfortable
On sides. two on windows has and room, corner a is It delightful. be
a to house, the behind bowling-green, the across look you side one
church the of view a have you other the on and wood, hanging beautiful
so have we that hills bold fine those of them, beyond and, village, and
be could nothing for advantage, to it see not did I admired. often
up--a fitted newly were it if furniture,--but the than forlorn more
the of one it make would says, Willoughby pounds, hundred of couple
England." in summer-rooms pleasantest

others, the from interruption without her to listened have Elinor Could
delight. equal with house the in room every described have would she



14 CHAPTER


his with park, the at visit Brandon's Colonel of termination sudden The
the raised and mind, the filled cause, its concealing in steadiness
great a was she days; three or two for Jennings Mrs. of wonder
all in interest lively very a takes who be must one every as wonderer,
with wondered, She acquaintance. their all of goings and comings the
must there sure was it; of reason the be could what intermission little
could that distress of kind every over thought and news, bad some be
escape not should he that determination fixed a with him, befallen have
all. them

she. said sure," am I matter, the be must melancholy very "Something
circumstances his afraid am I man! Poor face. his in it see could "I
two than more reckoned never was Delaford at estate The bad. be may
do I involved. sadly everything left brother his and year, a thousand
can else what for matters, money about for sent been have must he think
the know to anything give would I so. is it whether wonder I be? it
dare I bye, the by and, Williams Miss about is it Perhaps it. of truth
be May her. mentioned I when conscious so looked he because is, it say
a have I for likely, more world the in nothing town; in ill is she
about is it wager any lay would I sickly. rather always is she notion
his in distressed be should he likely very so not is It Williams. Miss
must sure be to and man, prudent very a is he for NOW, circumstances
be May be! can it what wonder I time. this by estate the cleared have
setting His over. him for sent has and Avignon, at worse is sister his
all of out him wish I Well, it. like very seems hurry a such in off
bargain." the into wife good a and heart, my all with trouble his

every with varying opinion Her Jennings. Mrs. talked so wondered, So
arose. they as probable equally seeming all and conjecture, fresh
Colonel of welfare the in interested really felt she though Elinor,
away, suddenly so going his on wonder the all bestow not could Brandon,
the that besides for feeling; her of desirous was Jennings Mrs. which
or amazement lasting such justify opinion her in not did circumstance
was It of. disposed otherwise was wonder her speculation, of variety
on Willoughby and sister her of silence extraordinary the by engrossed
them to interesting peculiarly be to know must they which subject, the
strange more appear it made day every continued, silence this As all.
should they Why both. of disposition the with incompatible more and
constant their what herself, and mother her to acknowledge openly not
not could Elinor place, taken have to declared other each to behaviour
imagine.

in immediately be not might marriage that conceive easily could She
reason no was there independent, was Willoughby though for power; their
about at John Sir by rated been had estate His rich. him believe to
that which to expense an at lived he but year; a hundred seven or six
of complained often himself had he and equal, be hardly could income
them by maintained secrecy of kind strange this for But poverty. his
all, at nothing concealed fact in which engagement, their to relative
their to contradictory wholly so was it and account; not could she
mind her entered sometimes doubt a that practice, and opinions general
her prevent to enough was doubt this and engaged, really being their of
Marianne. of inquiry any making

than all, them to attachment of expressive more be could Nothing
distinguishing the all had it Marianne To behaviour. Willoughby's
the of rest the to and give, could heart lover's a which tenderness
The brother. a and son a of attention affectionate the was it family
more many home; his as him by loved and considered be to seemed cottage
general no if and Allenham; at than there spent were hours his of
him called which exercise the park, the at them collected engagement
rest the where there, ending of certain almost was morning the in out
his by and Marianne, of side the at himself by spent was day the of
feet. her at pointer favourite

the left Brandon Colonel after week a about particular, in evening One
of feeling every to open usually than more seemed heart his country,
happening Dashwood's Mrs. on and him; around objects the to attachment
warmly he spring, the in cottage the improving of design her mention to
as established had affection which place a of alteration every opposed
him. with perfect

will I THAT No. cottage! dear this exclaimed--"Improve he "What!"
inch an not walls, its to added be must stone a Not to. consent never
regarded." are feelings my if size, its to

be will kind the of "nothing Dashwood, Miss said alarmed," be not "Do
it." attempt to enough money have never will mother my for done;

she if poor, be always she "May cried. he it," of glad heartily am "I
better." no riches her employ can

not would I that assured be may you But Willoughby. you, "Thank
one any of or yours, of attachment local of sentiment one sacrifice
it upon Depend world. the in improvements the all for loved, I whom
in accounts my up make I when remain, may sum unemployed whatever that
it of dispose than by uselessly it lay rather even would I spring, the
this to attached so really you are But you. to painful so manner a in
it?" in defect no see to as place

as it consider I more, Nay, faultless. is it me "To he. said am," "I
I were and attainable, is happiness which in building of form only the
in again up it build and down, Combe pull instantly would I enough rich
cottage." this of plan exact the

said suppose," I smokes, that kitchen a and stairs narrow dark "With
Elinor.

thing every and all "with tone, eager same the in he cried "Yes,"
it, about INconvenience or convenience one no it;--in to belonging
under only, then and Then, perceptible. be variation least the should
at been have I as Combe at happy as be perhaps might I roof, a such
Barton."

disadvantage the under even "that Elinor, replied myself," flatter "I
your find hereafter will you staircase, broader a and rooms better of
this." do now you as faultless as house own

might "which Willoughby, said circumstances," are certainly "There
of claim one have always will place this but me; to it endear greatly
share." possibly can other no which affection, my

were eyes fine whose Marianne, at pleasure with looked Dashwood Mrs.
she well how denoted plainly as Willoughby, on expressively so fixed
him. understood

time this Allenham at was I "when he, added wish," I did often "How
within passed never I inhabited! were cottage Barton that twelvemonth,
one no that grieving and situation, its admiring without it of view
first very the that think then I did little How it. in live should
country, the into came next I when Smith, Mrs. from hear should I news
immediate an felt I and taken: was cottage Barton that be would
of kind a but nothing which event, the in interest and satisfaction
account can it, from experience should I happiness what of prescience
lowered a in her to speaking Marianne?" so, been have not it Must for.
house this yet "And said, he tone, former his continuing Then voice.
by simplicity its of it rob would You Dashwood? Mrs. spoil, would you
acquaintance our which in parlour dear this and improvement! imaginary
by spent since been have hours happy many so which in and began, first
entrance, common a of condition the to degrade would you together, us
has which room the through pass to eager be would body every and
comfort and accommodation real more itself within contained hitherto
world the in dimensions handsomest the of apartment other any than
afford." possibly could

should kind the of alteration no that him assured again Dashwood Mrs.
attempted. be

me makes promise "Your replied. warmly he woman," good a are "You
me Tell happy. me make will it and farther, little a it Extend easy.
ever shall I that but same, the remain will house your only not that
will you that and dwelling; your as unchanged as yours and you find
everything made has which kindness the with me consider always
me." to dear so you to belonging

the during behaviour Willoughby's and given, readily was promise The
happiness. and affection his once at declared evening the of whole

was he when Dashwood, Mrs. said dinner?" to tomorrow you see we "Shall
must we for morning, the in come to you ask not do "I them. leaving
Middleton." Lady on call to park, the to walk

o'clock. four by them with be to engaged He



15 CHAPTER


and day, next the place took Middleton Lady to visit Dashwood's Mrs.
from herself excused Marianne but her; with went daughters her of two
her and employment; of pretext trifling some under party, the of being
the Willoughby by made been had promise a that concluded who mother,
perfectly was absent, were they while her on calling of before night
home. at remaining her with satisfied

and curricle Willoughby's found they park the from return their On
that convinced was Dashwood Mrs. and cottage, the at waiting in servant
foreseen; had she as all was it far So just. been had conjecture her
her taught had foresight no what beheld she house the entering on but
came Marianne than passage the in sooner no were They expect. to
her with affliction, violent in apparently parlour the of out hastily
stairs. up ran them noticing without and eyes; her at handkerchief
had she room the into directly proceeded they alarmed and Surprised
against leaning was who Willoughby, only found they where quitted, just
their on round turned He them. towards back his with mantel-piece the
the of partook strongly he that shewed countenance his and in, coming
Marianne. over-powered which emotion

she as Dashwood Mrs. cried her?" with matter the anything "Is
ill?" she entered--"is

forced a with and cheerful; look to trying replied, he not," hope "I
I ill--for be to expect rather may who I is "It added, presently smile
disappointment!" heavy very a under suffering now am

"Disappointment?"

has Smith Mrs. you. with engagement my keep to unable am I for "Yes,
dependent poor a upon riches of privilege the exercised morning this
my received just have I London. to business on me sending by cousin,
of way by and Allenham; of farewell my taken and dispatches,
you." of farewell my take to come now am I exhilaration

morning?" this going you are London!--and "To

moment." this "Almost

her obliged;--and be must Smith Mrs. But unfortunate. very is "This
hope." I long us from you detain not will business

of idea no have I but kind, very are "You replied, he as coloured He
are Smith Mrs. to visits My immediately. Devonshire into returning
twelvemonth." the within repeated never

the in house only the Allenham Is friend? only your Smith Mrs. is "And
can Willoughby, shame, For welcome? be will you which to neighbourhood
here?" invitation an for wait you

only he ground the on fixed eyes his with and increased; colour His
good." too are "You replied,

equal felt Elinor surprise. with Elinor at looked Dashwood Mrs.
Dashwood Mrs. silent. was one every moments few a For amazement.
spoke. first

you cottage Barton at that Willoughby, dear my add, to only have "I
here return to you press not will I for welcome; be always will
pleasing be might THAT far how judge can only you because immediately,
question to disposed more no be shall I head this on and Smith; Mrs. to
inclination." your doubt to than judgment your

of "are confusedly, Willoughby, replied present," at engagements "My
myself"-- flatter not dare nature--that--I a such

another and speak, to astonished much too was Dashwood Mrs. stopt. He
faint a with said who Willoughby, by broken was This succeeded. pause
torment not will I manner. this in linger to folly is "It smile,
is it society whose friends among remaining by longer any myself
enjoy." to now me for impossible

him saw They room. the left and all them of leave took hastily then He
sight. of out was it minute a in and carriage, his into step

the quitted instantly and speech, for much too felt Dashwood Mrs.
this which alarm and concern the to solitude in way give to parlour
occasioned. departure sudden

of thought She mother's. her to equal least at was uneasiness Elinor's
behaviour Willoughby's distrust. and anxiety with passed just had what
of affectation and embarrassment, his them, of leave taking in
mother's her accept to unwillingness his all, above and, cheerfulness,
himself, unlike so lover, a unlike so backwardness a invitation,
design serious no that feared she moment One her. disturbed greatly
unfortunate some that next the and side; his on formed been ever had
in distress sister;--the her and him between place taken had quarrel
could quarrel serious a as such was room the quitted had Marianne which
Marianne's what considered she when though for, account reasonably most
impossible. almost seemed quarrel a was, him for love

sister's her separation, their of particulars the be might whatever But
tenderest the with thought she and indubitable; was affliction
probability all in was Marianne which sorrow violent that of compassion
a as encouraging and feeding but relief, a as to way giving merely not
duty.

were eyes her though and returned, mother her hour an half about In
uncheerful. not was countenance her red,

she, said Elinor," Barton, from miles some now is Willoughby dear "Our
travel?" he does heart a heavy how with "and work, to down sat she as

work the but seems It gone! be to suddenly So strange. very all is "It
so cheerful, so happy, so us with was he night last And moment. a of
without too notice--Gone minutes ten only after now, And affectionate?
have must us to owned he what than more return!--Something to intending
must YOU himself. like behave not did he speak, not did He happened.
have they Can be? it can What I. as well as difference the seen have
accept to unwillingness such shewn have he should else Why quarrelled?
here?"-- invitation your

see plainly could I Elinor; wanted, he that inclination not was "It
all it thought have I it. accepting of power the not had He THAT.
at that thing every for account perfectly can I and you, assure I over
you." to as well as me to strange seemed first

indeed!" you, "Can

way;--but satisfactory most the in myself to it explained have I "Yes.
YOU, satisfy not will can--it you where doubt to love who Elinor, you,
am I it. in trust my of out ME talk not shall you but know; I
disapproves Marianne, for regard his suspects Smith Mrs. that persuaded
that on and him,) for views other has she because (perhaps it, of
she which business the that away;--and him get to eager is account
him. dismiss to excuse an as invented is transact to off him sends
that aware moreover, is, He happened. have to believe I what is This
present at therefore not dares he connection, the disapprove DOES she
himself feels he and Marianne, with engagement his her to confess
and schemes, her into give to situation, dependent his from obliged,
know, I me, tell will You while. a for Devonshire from himself absent
cavil, no to listen will I but happened; have NOT may or may this that
affair the understanding of method other any out point can you unless
say?" to you have what Elinor, now, And this. at satisfactory as

answer." my anticipated have you for "Nothing,

happened. have not might or might it that me, told have would you "Then
rather had You feelings! your are incomprehensible how Elinor, Oh,
misery for out look rather had You good. than credit upon evil take
the for apology an than Willoughby, poor for guilt and Marianne, for
leave took he because blameable, him think to resolved are You latter.
is And shewn. has behaviour usual his than affection less with us of
by depressed spirits for or inadvertence, for made be to allowance no
merely accepted, be to probabilities no Are disappointment? recent
we whom man the to due nothing Is certainties? not are they because
ill think to world the in reason no and love, to reason such all have
though themselves, in unanswerable motives of possibility the To of?
suspect you it is what all, after And, while? a for secret unavoidably
of?" him

is unpleasant something of suspicion But myself. tell hardly can "I
witnessed just we as alteration an such of consequence inevitable the
of urged now have you what in however, truth, great is There him. in
be to wish my is it and him, for made be to ought which allowances the
have undoubtedly may Willoughby body. every of judgment my in candid
has. he that hope will I and conduct, his for reasons sufficient very
at them acknowledge to Willoughby like more been have would it But
at wondering help cannot I still but advisable; be may Secrecy once.
him." by practiced being its

the where character, his from departing for however, him, blame not "Do
I what of justice the admit do really you But necessary. is deviation
acquitted." is he happy--and am defence?--I his in said have

they (if engagement their conceal to proper be may It entirely. "Not
be must it case, the is that if Smith--and Mrs. from engaged) ARE
at Devonshire in little but be to Willoughby for expedient highly
us." from it concealing their for excuse no is this But present.

and Willoughby accuse you do child, dear my us! from it "Concealing
have eyes your when indeed, strange is This concealment? of Marianne
incautiousness." for day every them reproaching been

their of "but Elinor; said affection," their of proof no want "I
do." I engagement

both." of satisfied perfectly am "I

of either by subject, the on you to said been has syllable a not "Yet
them."

Has plainly. so spoken have actions where syllables wanted not have "I
last the least at for us, of all to and Marianne to behaviour his not
future his as her considered and loved he that declared fortnight,
relation? nearest the of attachment the us for felt he that and wife,
been consent my not Has other? each understood perfectly not we Have
affectionate and attentive his manner, his looks, his by asked daily
How engagement? their doubt to possible it is Elinor, My respect?
that supposed be to it is How you? to occur thought a such could
leave should love, sister's your of be must he as persuaded Willoughby,
his of her telling without months, for perhaps her leave and her,
of exchange mutual a without part should they affection;--that
confidence?"

in is ONE except circumstance every "that Elinor, replied confess," "I
both of silence total the is ONE that but engagement; their of favour
other." every outweighs almost it me with and subject, the on

Willoughby, of indeed wretchedly think must You is! this strange "How
the doubt can you them, between passed openly has that all after if,
a acting been he Has together. are they which on terms the of nature
him suppose you Do time? this all sister your to behaviour his in part
her?" to indifferent really

sure." am I her love does and must He that. think cannot I "No,

such with her leave can he if tenderness, of kind strange a with "But
him." to attribute you as future, the of carelessness such indifference,

this considered never have I that mother, dear my remember, must "You
are they but confess; I doubts, my had have I certain. as matter
we If away. done entirely be soon may they and were, they than fainter
removed." be will mine of fear every correspond, they find

you altar, the at them see to were you If indeed! concession mighty "A
I But girl! Ungracious married. be to going were they suppose would
to passed ever has opinion my in Nothing proof. such no require
uniformly been has all attempted; been has secrecy no doubt; justify
must It wishes. sister's your doubt cannot You unreserved. and open
of man a not he Is why? But suspect. you whom therefore Willoughby be
to side his on inconsistency any been there Has feeling? and honour
deceitful?" be he can alarm? create

Willoughby, love "I Elinor. cried not," believe I not, hope "I
more be cannot integrity his of suspicion and him; love sincerely
will I and involuntary, been has It me. to than yourself to painful
his in alteration the by confess, I startled, was I it. encourage not
not did and himself, like speak not did morning;--he this manners
be may this all But cordiality. any with kindness your return
He supposed. have you as affairs his of situation a such by explained
greatest the in him leave her seen had sister, my from parted just had
Mrs. offending of fear a from obliged, felt he if and affliction;
aware yet and soon, here returning of temptation the resist to Smith,
for away going was he that saying by invitation, your declining by that
by part suspicious a ungenerous, an act to seem should he time, some
a such In disturbed. and embarrassed be well might he family, our
more been have would difficulties his of avowal open and plain a case,
general his with consistent more as well as think, I honour his to
conduct one's any against objections raise not will I character;--but
myself, from judgment in difference a as foundation, a illiberal so on
consistent." and right think may I what from deviation a or

be to deserve not does certainly Willoughby properly. very speak "You
in stranger no is he long, him known not have WE Though suspected.
disadvantage? his to spoken ever has who and world; the of part this
immediately, marry and independently act to situation a in been he Had
acknowledging without us leave should he that odd been have might it
an is It case. the not is this but once: at me to everything
marriage their for begun, prosperously not respects some in engagement
it as far as secrecy, even and distance; uncertain very a at be must
advisable." very be now may observed, be can

then was Elinor and Margaret; of entrance the by interrupted were They
to mother, her of representations the over think to liberty at
all. of justice the for hope and many, of probability the acknowledge

the entered she when time, dinner till Marianne of nothing saw They
eyes Her word. a saying without table the at place her took and room
then even were tears her if as seemed it and swollen; and red were
could all, them of looks the avoided She difficulty. with restrained
silently mother's her on time, some after and speak, nor eat neither
fortitude of degree small her compassion, tender with hand her pressing
room. the left and tears into burst she overcome, quite was

She evening. whole the continued spirits of oppression violent This
command of desire any without was she because power, any without was
Willoughby to relative anything of mention slightest The herself. over
most were family her though and instant; an in her overpowered
they if them, for impossible was it comfort, her to attentive anxiously
feelings her which subject every of clear keep to all, at spoke
him. with connected



16 CHAPTER


able been she had inexcusable very herself thought have would Marianne
She Willoughby. from parting after night first the all at sleep to
next the face the in family her look to ashamed been have would
than repose of need more in bed her from risen not she had morning,
a composure such made which feelings the But it. in down lay she when
the awake was She it. incurring of danger no in her left disgrace,
a with up got She it. of part greatest the wept she and night, whole
nourishment; any take to unwilling and talk, to unable was headache,
all forbidding and sisters, and mother her to moment every pain giving
enough! potent was sensibility Her either. from consolation at attempt

about wandered and herself, by out walked she over was breakfast When
enjoyment past of recollection the indulging Allenham, of village the
morning. the of chief the for reverse present the over crying and

played She feeling. of indulgence equal the in off passed evening The
Willoughby, to play to used been had she that song favourite every over
at sat and joined, oftenest been had voices their which in air every
out written had he that music of line every on gazing instrument the
be could sadness farther no that heavy so was heart her till her, for
spent She applied. day every was grief of nourishment this and gained;
voice her crying; and singing alternately pianoforte the at hours whole
in as well as too, books In tears. her by suspended totally often
and past the between contrast a which misery the courted she music,
been had they what but nothing read She giving. of certain was present
together. read to used

it ever; for supported be not could indeed affliction of violence Such
employments, these but melancholy; calmer a into days few a within sunk
meditations, silent and walks solitary her recurred, daily she which to
ever. as lively as sorrow of effusions occasional produced still

Marianne. by expected seemed none and came; Willoughby from letter No
Mrs. But uneasy. became again Elinor and surprised, was mother Her
at which them, wanted she whenever explanations find could Dashwood
herself. satisfied least

our fetches John Sir often very "how she, said Elinor," "Remember,
already have We it. to them carries and post, the from himself letters
it that acknowledge must we and necessary, be may secrecy that agreed
through pass to were correspondence their if maintained be not could
hands." John's Sir

a it in find to tried she and this, of truth the deny not could Elinor
so method one was there But silence. their for sufficient motive
real the knowing of eligible so opinion her in and simple, so direct,
she that mystery, all removing instantly of and affair, the of state
mother. her to it suggesting help not could

she or is she "whether she, said once," at Marianne ask not you do "Why
so kind, so and mother, her you, From Willoughby? to engaged not is
be would It offence. give not could question the mother, a indulgent
all be to used She her. for affection your of result natural the
especially." more you to and unreserve,

possible it Supposing world. the for question a such ask not would "I
enquiry an such not would distress what engaged, not are they that
never should I ungenerous. most be would it rate any At inflict!
of confession a her from forcing after again, confidence her deserve
know I one. any to unacknowledged be to present at meant is what
not shall I that and me, loves dearly she that know I heart: Marianne's
make circumstances when known, made is affair the whom to last the be
the force to attempt not would I eligible. it of revealment the
duty of sense a because less; much child a of one; any of confidence
direct." might wishes her which denial the prevent would

sister's her considering overstrained, generosity this thought Elinor
common sense, common vain; in but farther, matter the urged and youth,
romantic Dashwood's Mrs. in sunk all were prudence, common care,
delicacy.

before mentioned was name Willoughby's before days several was It
were indeed, Jennings, Mrs. and John Sir family; her of any by Marianne
hour;--but painful a many to pain added witticisms their nice; so not
of volume a up taking accidentally Dashwood, Mrs. evening, one
exclaimed, Shakespeare,

away went Willoughby dear our Marianne; Hamlet, finished never have "We
comes he when that by, it put will We it. through get could we before
happens." THAT before perhaps, months, be may it again...But

weeks." many "No--nor surprise. strong with Marianne, cried "Months!"

Elinor gave it but said; had she what for sorry was Dashwood Mrs.
of expressive so Marianne from reply a produced it as pleasure,
intentions. his of knowledge and Willoughby in confidence

was Marianne country, the leaving his after week a about morning, One
of instead walk, usual their in sisters her join to on prevailed
every avoided carefully had she Hitherto herself. by away wandering
the on walk to intended sisters her If rambles. her in companion
the of talked they if lanes; the towards away stole directly she downs,
be never could and hills, the climbing in speedy as was she valley,
the by secured was she length at But off. set others the when found
seclusion. continual such disapproved greatly who Elinor, of exertions
silence, in chiefly and valley, the through road the along walked They
with satisfied Elinor, and controlled, be not could MIND Marianne's for
of entrance the Beyond more. attempt then not would point, one gaining
and wild less was rich, still though country, the where valley, the
first on travelled had they which road the of stretch long a open, more
they point, that reaching on and them; before lay Barton, to coming
the formed which prospect a examine and them, around look to stopped
had they which spot a from cottage, the from view their of distance
before. walks their of any in reach to happened never

one; animated an discovered soon they scene, the in objects the Amongst
they minutes few a In them. towards riding horseback on man a was it
afterwards moment a in and gentleman; a be to him distinguish could
exclaimed, rapturously Marianne

meet to hastening was is!"--and it know indeed;--I is it he; is "It
out, cried Elinor when him,

Willoughby. not is It mistaken. are you think I Marianne, "Indeed,
air." his not has and him, for enough tall not is person The

his air, His has. he sure am "I Marianne, cried has," he has, "He
come." would he soon how knew I horse. his coat,

from Marianne screen to Elinor, and spoke; she as on eagerly walked She
Willoughby, being not its of certain almost felt she as particularity,
thirty within soon were They her. with up kept and pace her quickened
within sunk heart her again; looked Marianne gentleman. the of yards
voices the when back, hurrying was she round, turning abruptly and her;
well as almost third, a her; detain to raised were sisters her both of
she and stop, to her begging in them joined Willoughby's, as known
Ferrars. Edward welcome and see to surprise with round turned

be moment that at could who world the in person only the was He
a gained have could who one only the Willoughby; being not for forgiven
her in and HIM, on smile to tears her dispersed she but her; from smile
disappointment. own her time a for forgot happiness sister's

with back walked servant, his to horse his giving and dismounted, He
them. visit to coming purposely was he whither Barton, to them

by especially but cordiality, great with all them by welcomed was He
than him of reception her in regard of warmth more showed who Marianne,
Edward between meeting the indeed, Marianne, To herself. Elinor even
coldness unaccountable that of continuation a but was sister her and
On behaviour. mutual their in Norland at observed often had she which
a that all of deficiency a was there particularly, more side, Edward's
confused, was He occasion. an such on say and look to ought lover
neither looked them, seeing in pleasure of sensible scarcely seemed
by him from forced was what but little said gay, nor rapturous
Marianne affection. of mark no by Elinor distinguished and questions,
a feel to almost began She surprise. increasing with listened and saw
by her, with end must feeling every as ended, it and Edward; of dislike
a formed manners whose Willoughby, to thoughts her back carrying
elect. brother his of those to striking sufficiently contrast

enquiries and surprise first the succeeded which silence short a After
No, London. from directly came he if Edward asked Marianne meeting, of
fortnight. a Devonshire in been had he

same the in long so being his at surprised repeated, she fortnight!" "A
before. her seeing without Elinor with county

with staying been had he that added, he as distressed rather looked He
Plymouth. near friends some

Elinor. said Sussex?" in lately been you "Have

ago." month a about Norland at was "I

Marianne. cried look?" Norland dear dear, does how "And

always it as much looks "probably Elinor, said Norland," dear "Dear,
covered thickly walks and woods The year. the of time this at does
leaves." dead with

formerly I have sensation transporting what "with Marianne, cried "Oh,"
driven them see to walked, I as delighted, I have How fall! them seen
season, the they, have feelings What wind! the by me about showers in
They them. regard to one no is there Now inspired! altogether air the
as much as driven and off, hastily swept nuisance, a as only seen are
sight." the from possible

dead for passion your has "who Elinor, said one," every not is "It
leaves."

But understood. often not shared, often not are feelings my "No;
a for reverie a into sunk she this, said she are."--As they SOMETIMES
she, said Edward," "Now, again, herself rousing moments;--but few
up Look valley. Barton is "here prospect, the to attention his calling
ever you Did hills! those at Look can. you if tranquil be and it, to
and woods those amongst park, Barton is left the To equals? their see
beneath there, And house. the of end the see may You plantations.
cottage." our is grandeur, such with rises which hill, farthest that

be must bottoms these "but replied; he country," beautiful a is "It
winter." in dirty

you?" before objects such with dirt, of think you can "How

before objects the of rest the "among smiling, he, replied "Because,"
lane." dirty very a see I me,

on. walked she as herself to Marianne said strange!" "How

pleasant Middletons the Are here? neighbourhood agreeable an you "Have
people?"

unfortunately more be not could "we Marianne; answered all," not "No,
situated."

so be you can How so? say you can "how sister, her cried "Marianne,"
towards and Ferrars; Mr. family, respectable very a are They unjust?
Marianne, forgot, you Have manner. friendliest the in behaved have us
them?" to owed have we days pleasant many how

moments." painful many how "nor voice, low a in Marianne, said "No,"

their to attention her directing and this; of notice no took Elinor
by him, with discourse like something support to endeavoured visitor,
extorting &c. conveniences, its residence, present their of talking
reserve and coldness His remarks. and questions occasional him from
to resolving but angry; half and vexed was she severely; her mortified
she present, the than rather past the by him to behaviour her regulate
him treated and displeasure, or resentment of appearance every avoided
connection. family the from treated be to ought he thought she as



17 CHAPTER


his for him; seeing at moment a for only surprised was Dashwood Mrs.
natural. most the things all of opinion, her in was, Barton to coming
received He wonder. her outlived long regard of expression and joy Her
not could reserve coldness, shyness, and her; from welcome kindest the
he before him fail to begun had They reception. a such against stand
captivating the by overcome quite were they and house, the entered
love in be well very not could man a Indeed Dashwood. Mrs. of manners
and her; to passion the extending without daughters, her of either with
like more become soon him seeing of satisfaction the had Elinor
his and all, them towards reanimate to seemed affections His himself.
in not was He perceptible. became again welfare their in interest
was prospect, its admired house, their praised he however; spirits,
family whole The spirits. in not was he still but kind; and attentive,
of want some to it attributing Dashwood, Mrs. and it, perceived
all against indignant table to down sat mother, his in liberality
parents. selfish

she, said Edward?" present, at you for views Ferrars's Mrs. are "What
still you "are fire; the round drawn had they and over was dinner when
yourself?" of spite in orator great a be to

than talents more no have I that convinced now is mother my hope I "No.
life!" public a for inclination

to be must you famous for established? be to fame your is how "But
no expense, for inclination no with and family; your all satisfy
find may you assurance, no and profession, no strangers, for affection
matter." difficult a it

have and distinguished; be to wish no have I it. attempt not shall "I
forced be cannot I Heaven! Thank shall. never I hope to reason every
eloquence." and genius into

moderate." all are wishes Your know. well I ambition, no have "You

as wish I believe. I world, the of rest the of those as moderate "As
body every like but, happy; perfectly be to else body every as well
so." me make not will Greatness way. own my in be must it else

grandeur or wealth have "What Marianne. cried would!" it that "Strange
happiness?" with do to

with do to much has wealth "but Elinor, said little," but has "Grandeur
it."

happiness give only can "money Marianne, said shame!" for "Elinor,
can it competence, a Beyond it. give to else nothing is there where
concerned." is self mere as far as satisfaction, real no afford

YOUR point. same the to come may "we smiling, Elinor, said "Perhaps,"
without and say; dare I alike, much very are wealth MY and competence
of kind every that agree both shall we now, goes world the as them,
than noble more only are ideas Your wanting. be must comfort external
competence?" your is what Come, mine.

THAT." than more not year; a thousand two or hundred eighteen "About

how guessed I wealth! my is ONE year! a thousand "TWO laughed. Elinor
end." would it

Marianne. said income," moderate very a is a-year thousand two yet "And
not am I sure am I smaller. a on maintained be well cannot family "A
a servants, of establishment proper A demands. my in extravagant
less." on supported be cannot hunters, and two, perhaps carriage,

their accurately so describing sister her hear to again, smiled Elinor
Magna. Combe at expenses future

body Every hunters? have you must why Edward--"but repeated "Hunters!"
hunt." not does

do." people most "But replied, she as coloured Marianne

somebody "that thought, novel a out striking Margaret, said wish," "I
apiece!" fortune large a all us give would

with sparkling eyes her Marianne, cried would!" they that "Oh
imaginary such of delight the with glowing cheeks her and animation,
happiness.

spite "in Elinor, said suppose," I wish, that in unanimous all are "We
wealth." of insufficiency the of

I what wonder I be! should I happy "how Margaret, cried dear!" "Oh
it!" with do should

point. that on doubt no had she if as looked Marianne

Mrs. said myself," fortune a large so spend to puzzled be should "I
help." my without rich be to all were children my "if Dashwood,

"and Elinor, observed house," this on improvements your begin must "You
vanish." soon will difficulties your

said London," to family this from travel would orders magnificent "What
booksellers, for day happy a What event! an such "in Edward,
a give would Dashwood, Miss You, print-shops! and music-sellers,
as you--and sent be to merit of print new every for commission general
music be not would there soul, of greatness her know I Marianne, for
Cowper, books!--Thomson, And her. content to London in enough
up buy would she again: over and over all them buy would Scott--she
hands; unworthy into falling their prevent to believe, I copy, every
old an admire to how her tells that book every have would she and
very am I if me, Forgive Marianne? you, not Should tree. twisted
old our forgot not had I that you shew to willing was I But saucy.
disputes."

or melancholy be it Edward--whether past, the of reminded be to love "I
of talking by me offend never will you it--and recall to love I gay,
be would money my how supposing in right very are You times. former
employed be certainly would cash loose least--my at it, of spent--some
books." and music of collection my improving in

the on annuities in out laid be would fortune your of bulk the "And
heirs." their or authors

it." with do to else something have should I Edward, "No,

who person that on reward a as it bestow would you then, "Perhaps,
ever can one no that maxim, favourite your of defence ablest the wrote
is point that on opinion life--your their in once than more love in be
presume?" I unchanged,

is It fixed. tolerably are opinions life of time my At "Undoubtedly.
them." change to thing any hear or see now should I that likely not

not is "she Elinor, said see," you ever, as steadfast as is "Marianne
altered." all at

was." she than grave more little a grown only is "She

not are You me. reproach not need "you Marianne, said Edward," "Nay,
yourself." gay very

never gaiety "But sigh. a with he, replied so!" think you should "Why
character." MY of part a was

hardly should "I Elinor; said Marianne's," of part a it think I do "Nor
she all in eager very earnest, very is girl--she lively a her call
she animation--but with always and deal great a talks does--sometimes
merry." really often not is

her set always have I yet "and replied, he right," are you believe "I
girl." lively a as down

said mistakes," of kind such in myself detected frequently have "I
or point some in character of misapprehension total a "in Elinor,
or ingenious or grave, or gay more much so people fancying other:
the what in or why tell hardly can I and are, really they than stupid
of say they what by guided is one Sometimes originated. deception
them, of say people other what by frequently very and themselves,
judge." and deliberate to time oneself giving without

guided be "to Marianne, said Elinor," right, was it thought I "But
were judgments our thought I people. other of opinion the by wholly
has This neighbours. of those to subservient be to merely us given
sure." am I doctrine, your been always

of subjection the at aimed never has doctrine My never. Marianne, "No,
the been has influence to attempted ever have I All understanding. the
confess, I guilty, am I meaning. my confound not must You behaviour.
with general in acquaintance our treat to you wished often having of
their adopt to you advised I have when but attention; greater
matters?" serious in judgment their to conform to or sentiments

of plan your to over sister your bring to able been not have "You
ground?" no gain you "Do Elinor. to Edward said civility," general

Marianne. at expressively looking Elinor, replied contrary," the "Quite

I but question; the of side your on all "is returned, he judgment," "My
to wish never I sister's. your on more much is practice my afraid am
I when negligent, seem often I that shy, foolishly so am I but offend,
thought frequently have I awkwardness. natural my by back kept only am
I company, low of fond be to nature by intended been have must I that
gentility!" of strangers among ease my at little so am

said hers," of inattention any excuse to shyness not has "Marianne
Elinor.

Edward. replied shame," false for well too worth own her knows "She
or way some in inferiority of sense a of effect the only is "Shyness
easy perfectly were manners my that myself persuade could I If other.
shy." be not should I graceful, and

worse." is that "and Marianne, said reserved," be still would you "But

Marianne?" reserved, I Am started--"Reserved! Edward

very." "Yes,

in "Reserved!--how, colouring. he, replied you," understand not do "I
suppose?" you can What you? tell to I am What manner? what

the off laugh to trying but emotion; his at surprised looked Elinor
to enough well sister my know you not "Do him, to said she subject,
one every calls she know you not Do means? she what understand
as admires she what admire and fast, as talk not does who reserved
herself?" as rapturously

him on returned thoughtfulness and gravity His answer. no made Edward
dull. and silent time some for sat he extent--and fullest their in



18 CHAPTER


His friend. her of spirits low the uneasiness great with saw, Elinor
own his while satisfaction, partial very a but her afforded visit
was he that evident was It imperfect. so appeared it in enjoyment
distinguished still he that evident equally were it wished she unhappy;
of doubt no felt had she once which affection same the by her
very seemed preference his of continuance the hitherto but inspiring;
contradicted her towards manner his of reservedness the and uncertain;
one. preceding the intimated had look animated more a what moment one

morning next the breakfast-room the in Marianne and her joined He
to eager always was who Marianne, and down; were others the before
to them left soon could, she as far as happiness their promote
parlour the heard she upstairs way half was she before But themselves.
himself Edward see to astonished was round, turning and, open, door
out. come

are you "as he, said horses," my see to village the into going am "I
presently." again back be shall I breakfast; for ready yet not

***

surrounding the of admiration fresh with them to returned Edward
the of parts many seen had he village, the to walk his in country;
situation higher much a in itself, village the and advantage; to valley
had which whole, the of view general a afforded cottage, the than
Marianne's ensured which subject a was This him. pleased exceedingly
of admiration own her describe to beginning was she and attention,
had that objects the on minutely more him question to and scenes, these
"You saying, by her interrupted Edward when him, struck particularly
the in knowledge no have I Marianne--remember far, too enquire not must
taste of want and ignorance my by you offend shall I and picturesque,
be to ought which steep, hills call shall I particulars. to come we if
and irregular be to ought which uncouth, and strange surfaces bold;
be to only ought which sight, of out objects distant and rugged;
be must You atmosphere. hazy a of medium soft the through indistinct
a it call I give. honestly can I as admiration such with satisfied
fine of full seem woods the steep, are hills country--the fine very
meadows rich snug--with and comfortable looks valley the and timber,
exactly It there. and here scattered houses farm neat several and
with beauty unites it because country, fine a of idea my answers
admire you because too, one picturesque a is it say dare I utility--and
grey promontories, and rocks of full be to it believe easily can I it;
of nothing know I me. on lost all are these but wood, brush and moss
picturesque." the

you should why "but Marianne; said true," too but is it afraid am "I
it?" of boast

affectation, of kind one avoid to "that Elinor, said suspect," "I
people many believes he Because another. into falls here Edward
really they than nature of beauties the of admiration more to pretend
greater affects he pretensions, such with disgusted is and feel,
he than himself them viewing in discrimination less and indifference
own." his of affectation an have will and fastidious is He possesses.

scenery landscape of admiration "that Marianne, said true," very is "It
to tries and feel to pretends body Every jargon. mere a become is
what defined first who him of elegance and taste the with describe
I sometimes and kind, every of jargon detest I was. beauty picturesque
to language no find could I because myself, to feelings my kept have
and sense all of out hackneyed and worn was what but in them describe
meaning."

in delight the all feel really you "that Edward, said convinced," am "I
sister your return, in But, feel. to profess you which prospect fine a
prospect, fine a like I profess. I than more no feel to me allow must
twisted, crooked, like not do I principles. picturesque on not but
and straight, tall, are they if more much them admire I trees. blasted
fond not am I cottages. tattered ruined, like not do I flourishing.
a in pleasure more have I blossoms. heath or thistles, or nettles of
villages happy tidy, of troop a watch-tower--and a than farm-house snug
world." the in banditti finest the than better me please

her at compassion with Edward, at amazement with looked Marianne
laughed. only Elinor sister.

remained Marianne and farther; no continued was subject The
attention. her engaged suddenly object new a till silent, thoughtfully
Dashwood, Mrs. from tea his taking in and Edward, by sitting was She
plait a with ring, a make to as her, before directly so passed hand his
fingers. his of one on conspicuous very centre, the in hair of

that "Is cried. she Edward," before, ring a wear you saw never "I
should I But some. you give to promising her remember I hair? Fanny's
darker." been had hair her thought have

saw she when felt--but really she what inconsiderately spoke Marianne
thought of want her at vexation own her Edward, pained had she much how
a giving and deeply, very coloured He his. by surpassed be not could
The hair. sister's my is it "Yes; replied, Elinor, at glance momentary
know." you it, on shade different a casts always setting

hair the That likewise. conscious looked and eye, his met had Elinor
Marianne; as satisfied well as felt instantaneously she own, her was
Marianne what that was, conclusions their in difference only the
must conscious was Elinor sister, her from gift free a as considered
herself. to unknown contrivance or theft some by procured been have
and affront, an as it regard to however, humour, a in not was She
of talking instantly by passed, what of notice no take to affecting
every catch to henceforward resolved internally she else, something
all beyond herself, satisfying of and hair the eyeing of opportunity
own. her of shade the exactly was it that doubt,

of absence an in ended it and time, some lasted embarrassment Edward's
morning. whole the grave particularly was He settled. more still mind
own her but said; had she what for herself censured severely Marianne
little how known she had speedy, more been have might forgiveness
sister. her given had it offence

Mrs. and John Sir by visited were they day, the of middle the Before
the at gentleman a of arrival the of heard having who, Jennings,
of assistance the With guest. the of survey a take to came cottage,
name the that discovering in long not was John Sir mother-in-law, his
raillery of mine future a prepared this and F. an with began Ferrars of
their of newness the but nothing which Elinor, devoted the against
immediately being from prevented have could Edward with acquaintance
significant very some from learned, only she was, it as But, sprung.
instructions, Margaret's on founded penetration, their far how looks,
extended.

to them inviting either without Dashwoods the to came never John Sir
evening. that them with tea drink to or day, next the park the at dine
visitor, their of entertainment better the for occasion, present the On
wished he contribute, to bound himself felt he amusement whose towards
both. for them engage to

quite be shall we "for he, said night," to us with tea drink MUST "You
a be shall we for us, with dine absolutely must you tomorrow alone--and
party." large

raise may you but knows who "And necessity. the enforced Jennings Mrs.
Marianne." Miss YOU, tempt will that "And she. said dance," a

dance?" to is Who "Impossible! Marianne. cried dance!" "A

sure.--What! be to Whitakers and Careys, the and yourselves, why "Who!
be shall that person certain a because dance could nobody thought you
gone!" is nameless

among were Willoughby "that John, Sir cried soul," my all with wish "I
again." us

who "And Edward. to suspicions new gave blushing, Marianne's and This,
he whom by Dashwood, Miss to voice, low a in he, said Willoughby?" is
sitting. was

more was countenance Marianne's reply. brief a him gave She
meaning the only not comprehend, to enough saw Edward communicative.
him puzzled had as expressions Marianne's of such but others, of
round immediately went he them, left visitors their when and before;
you tell I Shall guessing. been have "I whisper, a in said, and her,
guess?" my

mean?" you do "What

you." tell I "Shall

"Certainly."

hunts." Willoughby Mr. that guess I then; "Well

at smiling help not could she yet confused, and surprised was Marianne
said, silence, moment's a after and manner, his of archness quiet the

sure am hope...I I come will time the you?--But can How Edward! "Oh,
him." like will you

earnestness her at astonished rather he, replied it," doubt not do "I
her of good the for joke a be to it imagined not he had for warmth; and
nothing a or something a on only founded general, in acquaintance
to ventured have not would he herself, and Willoughby Mr. between
it. mention



19 CHAPTER


Mrs. by pressed earnestly was he cottage; the at week a remained Edward
on only bent were he if as but, longer; stay to Dashwood
enjoyment his when gone be to resolved seemed he self-mortification,
two last the during spirits, His height. the at was friends his among
improved--he greatly were unequal, very still though days, three or
of spoke environs--never and house the to partial more and more grew
wholly be to time his sigh--declared a without away going
left he when go should he place what to doubted disengaged--even
quickly--he so passed week any had Never must. he go still, them--but
other repeatedly; so said He gone. be to it believe hardly could
the gave and feelings his of turn the marked which too, said he things
being detested he Norland; at pleasure no had He actions. his to lie
their valued He go. must he London, or Norland to either but town; in
with being in was happiness greatest his and thing, any beyond kindness
their of spite in week, a of end the at them leave must he Yet, them.
time. his on restraint any without and own, his and wishes

his to acting of way this in astonishing was that all placed Elinor
whose mother a had he that her for happy was it and account; mother's
excuse general the be to as her, to known imperfectly so was character
however, Disappointed, son. her of part the on strange thing every for
uncertain his with displeased sometimes and was, she as vexed and
regard to whole the on disposed well very was she herself, to behaviour
qualifications, generous and allowances candid the all with actions his
for her, from extorted painfully more rather been had which
openness, of spirits, of want His mother. her by service, Willoughby's
of want his to attributed usually most were consistency, of and
disposition Ferrars's Mrs. of knowledge better his and independence,
purpose his of steadiness the visit, his of shortness The designs. and
same the inclination, fettered same the in originated them, leaving in
old The mother. his with temporizing of necessity inevitable
child, against parent will, against duty of grievance well-established
these when know to glad been have would She all. of cause the was
Mrs. yield,--when to was opposition this cease, to were difficulties
But happy. be to liberty at be son her and reformed, be would Ferrars
renewal the to comfort for turn to forced was she wishes vain such from
every of remembrance the to affection, Edward's in confidence her of
and Barton, at while him from fell which word or look in regard of mark
round wore constantly he which it of proof flattering that to all above
finger. his

the breakfast at were they as Dashwood, Mrs. said Edward," think, "I
to profession any had you if man happier a be would "you morning, last
Some actions. and plans your to interest an give and time your engage
would it--you from result might indeed, friends, your to inconvenience
you smile) a (with But time. your of much so them give to able be not
would least--you at particular one in benefited materially be would
them." left you when go to where know

point, this on thought long have I "that replied, he you," assure do "I
a be always will probably and is, and been, has It now. think you as
engage to business necessary no had have I that me, to misfortune heavy
like thing any me afford or employment, me give to profession no me,
my of nicety the and nicety, own my unfortunately But independence.
never We being. helpless idle, an am, I what me made have friends,
the preferred always I profession. a of choice our in agree could
family. my for enough smart not was that But do. still I as church,
me. for smart too deal great a was That army. the recommended They
had who men, young many enough; genteel be to allowed was law The
first the in appearance good very a made Temple, the in chambers
no had I But gigs. knowing very in town about drove and circles,
which it, of study abstruse less this in even law, the for inclination
I but side, its on fashion had it navy, the for As approved. family my
at it--and, enter to started first was subject the when old too was
all, at profession any having my for necessity no was there as length,
as back my on coat red a without expensive and dashing as be might I as
advantageous most be to whole the on pronounced was idleness one, with
so general in not is eighteen of man young a and honourable, and
his of solicitations the resist to as busy being on bent earnestly
been have and Oxford at entered therefore was I nothing. do to friends
since." ever idle properly

Dashwood, Mrs. said be," will suppose, I which, of consequence "The
will sons your that happiness, own your promoted not has leisure "since
trades and professions, employments, pursuits, many as to up brought be
Columella's." as

as be "to accent, serious a in he, said up," brought be will "They
in condition, in action, in feeling, In possible. is as myself unlike
thing." every

spirits, of want immediate of effusion an all is this come; "Come,
unlike one any that fancy and humour, melancholy a in are You Edward.
from parting of pain the that remember But happy. be must yourself
their be whatever times, at body every by felt be will friends
but nothing want You happiness. own your Know state. or education
Your hope. it call name, fascinating more a it give patience--or
so are you independence that time, in you, to secure will mother
her become long ere must it will, it and duty, her is it for; anxious
discontent. in wasted being from youth whole your prevent to happiness
do?" months few a not may much How

any produce to months many defy may I "that Edward, replied think," "I
me." to good

to communicated be not could it though mind, of turn desponding This
which parting, the in all them to pain additional gave Dashwood, Mrs.
Elinor's on impression uncomfortable an left and place, took shortly
subdue. to time and trouble some required which especially, feelings
herself prevent to and it, subdue to determination her was it as But
his on suffered family her all what than more suffer to appearing from
by employed judiciously so method the adopt not did she away, going
by sorrow, her fix and augment to occasion, similar a on Marianne,
different as were means Their idleness. and solitude silence, seeking
each. of advancement the to suited equally and objects, their as

the of out was he as soon as drawing-table her to down sat Elinor
nor sought neither day, whole the herself employed busily house,
as almost herself interest to appeared name, his of mention the avoided
this by if, and family, the of concerns general the in ever as much
prevented least at was it grief, own her lessen not did she conduct,
much spared were sisters and mother her and increase, unnecessary from
account. her on solicitude

no appeared own, her of reverse the exactly so this, as behaviour Such
her. to faulty seemed had own her than Marianne, to meritorious more
strong easily;--with very settled she self-command of business The
merit. no have could it ones calm with impossible, was it affections
she though deny, not dared she calm, WERE affections sister's her That
a gave she own, her of strength the of and it; acknowledge to blushed
in sister, that respecting and loving still by proof, striking very
conviction. mortifying this of spite

in house the leaving or family, her from up herself shutting Without
to night whole the awake lying or them, avoid to solitude determined
enough leisure her afforded day every found Elinor meditation, indulge
possible every in behaviour, Edward's of and Edward, of think to
times different at spirits her of state different the which variety
doubt. and censure, approbation, pity, tenderness, produce,--with could
her of absence the by not if when, abundance, in moments were There
employments, their of nature the by least at sisters, and mother
was solitude of effect every and them, among forbidden was conversation
not could thoughts her liberty; at inevitably was mind Her produced.
so subject a on future, the and past the and elsewhere; chained be
engross and attention, her force must her, before be must interesting,
fancy. her and reflection, her memory, her

was she drawing-table, her at sat she as kind, this of reverie a From
of arrival the by them, leaving Edward's after soon morning, one roused
little the of closing The alone. quite be to happened She company.
drew house, the of front in court green the of entrance the at gate,
the to up walking party large a saw she and window, the to eyes her
Jennings, Mrs. and Middleton Lady and John Sir were them Amongst door.
unknown quite were who lady, and gentleman a others, two were there but
John Sir as soon as and window, the near sitting was She her. to
of ceremony the to party the of rest the left he her, perceived
open to her obliged turf, the across stepping and door, the at knocking
the between short so was space the though him, to speak to casement the
one at speak to possible hardly it make to as window, the and door
other. the at heard being without

like you do How strangers. some you brought have "we he, said "Well,"
them?"

you." hear will they "Hush!

very is Charlotte Palmers. the only is It do. they if mind "Never
way." this look you if her see may You you. tell can I pretty,

without minutes, of couple a in her seeing of certain was Elinor As
excused. be to begged she liberty, that taking

her see I come? are we because away run she Has Marianne? is "Where
open." is instrument

believe." I walking, is "She

to enough patience not had who Jennings, Mrs. by joined now were They
came She story. HER told she before opened was door the till wait
Mrs. does How dear? my do, you do "How window, the to hallooing
be will you alone! all What! sisters? your are where And do? Dashwood
son other my brought have I you. with sit to company little a of glad
I suddenly! so coming their of think Only you. see to daughter and
tea, our drinking were we while night, last carriage a heard I thought
of thought I them. be could it that head my entered never it but
so again; back come Brandon Colonel be not might it whether but nothing
Colonel is it perhaps carriage; a hear I think do I John, Sir to said I
again"-- back come Brandon

to story, her of middle the in her, from turn to obliged was Elinor
two the introduced Middleton Lady party; the of rest the receive
same the at stairs down came Margaret and Dashwood Mrs. strangers;
Jennings Mrs. while another, one at look to down sat all they and time,
parlour, the into passage the through walked she as story her continued
John. Sir by attended

totally and Middleton, Lady than younger years several was Palmer Mrs.
very a had plump, and short was She respect. every in her unlike
could that it in humour good of expression finest the and face, pretty
sister's, her as elegant so means no by were manners Her be. possibly
smile, a with in came She prepossessing. more much were they but
smiled and laughed, she when except visit, her of time the all smiled
five of man young looking grave a was husband Her away. went she when
wife, his than sense and fashion more of air an with twenty, and six or
room the entered He pleased. be or please to willingness less of but
without ladies, the to bowed slightly self-consequence, of look a with
their and them surveying briefly after and, word, a speaking
read to continued and table, the from newspaper a up took apartments,
staid. he as long as it

a with nature by endowed strongly was who contrary, the on Palmer, Mrs.
her before seated hardly was happy, and civil uniformly being for turn
forth. burst it in thing every and parlour the of admiration

so anything saw never I is! this room delightful a what "Well!
last! here was I since improved is it how Mama, think, Only charming!
Mrs. to (turning ma'am! place, sweet a such it thought always I
how sister, look, Only charming! so it made have you but Dashwood)
myself! for house a such like should I How is! thing every delightful
Palmer?" Mr. you, not Should

the from eyes his raise even not did and answer, no her made Palmer Mr.
newspaper.

does never "he laughing; she, said me," hear not does Palmer "Mr.
ridiculous!" so is It sometimes.

to used been never had she Dashwood; Mrs. to idea new a quite was This
with looking help not could and one, any of inattention the in wit find
both. them at surprise

and could, she as loud as on talked meantime, the in Jennings, Mrs.
seeing on before, evening the surprise, their of account her continued
Palmer Mrs. told. was thing every till ceasing without friends, their
every and astonishment, their of recollection the at heartily laughed
an quite been had it that over, times three or two agreed, body
surprise. agreeable

Mrs. added them," see to were all we glad how believe may "You
voice low a in speaking and Elinor, towards forward leaning Jennings,
on seated were they though else, one no by heard be to meant she if as
they wishing help can't I however, "but, room; the of sides different
it, of journey long a such made nor fast, so quite travelled not had
for business, some of account upon London by round all came they for
was it daughter) her to pointing and significantly (nodding know you
this rest and home at stay to her wanted I situation. her in wrong
all!" you see to much so longed she us; with come would she but morning,

harm. any her do not would it said and laughed, Palmer Mrs.

Jennings. Mrs. continued February," in confined be to expects "She

and conversation, a such endure longer no could Middleton Lady
in news any was there if Palmer Mr. ask to herself exerted therefore
paper. the

on. read and replied, he all," at none "No,

a see shall you Palmer, "Now, John. Sir cried Marianne," comes "Here
girl." pretty monstrous

and door, front the opened passage, the into went immediately He
she as soon as her, asked Jennings Mrs. himself. in her ushered
so laughed Palmer Mrs. and Allenham; to been not had she if appeared,
Palmer Mr. it. understood she show to as question, the at heartily
and minutes, some her at stared room, the entering her on up looked
by caught now was eye Palmer's Mrs. newspaper. his to returned then
them. examine to up got She room. the round hung which drawings the

but Do delightful! how Well! are! these beautiful how dear, "Oh!
look could I charming; quite are they declare I sweet! how mama, look,
forgot soon very she again, down sitting then And ever." for them at
room. the in things such any were there that

down laid also, rose Palmer Mr. away, go to rose Middleton Lady When
around. all them at looked and himself stretched newspaper, the

laughing. wife, his said asleep?" been you have love, "My

the examining again after observed, only and answer; no her made He
crooked. was ceiling the that and pitched, low very was it that room,
rest. the with departed and bow, his made then He

at day next the spend to all them with urgent very been had John Sir
oftener them with dine to chuse not did who Dashwood, Mrs. park. the
account; own her on refused absolutely cottage, the at dined they than
to curiosity no had they But pleased. they as do might daughters her
of expectation no and dinner, their ate Palmer Mrs. and Mr. how see
therefore, attempted, They way. other any in them from pleasure
not and uncertain, was weather the themselves; excuse to likewise,
carriage satisfied--the be not would John Sir But good. be to likely
though too, Middleton Lady come. must they and them for sent be should
Mrs. and Jennings Mrs. them. pressed mother, their press not did she
a avoid to anxious equally seemed all entreaties, their joined Palmer
yield. to obliged were ladies young the and party; family

gone. were they as soon as Marianne, said us?" ask they should "Why
very on it have we but low; be to said is cottage this of rent "The
staying is one any whenever park the at dine to are we if terms, hard
us." with or them, with either

"by Elinor, said now," us to kind and civil be to less no mean "They
a them from received we which those by than invitations, frequent these
are parties their if them, in not is alteration The ago. weeks few
elsewhere." change the for look must We dull. and tedious grown



20 CHAPTER


next the park the of drawing-room the entered Dashwoods Miss the As
as looking other, the at in running came Palmer Mrs. door, one at day,
most all them took She before. as merry and humoured good
them seeing in delight great expressed and hand, the by affectionately
again.

and Elinor between herself seating she, said you!" see to glad so am "I
come, not might you afraid was I day a bad so is it "for Marianne,
must We tomorrow. again away go we as thing, shocking a be would which
a quite was It know. you week next us to come Westons the for go,
the till it of nothing knew I and all, at coming our thing sudden
I if me asked Palmer Mr. then and door, the to coming was carriage
any me tells never He droll! so is He Barton. to him with go would
again meet shall we however longer; stay cannot we sorry so am I thing!
hope." I soon, very town in

expectation. an such to end an put to obliged were They

quite be shall "I laugh, a with Palmer, Mrs. cried town!" to go "Not
for world the in house nicest the get could I not. do you if disappointed
I indeed. come, must You Hanover-square. in ours, to door next you,
am I till time any at you chaperon to happy very be shall I sure am
public." into go to like not should Dashwood Mrs. if confined,

entreaties. her all resist to obliged were but her; thanked They

entered then just who husband, her to Palmer Mrs. cried love," my "Oh,
to go to Dashwoods Miss the persuade to me help must room--"you the
winter." this town

began ladies, the to bowing slightly after and answer; no made love Her
weather. the of complaining

and thing every makes weather "Such he. said is!" this all horrid "How
as doors within produced much as is Dullness disgusting. body every
What acquaintance. one's all detest one makes It rain. by without,
his in room billiard a having not by mean John Sir does devil the
as stupid as is John Sir is! comfort what know people few How house?
weather." the

in. dropt soon company the of rest The

to able been not have "you John, Sir said Marianne," Miss afraid, am "I
today." Allenham to walk usual your take

nothing. said and grave very looked Marianne

all know we "for Palmer; Mrs. said us," before sly so be don't "Oh,
think I for much, very taste your admire I and you; assure I it, about
the in him from way great a live not do We handsome. extremely is he
say." dare I miles, ten above Not know. you country,

husband. her said thirty," nearer "Much

but house; his at was never I difference. much not is there well! "Ah,
place." pretty sweet a is it say they

Palmer. Mr. said life," my in saw ever I as spot a vile "As

her betrayed countenance her though silent, perfectly remained Marianne
said. was what in interest

other some be must it Palmer--"then Mrs. continued ugly?" very it "Is
suppose." I pretty so is that place

regret with observed John Sir room, dining the in seated were they When
together. all eight only were they that

be should we that provoking very is "it lady, his to he said dear," "My
today?" us to come to Gilberts the ask you not did Why few. so

before, it about me to spoke you when John, Sir you, tell I not "Did
last." us with dined They done? be not could it that

such upon stand not "should Jennings, Mrs. said John," Sir I, and "You
ceremony."

Palmer. Mr. cried ill-bred," very be would you "Then

usual her with wife his said body," every contradict you love "My
rude?" quite are you that know you "Do laugh.

mother your calling in body any contradicted I know not did "I
ill-bred."

lady, old good-natured the said please," you as me abuse may you "Ay,
again. back her give cannot and hands, my off Charlotte taken have "you
you." of hand whip the have I there So

rid get not could husband her that think to heartily laughed Charlotte
her, to was he cross how care not did she said, exultingly and her; of
more be to one any for impossible was It together. live must they as
Mrs. than happy be to determined more or good-natured, thoroughly
her of discontent and insolence, indifference, studied The Palmer.
was she her, abused or scolded he when and pain; no her gave husband
diverted. highly

is "He Elinor. to whisper, a in she, said droll!" so is Palmer "Mr.
humour." of out always

credit him give to observation, little a after inclined, not was Elinor
he as ill-bred or ill-natured unaffectedly and genuinely so being for
by soured little a be perhaps might temper His appear. to wished
unaccountable some through that sex, his of others many like finding,
silly very a of husband the was he beauty, of favour in bias
any for common too was blunder of kind this that knew she woman,--but
of wish a rather was It it.-- by hurt lastingly be to man sensible
of treatment contemptuous his produced which believed, she distinction,
was It him. before thing every of abuse general his and body, every
too was motive The people. other to superior appearing of desire the
by succeed might they however means, the but at; wondered be to common
attach to likely not were ill-breeding, in superiority his establishing
wife. his except him to one any

have "I afterwards, soon Palmer Mrs. said Dashwood," Miss dear my "Oh,
and come you Will sister. your and you of ask to favour a such got
come do,--and pray Now, Christmas? this Cleveland at time some spend
be! shall I happy how think cannot You us. with are Westons the while
"don't husband, her to applying love," delightful!--My quite be will It
Cleveland?" to come Dashwoods Miss the have to long you

no with Devonshire into came sneer--"I a with replied, he "Certainly,"
view." other

you so you; expects Palmer Mr. see "you lady, his now,"--said "There
come." to refuse cannot

invitation. her declined resolutely and eagerly both They

all of it like will you sure am I come. shall and must you indeed "But
delightful. quite be will it and us, with be will Westons The things.
gay so are we and is; Cleveland place sweet a what think cannot You
canvassing country the about going always is Palmer Mr. for now,
I that us with dine to came people many so and election; the against
very is it fellow! poor But, charming! quite is it before, saw never
him." like body every make to forced is he for him! to fatiguing

the to assented she as countenance her keep hardly could Elinor
obligation. an such of hardship

in is he "when Charlotte, said be," will it charming "How
to ridiculous so be will It laugh! shall I How it? Parliament!--won't
he know, you do M.P.--But an with him to directed letters his all see
you, Don't won't. he declares He me? for frank never will he says,
Palmer?" Mr.

her. of notice no took Palmer Mr.

quite is it says continued--"he she know," you writing, bear cannot "He
shocking."

all palm Don't irrational. so thing any said never "I he, said "No,"
me." upon languages of abuses your

him! with way the always is This is. he droll how see you now; "There
he then and together, day a half for me to speak won't he Sometimes
world." the in thing any about droll--all so something with out comes

drawing-room, the into returned they as much very Elinor surprised She
excessively. Palmer Mr. like not did she whether her asking by

agreeable." very seems "he Elinor; said "Certainly,"

pleasant; so is he would, you thought I do. you glad so am "Well--I
can I sisters your and you with pleased excessively is Palmer Mr. and
don't you if be will he disappointed how think can't you and you, tell
it." to object should you why imagine can't Cleveland.--I to come

the changing by and invitation; her decline to obliged again was Elinor
as that probable it thought She entreaties. her to stop a put subject,
some give to able be might Palmer Mrs. county, same the in lived they
could than character, general Willoughby's of account particular more
she and him; with acquaintance partial Middletons' the from gathered be
as merits his of confirmation a such one, any from gain to eager was
by began She Marianne. from fear of possibility the remove might
whether and Cleveland, at Willoughby Mr. of much saw they if inquiring
him. with acquainted intimately were they

Palmer;--"Not Mrs. replied well," extremely him know I yes; dear, "Oh
town. in ever for him seen have I but indeed; him, to spoke ever I that
was he while Barton at staying be to happened never I other or Somehow
uncle my with was I before;--but once here him saw Mama Allenham. at
of deal great a seen have should we say dare I However, Weymouth. at
we that unluckily very happened not had it if Somersetshire, in him
at little very is He together. country the in been have never should
Mr. think not do I there, much so ever were he if but believe; I Combe,
and know, you opposition, the in is he for him, visit would Palmer
very him, about inquire you why know I off. way a such is it besides
then for it, of glad monstrous am I him. marry to is sister your well;
know." you neighbour a for her have shall I

than matter the of more much know "you Elinor, replied word," my "Upon
match." a such expect to reason any have you if do, I

talks body every what is it know you because it, deny to pretend "Don't
town." through way my in it of heard I you assure I of.

Palmer!" Mrs. dear "My

in morning Monday Brandon Colonel met did.--I I honour my "Upon
directly." it of me told he and town, left we before just Bond-street,

Surely it! of you tell Brandon Colonel much. very me surprise "You
could who person a to intelligence such give To mistaken. be must you
should I what not is true, were it if even it, in interested be not
do." to Brandon Colonel expect

how you tell will I and that, all for so, was it you assure do I "But
and us; with walked and back turned he him, met we When happened. it
and thing one and sister, and brother my of talking began we so
to come family new a is there Colonel, 'So, him, to said I and another,
pretty, very are they word me sends mama and hear, I cottage, Barton
Combe of Willoughby Mr. to married be to going is them of one that and
been have you as know, must you course of for pray? true, it Is Magna.
lately.'" so Devonshire in

say?" Colonel the did what "And

so true, be to it knew he if as looked he but much; say not did "Oh--he
quite be will It certain. as down it set I moment that from
place?" take to it is When declare! I delightful,

hope?" I well very was Brandon "Mr.

but nothing did he praises, your of full so and well; quite yes, "Oh!
you." of things fine say

I and man; excellent an seems He commendation. his by flattered am "I
pleasing." uncommonly him think

should he pity a quite is it that man, charming a such is I.--He do "So
sister your with love in was HE says Mama dull. so and grave so be
hardly he for was, he if compliment great a was it you assure I too.--
body." any with love in falls ever

said Somersetshire?" of part your in known much Willoughby Mr. "Is
Elinor.

are people many believe not do I is, that well; extremely yes, "Oh!
all they but off; far so is Magna Combe because him, with acquainted
than liked more is Nobody you. assure I agreeable extremely him think
She sister. your tell may you so and goes, he wherever Willoughby Mr.
he that but not honour; my upon him, get to girl lucky monstrous a is
and handsome very so is she because her, getting in lucky more much is
don't I However, her. for enough good be can nothing that agreeable,
think I for you; assure I you, than handsomer all at hardly her think
sure, am I too Palmer Mr. does so and pretty, excessively both you
night." last it own to him get not could we though

material; very not was Willoughby respecting information Palmer's Mrs.
her. to pleasing was small, however favour, his in testimony any but

continued last," at acquainted got are we glad so am "I
You friends. great be always shall we hope I now Charlotte.--"And
you that delightful so is It you! see to longed I much how think can't
I And sure! be to it, like be can Nothing cottage! the at live should
be will you hope I married! well be to going is sister your glad so am
accounts." all by place, sweet a is It Magna. Combe at deal great a

you?" not have Brandon, Colonel with acquainted long been have "You

a was He married.-- sister my since ever while; great a "Yes,
voice, low a in added she believe," I John's. Sir of friend particular
John Sir could. he if me, had have to glad very been have would "he
the think not did mama But much. very it wished Middleton Lady and
to it mentioned have would John Sir otherwise me, for enough good match
immediately." married been have should we and Colonel, the

mother your to proposal John's Sir of know Brandon Colonel not "Did
yourself?" to affection his owned never he Had made? was it before

have would he say dare I it, to objected not had mama if but no; "Oh,
it for twice, above then me seen not had He things. all of it liked
Mr. am. I as happier much am I However, school. left I before was
like." I man of kind the is Palmer



21 CHAPTER


at families two the and day, next the Cleveland to returned Palmers The
last not did this But other. each entertain to left again were Barton
had head, her of out visitors last their got hardly had Elinor long;
at cause, a without happy so being Charlotte's at wondering done hardly
strange the at and abilities, good with simply, so acting Palmer's Mr.
Sir before wife, and husband between existed often which unsuitableness
society, of cause the in zeal active Jennings's Mrs. and John's
observe. and see to acquaintance new other some her procured

ladies, young two with met had they Exeter, to excursion morning's a In
her be to discovering of satisfaction the had Jennings Mrs. whom
to directly them invite to John Sir for enough was this and relations,
over. were Exeter at engagements present their as soon as park, the
an such before way gave instantly Exeter at engagements Their
the on alarm little no into thrown was Middleton Lady and invitation,
a receive to soon very was she that hearing by John, Sir of return
whose of and life, her in seen never had she whom girls two from visit
for proof; no have could she even, gentility tolerable elegance,--whose
for went subject that on mother and husband her of assurances the
the much so it made too relations her being Their all. at nothing
therefore were consolation at attempts Jennings's Mrs. and worse;
about care to not daughter her advised she when founded, unfortunately
put must and cousins all were they because fashionable; so being their
prevent to now however, impossible, was it As another. one with up
with it, of idea the to herself resigned Middleton Lady coming, their
merely with herself contenting woman, well-bred a of philosophy the all
times six or five subject the on reprimand gentle a husband her giving
day. every

or ungenteel means no by was appearance their arrived: ladies young The
civil, very manners their smart, very was dress Their unfashionable.
furniture, the with raptures in and house, the with delighted were they
Lady that children of fond doatingly so be to happened they and
had they before favour their in engaged was opinion good Middleton's
girls agreeable very be to them declared She Park. the at hour an been
John's Sir admiration. enthusiastic was ladyship her for which indeed,
he and praise, animated this with rose judgment own his in confidence
Miss the of Dashwoods Miss the tell to cottage the for directly off set
girls sweetest the being their of them assure to and arrival, Steeles'
not was there however, this, as commendation such From world. the in
the in girls sweetest the that knew well Elinor learned; be to much
every under England, of part every in with met be to were world
John Sir understanding. and temper face, form, of variation possible
his at look and directly Park the to walk to family whole the wanted
to even him to painful was It man! philanthropic Benevolent, guests.
himself. to cousin third a keep

shall you declare come--I must come--you he--"pray said now," come "Do
monstrous is Lucy them. like will you how think can't come--You
all are children The agreeable! and humoured good so and pretty,
they And acquaintance. old an was she if as already, her about hanging
that Exeter at heard have they for things, all of you see to long both
them told have I and world; the in creatures beautiful most the are you
with delighted be will You more. deal great a and true, very all is it
playthings of full coach whole the brought have They sure. am I them
they Why come? to not as cross so be you can How children. the for
and cousins, my are YOU fashion. a after know, you cousins, your are
related." be must you so wife's, my are they

of promise a obtain only could He prevail. not could John Sir But
in them left then and two, or day a within Park the at calling their
their of anew boast and home walk to indifference, their at amazement
the of boasting already been had he as Steeles, Miss the to attractions
them. to Steeles Miss

to introduction consequent and Park the to visit promised their When
the of appearance the in found they place, took ladies young these
sensible a not and plain very a with thirty, nearly was who eldest,
or two than more not was who other, the in but admire; to nothing face,
features her beauty; considerable acknowledged they twenty, and three
air, of smartness a and eye, quick sharp a had she and pretty, were
distinction gave grace, or elegance actual give not did it though which
soon Elinor and civil, particularly were manners Their person.-- her to
what with saw she when sense, of kind some for credit them allowed
agreeable themselves making were they attention judicious and constant
raptures, continual in were they children her With Middleton. Lady to
their humouring and notice, their courting beauty, their extolling
importunate the from spared be could as time their of such and whims;
of admiration in spent was it, on made politeness this which demands
thing, any doing be to happened she if doing, was ladyship her whatever
her which in dress, new elegant some of patterns taking in or
delight. unceasing into them thrown had before day the appearance
fond a foibles, such through court their pay who those for Fortunately
most the children, her for praise of pursuit in though, mother,
demands her credulous; most the likewise is beings, human of rapacious
excessive the and thing; any swallow will she but exorbitant; are
were offspring her towards Steeles Miss the of endurance and affection
or surprise smallest the without Middleton Lady by therefore viewed
impertinent the all complacency maternal with saw She distrust.
submitted. cousins her which to tricks mischievous and encroachments
their ears, their about pulled hair their untied, sashes their saw She
felt and away, stolen scissors and knives their and searched, work-bags
other no suggested It enjoyment. reciprocal a being its of doubt no
by, composedly so sit should Marianne and Elinor that than surprise
passing. was what in share a claiming without

Steeles's Miss taking his on she, said today!" spirits such in is "John
of full is window--"He of out it throwing and handkerchief, pocket
tricks." monkey

the of one pinching violently boy's second the on afterwards, soon And
is!" William playful "How observed, fondly she fingers, lady's same

caressing tenderly added, she Annamaria," little sweet my is here "And
last the for noise a made not had who old, years three of girl little a
there was quiet--Never and gentle so always is she "And minutes; two
thing!" little quiet a such

ladyship's her in pin a embraces, these bestowing in unfortunately But
this from produced neck, child's the scratching slightly dress head
outdone be hardly could as screams, violent such gentleness of pattern
was consternation mother's The noisy. professedly creature any by
and Steeles, Miss the of alarm the surpass not could it but excessive;
which emergency, an critical so in three, all by done was thing every
little the of agonies the assuage to likely as suggest could affection
her kisses, with covered lap, mother's her in seated was She sufferer.
was who Steeles, Miss the of one by lavender-water, with bathed wound
by plums sugar with stuffed mouth her and her, attend to knees her on
to wise too was child the tears, her for reward a such With other. the
two her kicked lustily, sobbed and screamed still She crying. cease
were soothings united their all and her, touch to offering for brothers
of scene a in that remembering luckily Middleton Lady till ineffectual
been had marmalade apricot some week, last distress similar
eagerly was remedy same the temple, bruised a for applied successfully
of intermission slight a and scratch, unfortunate this for proposed
that hope to reason them gave it, hearing on lady young the in screams
therefore room the of out carried was She rejected.-- be not would it
boys two the as and medicine, this of quest in arms, mother's her in
stay to mother their by entreated earnestly though follow, to chose
room the which quietness a in left were ladies young four the behind,
hours. many for known not had

gone. were they as soon as Steele, Miss said creatures!" little "Poor
accident." sad very a been have might "It

under been had it "unless Marianne, cried how," know hardly I "Yet
of way usual the is this But circumstances. different totally
reality." in at alarmed be to nothing is there where alarm, heightening

Steele. Lucy said is!" Middleton Lady woman sweet a "What

not did she what say to her for impossible was it silent; was Marianne
whole the therefore Elinor upon and occasion; the trivial however feel,
did She fell. always it, required politeness when lies telling of task
more with Middleton Lady of speaking by on, called thus when best her
Lucy. Miss than less far with though felt, she than warmth

is!" he man charming a "what sister, elder the cried too," John Sir "And

just, and simple only being commendation, Dashwood's Miss too, Here
perfectly was he that observed merely She eclat. any without in came
friendly. and humoured good

fine such saw never I have! they family little charming a what "And
and already, them upon doat quite I declare life.--I my in children
children." of fond distractedly always am I indeed

have I what "from smile, a with Elinor, said so," guess should "I
morning." this witnessed

rather Middletons little the think "you Lucy, said notion," a have "I
is it but enough; of outside the be may they perhaps indulged; much too
children see to love I part, my for and Middleton; Lady in natural so
and tame are they if them bear cannot I spirits; and life of full
quiet."

never I Park, Barton at am I while "that Elinor, replied confess," "I
abhorrence." any with children quiet and tame of think

Miss by broken first was which speech, this succeeded pause short A
now who and conversation, for disposed much very seemed who Steele,
Dashwood? Miss Devonshire, like you do how "And abruptly, rather said
Sussex." leave to sorry very were you suppose I

of least at or question, this of familiarity the at surprise some In
was. she that replied Elinor spoken, was it which in manner the

Steele. Miss added it?" not is place, beautiful prodigious a is "Norland

seemed who Lucy, said excessively," it admire John Sir heard have "We
sister. her of freedom the for necessary apology some think to

the saw ever "who Elinor, replied it," admire MUST one every think "I
its estimate can one any that supposed be to not is it though place;
do." we as beauties

so not have you suppose I there? beaux smart many great a you had "And
vast a are they think I part, my for world; the of part this in many
always." addition

sister, her of ashamed looking Lucy, said think," you should why "But
Sussex?" as Devonshire in men young genteel many as not are there "that

I'm an't. there that say to pretend don't I sure I'm dear, my "Nay,
could how know, you but Exeter; in beaux smart many vast a there's sure
only was I and Norland; about be might there beaux smart what tell I
not had they if Barton, at dull it find might Dashwoods Miss the afraid
not may ladies young you perhaps But have. to used they as many so
them. with as them without be lief as had and beaux, the about care
dress they provided agreeable, vastly are they think I part, my For
nasty. and dirty them see to bear can't I But civil. behave and smart
a quite man, young smart prodigious a Exeter, at Rose Mr. there's Now
of him meet but do you if yet and know, you Simpson, Mr. to clerk beau,
quite was brother your suppose I seen.-- be to fit not is he morning, a
rich?" so was he as married, he before Dashwood, Miss beau, a

not do I for you, tell cannot "I Elinor, replied word," my "Upon
that say, can I this But word. the of meaning the comprehend perfectly
is there for still one is he married, he before beau a was ever he if
him." in alteration smallest the not

have beaux--they being men's married of thinks never one dear! "Oh!
do." to else something

but nothing of talk can "you sister, her cried Anne," "Lord!
else." nothing of think you believe Dashwood Miss make will beaux;--you
the and house the admiring began she discourse, the turn to then And
furniture.

and freedom vulgar The enough. was Steeles Miss the of specimen This
not was Elinor as and recommendation, no her left eldest the of folly
want her to youngest, the of look shrewd the or beauty, the by blinded
wish any without house the left she artlessness, and elegance real of
better. them knowing of

with provided well Exeter, from came Steeles.--They Miss the so Not
his all and family, his Middleton, John Sir of use the for admiration
fair his to out dealt now was proportion niggardly no and relations,
elegant, beautiful, most the be to declared they whom cousins,
whom with and beheld, ever had they girls agreeable and accomplished,
be to And acquainted.-- better be to anxious particularly were they
inevitable their was found soon Elinor therefore, acquainted better
Steeles, Miss the of side the on entirely was John Sir as for lot,
of kind that and opposition, for strong too be would party their
two or hour an sitting of consists which to, submitted be must intimacy
more; no do could John Sir day. every almost room same the in together
in was, together be to required: was more any that know not did he but
their for schemes continual his while and intimate, be to opinion, his
established being their of doubt a not had he effectual, were meeting
friends.

their promote to power his in thing every did he justice, him do To
knew he whatever with acquainted Steeles Miss the making by unreserve,
delicate most the in situations cousins' his of supposed or
the before twice, than more them seen not had Elinor particulars,--and
as lucky so been having sister's her on joy her wished them of eldest
Barton. to came she since beau smart very a of conquest a make to

said sure," be to young so married her have to thing fine a be "'Twill
I And handsome. prodigious and beau, a quite is he hear I "and she,
have may you perhaps soon,--but yourself luck good as have may you hope
already." corner the in friend a

in nice more be would John Sir that suppose not could Elinor
been had he than Edward, for regard her of suspicions his proclaiming
of joke favourite his rather was it indeed Marianne; to respect with
since and conjectural; more and newer somewhat being as two, the
to drinking his without together dined never had they visit, Edward's
and nods many so and significancy much so with affections best her
likewise been F--had letter The attention. general excite to as winks,
countless such of productive found and forward, brought invariably
had alphabet the in letter wittiest the as character its that jokes,
Elinor. with established long been

these of benefit the all now had expected, she as Steeles, Miss The
the know to curiosity a raised they them of eldest the in and jokes,
impertinently often though which, to, alluded gentleman the of name
inquisitiveness general her with piece a of perfectly was expressed,
long sport not did John Sir But family. their of concerns the into
as least at had he for raise, to delighted he which curiosity the with
it. hearing in had Steele Miss as name, the telling in pleasure much

do pray "but whisper; audible very a in he, said Ferrars," is name "His
secret." great a it's for it, tell not

he? is man, happy the is Ferrars "Mr. Steele; Miss repeated "Ferrars!"
agreeable very a Dashwood? Miss brother, sister-in-law's your What!
well." very him know I sure; be to man young

amendment an made generally who Lucy, cried Anne?" so, say you can "How
twice or once him seen have we "Though assertions. sister's her all to
well." very him know to pretend to much too rather is it uncle's, my at

this was who "And surprise. and attention with this all heard Elinor
very wished She acquainted?" they came How live? he did Where uncle?
in join to chuse not did she though continued, subject the have to much
in time first the for and said, was it of more nothing but herself; it
after curiosity in either deficient Jennings Mrs. thought she life, her
manner The it. communicate to disposition a in or information, petty
for curiosity; her increased Edward, of spoken had Steele Miss which in
suspicion the suggested and ill-natured, rather being as her struck it
his to something know to herself fancying or knowing, lady's that of
notice farther no for unavailing, was curiosity her disadvantage.--But
even or to, alluded when Steele Miss by name Ferrars's Mr. of taken was
John. Sir by mentioned openly



22 CHAPTER


like thing any for toleration much never had who Marianne,
of difference even or parts, of inferiority vulgarity, impertinence,
from ill-disposed, particularly time this at was herself, from taste
to or Steeles, Miss the with pleased be to spirits, her of state the
her of coldness invariable the to and advances; their encourage
on intimacy at endeavour every checked which them, towards behaviour
herself of preference that attributed principally Elinor side, their
of especially but both, of manners the in evident became soon which
of or conversation, in her engaging of opportunity no missed who Lucy,
frank and easy an by acquaintance their improve to striving
sentiments. her of communication

and amusing; and just often were remarks her clever; naturally was Lucy
agreeable; her found frequently Elinor hour an half for companion a as
and ignorant was she education: from aid no received had powers her but
of want her improvement, mental all of deficiency her and illiterate;
from concealed be not could particulars, common most the in information
to appear to endeavour constant her of spite in Dashwood, Miss
abilities of neglect the for, her pitied and saw, Elinor advantage.
with saw, she but respectable; so rendered have might education which
of delicacy, of want thorough the feeling, of tenderness less
her attentions, her which mind, of integrity and rectitude,
no have could she and betrayed; Park the at flatteries her assiduities,
insincerity joined who person a of company the in satisfaction lasting
in meeting their prevented instruction of want whose ignorance; with
made others toward conduct whose and equality, of terms on conversation
perfectly herself towards deference and attention of shew every
valueless.

her to Lucy said say," dare I one, odd an question my think will "You
the to park the from together walking were they as day, one
your with acquainted personally you are pray, cottage--"but
Ferrars?" Mrs. mother, sister-in-law's

countenance her and one, odd very a question the think DID Elinor
Ferrars. Mrs. seen never had she that answered she as it, expressed

have must you thought I for that, at wonder "I Lucy; replied "Indeed!"
what me tell cannot you perhaps, Then, sometimes. Norland at her seen
is?" she woman a of sort

Edward's of opinion real her giving of cautious Elinor, returned "No,"
impertinent seemed what satisfying of desirous very not and mother,
her." of nothing know "I curiosity--

a such in her about enquiring for strange, very me think you sure am "I
perhaps "but spoke; she as attentively Elinor eyeing Lucy, said way,"
you hope I however but venture; might I wish reasons--I be may there
be to mean not do I that believing of justice the me do will
impertinent."

in minutes few a for on walked they and reply, civil a her made Elinor
by again subject the renewed who Lucy, by broken was It silence.
hesitation, some with saying,

I sure am I curious. impertinently me think you have to bear cannot "I
person a by so thought be than world the in thing any do rather would
I sure am I And yours. as having worth well so is opinion good whose
be should I indeed, YOU; trusting of fear smallest the have not should
uncomfortable an such in manage to how advice your of glad very
YOU. trouble to occasion no is there however, but, am; I as situation
Ferrars." Mrs. know to happen not do you sorry am I

could it "if astonishment, great in Elinor, said NOT," do I sorry am "I
never I really But her. of opinion my know to YOU to use any of be
and family, that with connected all at were you that understood
inquiry an serious so at confess, I surprised, little a am I therefore
character." her into

But it. at wonder all at not do I sure am I and are, you say dare "I
Mrs. surprised. much so be not would you all, you tell dared I if
MAY time the present--but at me to nothing certainly is Ferrars
be may we herself--when upon depend must come will it soon come--how
connected." intimately very

side one only with bashful, amiably this, said she as down looked She
her. on effect its observe to companion her at glance

acquainted you Are mean? you do "what Elinor, cried heavens!" "Good
much feel not did she And be?" you Can Ferrars? Robert Mr. with
sister-in-law. a such of idea the with delighted

my in him saw never Ferrars--I ROBERT Mr. to "not Lucy, replied "No,"
brother." eldest his "to Elinor, upon eyes her fixing but," life;

as been have would that Astonishment, moment? that at Elinor felt What
the of disbelief immediate an not had strong, was it as painful
amazement, silent in Lucy towards turned She it. attended assertion
though and declaration; a such of object or reason the divine to unable
no in felt and incredulity, in firm stood she varied, complexion her
swoon. a or fit, hysterical an of danger

could you sure be to "for Lucy; continued surprised," be well may "You
the dropped never he say dare I for before; it of idea no had have
always was it because family; your of any or you to it of hint smallest
so kept faithfully been has sure am I and secret, great a be to meant
but it of know relations my all of soul a Not hour. this to me by
felt not had I if you, to it mentioned have should never I and Anne,
really I and secrecy; your upon world the in dependence greatest the
Ferrars Mrs. about questions many so asking in behaviour my thought
think not do I And explained. be to ought it that odd, so seem must
you, trusted have I knows he when displeased, be can Ferrars Mr.
your all of world the in opinion highest the has he know I because
as quite Dashwoods Miss other the and yourself upon looks and family,
paused. sisters."--She own his

she what at astonishment Her silent. remained moments few a for Elinor
herself forcing length at but words; for great too first at was heard
manner, of calmness with said, she cautiously, speak to and speak, to
ask I "May solicitude-- and surprise her concealed well tolerably which
standing?" long of is engagement your if

years." four these engaged been have "We

years!" "Four

"Yes."

it. believe to unable felt still shocked, greatly though Elinor,

the till acquainted even were you "that she, said know," not did "I
day." other

my under was He date. years many of is however, acquaintance, "Our
while." considerable a know, you care, uncle's

uncle!" "Your

Pratt?" Mr. of talk him hear never you Did Pratt. Mr. "Yes;

which spirits, of exertion an with Elinor, replied have," I think "I
emotion. of increase her with increased

near Longstaple, at lives who uncle, my with years four was "He
me and sister my for begun, acquaintance our there was It Plymouth.
was engagement our there was it and uncle, my with staying often was
he but pupil; a as quitted had he after year a till not though formed,
enter to unwilling very was I afterwards. us with always almost was
of approbation and knowledge the without imagine, may you as it, into
so be to well, too him loved and young, too was I but mother; his
well so him know not do you Though been.-- have to ought I as prudent
sensible be to him of enough seen have must you Dashwood, Miss me, as
him." to attached sincerely woman a making of capable very is he

after but said; she what knowing without Elinor, answered "Certainly,"
Edward's of security revived with added, she reflection, moment's a
Edward Mr. to falsehood--"Engaged companion's her and love, and honour
me, tell you what at surprised totally so myself confess Ferrars!--I
mistake some be must there surely but pardon; your beg really--I that
Ferrars." Mr. same the mean cannot We name. or person of

the Ferrars, Edward "Mr. smiling. Lucy, cried other," no mean can "We
your of brother and Street, Park of Ferrars, Mrs. of son eldest
allow must you mean; I person the is Dashwood, John Mrs. sister-in-law,
who on man the of name the to as deceived be to likely not am I that
depends." happiness my all

I "that perplexity, painful most a in Elinor, replied strange," is "It
name." your mention even him heard have never should

has care first Our strange. not was it situation, our considering "No;
family, my or me, of nothing knew You secret.-- matter the keep to been
name my mentioning ever for OCCASION no be could there therefore, and,
sister's his of afraid particularly always was he as and, you; to
it." mentioning not his for enough reason was THAT thing, any suspecting

not did self-command her but sunk; security silent.--Elinor's was She
it. with sink

voice. firm a with she said engaged," been have you years "Four

Poor wait. to have may we longer much how knows heaven and "Yes;
miniature small a taking Then heart." of out quite him puts It Edward!
be mistake, of possibility the prevent "To added, she pocket, her from
be to justice, him do not does It face. this at look to as good so
was it person the to as deceived be cannot you think I yet but sure,
years." three these above it had have for.--I drew

the saw Elinor when and spoke; she as hands her into it put She
or decision, hasty too a of fear her doubts other whatever painting,
she mind, her in linger to suffer might falsehood detecting of wish her
almost it returned She face. Edward's being its of none have could
likeness. the acknowledging instantly,

in picture my him give "to Lucy, continued able," been never have "I
so always been has he for at, vexed much very am I which return,
first very the it for set to determined am I But it! get to anxious
opportunity."

then They calmly. Elinor replied right," the in quite are "You
first. spoke Lucy silence. in paces few a proceeded

faithfully your of world the in doubt no have "I she, said sure," am "I
to is it importance what of know must you because secret, this keeping
it, of approve never would she for mother; his reach it have to not us,
exceeding an is she fancy I and fortune, no have shall I say. dare I
woman." proud

me do you "but Elinor; said confidence," your seek not did certainly "I
Your on. depended be may I that imagining in justice than more no
so at surprise some express I if me pardon but me; with safe is secret
being my that felt have least at must You communication. a unnecessary
safety." its to add not could it with acquainted

discover to hoping Lucy, at earnestly looked she this, said she As
greatest the of falsehood the perhaps countenance; her in something
no suffered countenance Lucy's but saying; been had she what of part
change.

you," with liberty great a taking was I think would you afraid was "I
be to long you known not have I this. all you telling "in she, said
by family your all and you known have I but least, at personally sure,
as almost felt I you, saw I as soon as and while; great a description
really I case, present the in Besides acquaintance. old an was you if
particular such making my after you to due was explanation some thought
have I that unfortunate, so am I and mother; Edward's about inquiries
that person only the is Anne ask. can I advice whose creature a not
a me does she indeed, all; at judgment no has she and it, of knows
her of fear constant in am I for good, than harm more deal great
must you as tongue, her hold to how know not does She me. betraying
world the in fright greatest the in was I sure am I and perceive,
she lest John, Sir by mentioned was name Edward's when day, t'other
my in through go I much how think can't You all. it with out should
I what after alive am I that wonder only I altogether. it from mind
in thing Every years. four last these sake Edward's for suffered have
hardly can seldom--we so him seeing and uncertainty; and suspense such
quite not is heart my wonder I sure am I a-year. twice above meet
broke."

very feel not did Elinor but handkerchief; her out took she Here
compassionate.

it whether think "I eyes, her wiping after Lucy, continued "Sometimes."
As entirely." matter the off break to both us for better be not would
at then "But companion. her at directly looked she this, said she
the bear cannot I it.-- for enough resolution not have I times other
such of mention very the know I as miserable, so him making of thoughts
me--I to is he as dear too--so account own my on And do. would thing a
in do to me advise you would What it. to equal be could I think don't
yourself?" do you would What Dashwood? Miss case, a such

give can I "but question; the by startled Elinor, replied me," "Pardon
direct must judgment own Your circumstances. such under advice no you
you."

both on silence minutes few a after Lucy, continued sure," be "To
poor but other; or sometime him for provide must mother "his sides,
dreadful him think not you Did it! by down cast so is Edward
left he when miserable so was He Barton? at was he when low-spirited
him think would you afraid was I that you, to go to Longstaple, at us
ill." quite

us?" visited he when then, uncle's, your from come he "Did

he think you Did us. with fortnight a staying been had he yes; "Oh,
town?" from directly came

fresh every of sensible feelingly most Elinor, replied "No,"
that us, told he remember "I veracity; Lucy's of favour in circumstance
She Plymouth." near friends some with fortnight a staying been had he
nothing mentioning his at time, the at surprise own her too, remembered
to even respect with silence total his at friends, those of farther
names. their

Lucy. repeated spirits?" of out sadly him think you not "Did

arrived." first he when so particularly indeed, did, "We

the was what suspect should you fear for himself exert to him begged "I
than more stay to able being not melancholy, so him made it but matter;
fellow!--I Poor affected.-- much so me seeing and us, with fortnight a
wretched in writes he for now; him with same the just is it afraid am
letter a taking Exeter;" left I before just him from heard I spirits.
"You Elinor. to direction the showing carelessly and pocket her from
not is that but is; it one charming a say, dare I hand, his know
just had he for say, dare I tired, was usual.--He as well so written
possible." as full as me to sheet the filled

This longer. no doubt could she and hand, his WAS it that saw Elinor
been have might believe, to herself allowed had she picture,
a but gift; Edward's been have not might it obtained; accidentally
a under only subsist could letter, by them between correspondence
few a for else; nothing by authorised be could engagement, positive
she and her, within sunk heart overcome--her almost was she moments,
she and necessary; indispensably was exertion but stand; hardly could
that feelings, her of oppression the against resolutely so struggled
complete. time the for and speedy, was success her

her into letter the returning Lucy, said other," each to "Writing
I Yes, separations. long such in have we comfort only the "is pocket,
even not has Edward poor but picture, his in comfort other one have
him gave I easy. be should he says he picture, my but had he If THAT.
and last, Longstaple at was he when ring a in set hair my of lock a
picture. a to equal not but said, he him, to comfort some was that
him?" saw you when ring the notice might you Perhaps

was which under voice, of composure a with Elinor, said did," "I
felt ever had she thing any beyond distress and emotion an concealed
confounded. shocked, mortified, was She before.

the and cottage, the reached now had they her, for Fortunately
a them with sitting After farther. no continued be could conversation
then was Elinor and Park, the to returned Steeles Miss the minutes, few
wretched. be and think to liberty at





ends.] 1 Volume editions, second and first the in point this [At





23 CHAPTER


be, might veracity Lucy's on dependence general Elinor's small However
the in it suspect to reflection serious on her for impossible was it
of folly the to answerable be could temptation no where case, present
to asserted had Lucy What description. a such of falsehood a inventing
supported doubt; longer not dared not, could Elinor therefore, true, be
and proofs, and probabilities such by side every on too was it as
of opportunity Their wishes. own her but nothing by contradicted
rest, the for foundation a was Pratt Mr. of house the in acquaintance
Plymouth, near visit Edward's and alarming; and indisputable once at
prospects, own his at dissatisfaction his mind, of state melancholy his
the of knowledge intimate the herself, towards behaviour uncertain his
had which connections, family their and Norland to as Steeles Miss
formed ring, the letter, the picture, the her, surprised often
of fear every overcame as evidence, of body a such altogether
partiality no which fact, a as established and unfairly, him condemning
such of resentment herself.--Her of ill-treatment his aside, set could
time short a for dupe, its been having at indignation her behaviour,
considerations, other ideas, other but herself; for only feel her made
he Had her? deceiving intentionally been Edward Had arose. soon
to engagement his Was feel? not did he which her for regard a feigned
been, have once might it whatever No; heart? the of engagement an Lucy
her all was affection His present. at such it believe not could she
Fanny, sisters, mother, Her that. in deceived be not could She own.
an not was it Norland; at her for regard his of conscious been had all
softener a What her. loved certainly He vanity. own her of illusion
to her tempt not it could much How persuasion! this was heart the of
at remaining in blamable, highly blamable, been had He forgive!
it than more be to him over influence her felt first he after Norland
injured had he if but defended; be not could he that, In be. to ought
pitiable, were case her if himself; injured he had more much how her,
while; a for miserable her made had imprudence His hopeless. was his
being ever of chance all of himself deprived have to seemed it but
he had what HE, but tranquillity; regain time in might She otherwise.
Steele; Lucy with happy tolerably be ever he Could to? forward look to
his with question, the of out herself for affection his were he, could
a with satisfied be mind, well-informed and delicacy, his integrity,
selfish? and artful, her--illiterate, like wife

every to him blind naturally would nineteen of infatuation youthful The
succeeding four the but nature; good and beauty her but thing
the to improvement such give spent, rationally if which years--years,
education, of defects her to eyes his opened have must understanding,
society inferior in side her on spent time, of period same the while
simplicity that of her robbed perhaps had pursuits, frivolous more and
beauty. her to character interesting an given have once might which

difficulties his herself, marry to seeking his of supposition the in If
likely now they were greater much how great, seemed had mother his from
in inferior undoubtedly was engagement his of object the when be, to
These herself. to fortune in inferior probably and connections,
not might Lucy, from alienated so heart a with indeed, difficulties,
the of state the was melancholy but patience; his upon hard very press
unkindness, and opposition family of expectation the whom by person
relief! a as felt be could

wept she succession, painful in her to occurred considerations these As
having of conviction the by Supported herself. for than more him, for
the by consoled and unhappiness, present her merit to nothing done
thought she esteem, her forfeit to nothing done had Edward that belief
command blow, heavy the of smart first the under now, even could she
mother her from truth the of suspicion every guard to enough herself
expectations, own her answer to able she was well so And sisters. and
first had she after hours two only dinner at them joined she when that
have would one no hopes, dearest her all of extinction the suffered
mourning was Elinor that sisters, the of appearance the from supposed
object the from ever for her divide must which obstacles over secret in
the on dwelling internally was Marianne that and love, her of
thoroughly felt she heart whole whose of man, a of perfections
drove which carriage every in see to expected she whom and possessed,
house. their near

been had what Marianne, and mother her from concealing of necessity The
unceasing to her obliged it though herself, to confidence in entrusted
it contrary the On distress. Elinor's of aggravation no was exertion,
give would what of communication the spared be to her, to relief a was
that hearing from likewise saved be to and them, to affliction such
of excess the from flow probably would which Edward, of condemnation
felt she than more was which and herself, for affection partial their
support. to equal

receive could she knew she conversation, their or counsel, their From
distress, her to add must sorrow and tenderness their assistance, no
their from encouragement receive neither would self-command her while
own her and alone, stronger was She praise. their from nor example
unshaken, as was firmness her that her, supported well so sense good
so regrets with as invariable, as cheerfulness of appearance her
be. to them for possible was it fresh, so and poignant

the on Lucy with conversation first her from suffered had she as Much
for this and it; renewing of wish earnest an felt soon she subject,
their of particulars many hear to wanted She one. than reasons more
what understand to clearly more wanted she again, repeated engagement
her in sincerity any were there whether Edward, for felt really Lucy
to wanted particularly she and him, for regard tender of declaration
her and again, matter the on enter to readiness her by Lucy, convince
in interested otherwise no was she that it, on conversing in calmness
involuntary her feared much very she which friend, a as than it
least at left have must discourse, morning their in agitation,
very appeared her of jealous be to disposed was Lucy That doubtful.
her in highly spoken always had Edward that plain was it probable:
to venturing her from but assertion, Lucy's from merely not praise,
so secret a with acquaintance, personal a short so on her trust
joking John's Sir even And important. evidently and confessedly
Elinor while indeed, But weight. some had have must intelligence
by beloved really being of herself within assured well so remained
it make to probabilities of consideration other no required it Edward,
very her so, was she that and jealous; be should Lucy that natural
the of disclosure the for reason other What proof. a was confidence
of it by informed be might Elinor that but be, there could affair
future? in him avoid to taught be and Edward, on claims superior Lucy's
rival's her of much thus understanding in difficulty little had She
every as her by act to resolved firmly was she while and intentions,
affection own her combat to directed, honesty and honour of principle
deny not could she possible; as little as him see to and Edward for
was heart her that Lucy convince to endeavouring of comfort the herself
on hear to painful more nothing have now could she as And unwounded.
own her mistrust not did she told, been already had than subject the
composure. with particulars of repetition a through going of ability

be could so doing of opportunity an that immediately not was it But
take to herself as disposed well as was Lucy though commanded,
fine often not was weather the for occurred; that any of advantage
most might they where walk, a in joining their of allow to enough
at met they though and others; the from themselves separate easily
at chiefly and cottage, or park the at either evening other every least
of sake the for meet to supposed be not could they former, the
Lady or John Sir either enter never would thought a Such conversation.
for given ever was leisure little very therefore and head; Middleton's
for met They discourse. particular for all at none and chat, general a
cards, at playing together, laughing and drinking, eating, of sake the
noisy. sufficiently was that game other any or consequences, or

affording without place, taken had kind this of meetings two or One
at called John Sir when private, in Lucy engaging of chance any Elinor
they that charity, of name the in beg, to morning, one cottage the
to obliged was he as day, that Middleton Lady with dine all would
alone, quite be otherwise would she and Exeter, at club the attend
a foresaw who Elinor, Steeles. Miss two the and mother her except
this as party a such in view, in had she point the for opening fairer
tranquil the under themselves among liberty at more be, to likely was
united husband her when than Middleton Lady of direction well-bred and
the accepted immediately purpose, noisy one in together them
equally was permission, mother's her with Margaret, invitation;
their of any join to unwilling always though Marianne, and compliant,
her have to bear not could who mother, her by persuaded was parties,
likewise. go to amusement, of chance any from herself seclude

from preserved happily was Middleton Lady and went, ladies young The
the of insipidity The her. threatened had which solitude frightful the
one not produced it expected; had Elinor as such exactly was meeting
interesting less be could nothing and expression, or thought of novelty
and parlour dining the in both discourse their of whole the than
while and them, accompanied children the latter, the to room: drawing
of impossibility the of convinced well too was she there, remained they
the with only it quitted They it. attempt to attention Lucy's engaging
Elinor and placed, then was card-table The tea-things. the of removal
of hope a entertained ever having for herself at wonder to began
in up rose all They park. the at conversation for time finding
game. round a for preparation

finish to going not are "you Lucy, to Middleton Lady said glad," am "I
hurt must it sure am I for evening; this basket Annamaria's little poor
dear the make will we And candlelight. by filigree work to eyes your
I then and to-morrow, disappointment her for amends some love little
it." mind much not will she hope

replied, and instantly herself recollected Lucy enough, was hint This
waiting only am I Middleton; Lady mistaken, much very are you "Indeed
have should I or me, without party your make can you whether know to
angel little the disappoint not would I already. filigree my at been
am I now, card-table the at me want you if and world: the all for
supper." after basket the finish to resolved

the ring you eyes--will your hurt won't it hope I good, very are "You
sadly be would girl little poor My candles? working some for bell
for tomorrow, finished not was basket the if know, I disappointed,
upon depends she sure am I not, would certainly it her told I though
done." it having

an with herself reseated and her near table work her drew directly Lucy
no taste could she that infer to seemed which cheerfulness and alacrity
child. spoilt a for basket filigree a making in than delight greater

made one No others. the to Casino of rubber a proposed Middleton Lady
forms the to inattention usual her with who Marianne, but objection any
goodness the have will Ladyship "Your exclaimed, civility, general of
piano-forte; the to go shall I cards. detest I know ME--you excuse to
farther without And tuned." was it since it touched not have I
instrument. the to walked and away turned she ceremony,

made never had SHE that heaven thanked she if as looked Middleton Lady
speech. a rude so

ma'am," know, you instrument that from long keep never can "Marianne
not do I "and offence; the away smooth to endeavouring Elinor, said
ever I piano-forte toned best very the is it for it; at wonder much
heard."

cards. their draw to now were five remaining The

be may I out, cut to happen should I "if Elinor, continued "Perhaps,"
and her; for papers her rolling in Steele, Lucy Miss to use some of
be must it that basket, the to done be to still much so is there
I evening. this it finish to singly, labour her for think I impossible
it." in share a me allow would she if exceedingly, work the like should

Lucy, cried help," your for you to obliged much very be shall I "Indeed
was; there thought I than it to done be to more is there find I "for
after Annamaria dear disappoint to thing shocking a be would it and
all."

little "Dear Steele-- Miss said indeed," terrible, be would that "Oh!
her!" love do I how soul,

really you as "and Elinor; to Middleton Lady said kind," very are "You
till in cut to not pleased well as be will you perhaps work, the like
now?" chance your take you will or rubber, another

a by thus and proposals, these of first the by profited joyfully Elinor
to condescend never could Marianne which address that of little
same the at Middleton Lady pleased and end, own her gained practise,
fair two the and attention, ready with her for room made Lucy time.
the with and, table, same the at side by side seated thus were rivals
at pianoforte The work. same the forwarding in engaged harmony, utmost
had thoughts, own her and music own her in up wrapped Marianne, which
herself, besides room the in was body any that forgotten time this by
might she judged now Dashwood Miss that them near so luckily was
interesting the introduce noise, its of shelter the under safely,
card-table. the at heard being of risk any without subject,



24 CHAPTER


began. thus Elinor tone, cautious though firm, a In

with, me honoured have you confidence the of undeserving be should "I
its on curiosity farther no or continuance, its for desire no felt I if
again." forward it bringing for therefore apologize not will I subject.

my set have you ice; the breaking "for warmly, Lucy cried you," "Thank
offended had I afraid other or somehow was I for it; by ease at heart
Monday." that you told I what by you

spoke Elinor and me," Believe so? suppose you could How me! "Offended
my from farther be could "nothing sincerity, truest the with it
for motive a have you Could idea. an such you give to than intention
me?" to flattering and honourable not was that trust, the

of full eyes sharp little her Lucy, replied you," assure do I yet "And
your in displeasure and coldness a be to me to seemed "there meaning,
was you that sure felt I uncomfortable. quite me made that manner
for since, ever myself with quarrelling been have and me; with angry
am I But affairs. my with you trouble to as liberty a such took having
not do really you that and fancy, own my only was it find to glad very
my relieve to me to was it consolation a what knew you If me. blame
of moment every of thinking always am I what of you to speaking heart
am I else thing every overlook you make would compassion your life, my
sure."

you, to relief great very a was it that believe easily can I "Indeed,
shall you that assured be and me, to situation your acknowledge to
one; unfortunate very a is case Your it. repent to reason have never
have will you and difficulties, with surrounded be to me to seem you
Mr. them. under you support to affection mutual your all of need
mother." his on dependent entirely is believe, I Ferrars,

to madness be would it own; his of pounds thousand two only has "He
prospect every up give could I part, own my for though that, upon marry
small very a to used always been have I sigh. a without more of
too him love I but him; for poverty any with struggle could and income,
his that all of perhaps, him, robbing of means selfish the be to well
it wait, must We her. please to married he if him give might mother
it world, the in man other every almost With years. many for be may
constancy and affection Edward's but prospect; alarming an be would
know." I of me deprive can nothing

undoubtedly is he and you; to thing every be must conviction "That
your of strength the If your's. in trust same the by supported
under and people, many between as failed, had attachment reciprocal
engagement, years' four a during would naturally it circumstances many
indeed." pitiable, been have would situation your

countenance her guarding in careful was Elinor but up; looked here Lucy
tendency. suspicious a words her give could that expression every from

the to put well pretty been "has Lucy, said me," for love "Edward's
and engaged, first were we since absence long very long, our by test,
doubt to unpardonable be should I that well, so trial the stood has it
alarm moment's one me gave never has he that say safely can I now. it
first." the from account that on

assertion. this at sigh or smile to whether knew hardly Elinor

from and nature, by too temper jealous a of rather am "I on. went Lucy
the in more much so being his from life, in situations different our
for inclined enough was I separation, continual our and me, than world
been had there if instant, an in truth the out found have to suspicion,
any or met, we when me to behaviour his in alteration slightest the
talked had he if or for, account not could I that spirits of lowness
at happy less respect any in seemed or another, than lady one of more
am I that say to mean not do I be. to used he than Longstaple
case a such in but general, in quick-sighted or observant particularly
deceived." be not could I sure am I

upon impose can it but pretty; very "is Elinor, thought this," "All
us." of neither

have or views? your "are silence, short a after she said what," "But
a is which death, Ferrars's Mrs. for waiting of that but none you
to submit to determined son her extremity?--Is shocking and melancholy
which in suspense of years many the of tediousness the all to and this,
a for displeasure her of risk the run than rather you, involve may it
truth?" the owning by while

Mrs. But while! a for only be would it that certain be could we "If
anger of fit first her in and woman, proud headstrong very a is Ferrars
and Robert, to thing every secure likely very would it, hearing upon
inclination my all away frightens sake, Edward's for that, of idea the
measures." hasty for

disinterestedness your carrying are you or too, sake own your for "And
reason." beyond

silent. was and again, Elinor at looked Lucy

Elinor. asked Ferrars?" Robert Mr. know you "Do

his unlike very is he fancy I but him; saw never all--I at "Not
coxcomb." great a and brother--silly

those caught had ear whose Steele, Miss repeated coxcomb!" great "A
of talking are they "Oh, music.-- Marianne's in pause sudden a by words
say." dare I beaux, favourite their

beaux favourite our there, mistaken are "you Lucy, cried sister," "No
coxcombs." great NOT are

Jennings, Mrs. said not," is Dashwood's Miss that it for answer can "I
behaved prettiest modestest, the of one is he "for heartily; laughing
little sly a such is she Lucy, for as but saw; ever I men young
likes." SHE who out finding no is there creature,

dare "I them, at round significantly looking Steele, Miss cried "Oh,"
Miss as behaved pretty and modest as quite is beau Lucy's say
Dashwood's."

looked and lip, her bit Lucy herself. of spite in blushed Elinor
time. some for place took silence mutual A sister. her at angrily
Marianne though tone, lower a in saying by it to end an put first Lucy
magnificent very a of protection powerful the them giving then was
concerto--

my into come lately has which scheme one of you tell honestly will "I
into you let to bound am I indeed bear; to matters bringing for head,
seen have you say dare I concerned. party a are you for secret, the
other every to church the prefer would he that know to Edward of enough
he as soon as orders take should he that is plan my now profession;
kind be would you sure am I which interest, your through then and can,
regard some of out hope I and him, for friendship of out use to enough
living; Norland him give to persuaded be might brother your me, to
not incumbent present the and one, good very a is understand I which
marry to us for enough be would That while. great a live to likely
rest." the for chance and time to trust might we and upon,

my of mark any show "to Elinor, replied happy," be always should "I
my that perceive not you do but Ferrars; Mr. for friendship and esteem
is He unnecessary? perfectly be would occasion an such on interest
to enough recommendation be must Dashwood--THAT John Mrs. to brother
husband." her

into going Edward's of approve much not would Dashwood John Mrs. "But
orders."

little." very do would interest my that suspect rather I "Then

with exclaimed Lucy length At minutes. many for silent again were They
sigh, deep a

at business the to end an put to way wisest the be would it believe "I
difficulties with beset so seem We engagement. the dissolving by once
we time, a for miserable us make would it though that side, every on
your me give not will you But end. the in perhaps happier be should
Dashwood?" Miss advice,

agitated very concealed which smile, a with Elinor, answered "No,"
well very know You not. will certainly I subject a such "on feelings,
the on were it unless you, with weight no have would opinion my that
wishes." your of side

know "I solemnity; great with Lucy, replied me," wrong you "Indeed
do I and yours; of do I as highly so think I judgment whose of nobody
all by you advise 'I me, to say to was you if that believe, really
be will it Ferrars, Edward with engagement your to end an put to means
it doing upon resolve should I you,' of both of happiness the for more
immediately."

and wife, future Edward's of insincerity the for blushed Elinor
any giving from me frighten effectually would compliment "This replied,
much influence my raises It one. formed I had subject the on opinion
too is attached tenderly so people two dividing of power the high; too
person." indifferent an for much

some with Lucy, said person," indifferent an are you because "'Tis
your "that words, those on stress particular a laying and pique,
be could you If me. with weight such have justly might judgment
opinion your feelings, own your by respect any in biased be to supposed
having." worth be not would

might they lest this, to answer no make to wisest it thought Elinor
and unreserve; and ease of increase unsuitable an to other each provoke
Another again. subject the mention to never determined partly even was
and speech, this succeeded duration, minutes' many of therefore pause
it. end to first the still was Lucy

all with she said Dashwood?" Miss winter, this town in be you "Shall
complacency. accustomary her

not." "Certainly

at brightened eyes her while other, the returned that," for sorry am "I
you meet to pleasure such me gave have would "it information, the
your sure, be To that. all for go will you say dare I But there!
them." to come to you ask will sister and brother

do." they if invitation their accept to power my in be not will "It

there. you meeting upon depended quite had I is! that unlucky "How
who relations some to January of end latter the go to are me and Anne
go only I But years! several these them visit to us wanting been have
otherwise February, in there be will He Edward. seeing of sake the for
it." for spirits not have I me; for charms no have would London

first the of conclusion the by card-table the to called soon was Elinor
therefore was ladies two the of discourse confidential the and rubber,
for reluctance, any without submitted them of both which to end, an at
other each dislike them make to side either on said been had nothing
table card the to down sat Elinor and before; done had they than less
without only not was Edward that persuasion melancholy the with
not had he that but wife; his be to was who person the for affection
sincere which marriage, in happy tolerably being of chance the even
could alone self-interest for given, have would side HER on affection
so seemed she which of engagement, an to man a keep to woman a induce
weary. was he that aware thoroughly

when and Elinor, by revived never was subject the time this From
it, introducing of opportunity an missed seldom who Lucy, by on entered
happiness her of confidante, her inform to careful particularly was and
the by treated was it Edward, from letter a received she whenever
civility as soon as dismissed and caution, and calmness with former
which indulgence an be to conversations such felt she for allow; would
herself. to dangerous were which and deserve, not did Lucy

beyond far lengthened was Park Barton at Steeles Miss the of visit The
could they increased; favour Their implied. invitation first the what
of spite in and going; their of hear not would John Sir spared; be not
the of spite in Exeter, in engagements arranged long and numerous their
was which immediately, them fulfill to returning of necessity absolute
stay to on prevailed were they week, every of end the at force full in
of celebration due the in assist to and park, the at months two nearly
private of share ordinary than more a requires which festival that
importance. its proclaim to dinners large and balls



25 CHAPTER


of portion large a spending of habit the in was Jennings Mrs. Though
without not was she friends, and children her of houses the at year the
who husband, her of death the Since own. her of habitation settled a
had she town, the of part elegant less a in success with traded had
Portman near streets the of one in house a in winter every resided
to January of approach the on began she home, this Towards Square.
very and abruptly, day one she thither and thoughts, her turn
her. accompany to Dashwood Misses elder the asked them, by unexpectedly
the and sister, her of complexion varying the observing without Elinor,
gave immediately plan, the to indifference no spoke which look animated
herself believed she which in both, for denial absolute but grateful a
their was alleged reason The inclinations. united their speaking be to
the of time that at mother their leaving not of resolution determined
and surprise, some with refusal the received Jennings Mrs. year.
immediately. invitation her repeated

beg DO I and well, very you spare can mother your sure am I Lord! "Oh,
upon heart my set quite I've for company, your with me favour will you
shan't I for me, to inconvenience any be will you that fancy Don't it.
Betty sending be only will It you. for way my of out all at myself put
to able be shall three We THAT. afford can I hope I and coach, the by
like not do you if town, in are we when and chaise; my in well very go
my of one with go always may you good, and well do, I wherever go to
had have I for it; to object not will mother your sure am I daughters.
will she that hands my off children own my getting in luck good such
don't I if and you; of charge the have to person fit very a me think
it you, with done have I before married well least at you of one get
the all to you for word good a speak shall I fault. my be not shall
it." upon depend may you men, young

object not would Marianne Miss "that John, Sir said notion," a have "I
very is It it. into come would sister elder her if scheme, a such to
Miss because pleasure, little a have not should she that indeed hard
for off set to two, you advise would I So it. wish not does Dashwood
Miss to word a saying without Barton, of tired are you when town,
it." about Dashwood

of glad monstrous be shall I sure am "I Jennings, Mrs. cried "Nay,"
the only not, or go will Dashwood Miss whether company, Marianne's Miss
for comfortable more be would it thought I and I, say merrier the more
talk might they me, of tired got they if because, together; be to them
or one But back. my behind ways old my at laugh and another, one to
you do how me! bless Lord have. must I them, of both not if other, the
till used always been have who I myself, by poking live can I think
us let Marianne, Miss Come, me. with Charlotte have to winter this
her change will Dashwood Miss if and bargain, the upon hands strike
better." the much so why bye, and by mind

warmth: with Marianne, said you," thank sincerely ma'am, you, thank "I
give would it and ever, for gratitude my insured has invitation "your
of, capable am I happiness greatest the almost yes, happiness, such me
mother,--I kindest dearest, my mother, my But it. accept to able be to
made be to were she if and urged, has Elinor what of justice the feel
should nothing no, absence--Oh! our by comfortable less happy, less
struggle." a be not must not, should It her. leave to me tempt

spare could Dashwood Mrs. that assurance her repeated Jennings Mrs.
saw and sister, her understood now who Elinor, and well; perfectly them
her by carried was she else thing every almost to indifference what to
direct farther no made again, Willoughby with be to eagerness
mother's her to it referred merely and plan, the to opposition
any receive to expected scarcely she however whom from decision,
not could she which visit, a prevent to endeavour her in support
had she account own her on which and Marianne, for of approve
her of, desirous was Marianne Whatever avoid. to reasons particular
the influence to expect not could promote--she to eager be would mother
had she which respecting affair an in conduct of cautiousness to latter
explain not dared she and distrust; with her inspire to able been never
That London. to going for disinclination own her of motive the
Mrs. with acquainted thoroughly was, she as fastidious Marianne,
overlook should them, by disgusted invariably and manners, Jennings'
be must whatever disregard should kind, that of inconvenience every
object, one of pursuit her in feelings, irritable her to wounding most
object that of importance the of full, so strong, so proof, a such was
to prepared not was passed, had that all of spite in Elinor, as her, to
witness.

such that persuaded Dashwood, Mrs. invitation, the of informed being On
her both to amusement much of productive be would excursion an
to attention affectionate her all through perceiving and daughters,
of hear not would it, in was Marianne of heart the much how herself,
both their on insisted account; HER upon offer the declining their
usual her with foresee, to began then and directly; it accepting
all, them to accrue would that advantages of variety a cheerfulness,
separation. this from

could I what exactly is "it cried, she plan," the with delighted am "I
yourselves. as it by benefited much as be shall I and Margaret wish.
and quietly so on go shall we gone, are Middletons the and you When
Margaret find will You music! our and books our with together happily
of plan little a have I again! back come you when improved so
without performed be now may which too, bedrooms your for alteration
to go SHOULD you that right very is It one. any to inconvenience any
life in condition your of woman young every have would I town;
be will You London. of amusements and manners the with acquainted
to kindness whose of woman, of sort good motherly a of care the under
your see will you probability all in And doubt. no have can I you
wife, his of faults the or faults, his be may whatever and brother,
wholly so you have to bear cannot I is, he son whose consider I when
other." each from estranged

"you Elinor, said happiness," our for anxiety usual your with "Though
which scheme present the to impediment every obviating been have
opinion, my in which, objection one still is there you, to occurred
removed." easily so be cannot

sunk. countenance Marianne's

to going Elinor prudent dear my "is Dashwood, Mrs. said what," "And
let Do forward? bring to now she is obstacle formidable What suggest?
it." of expense the about word a hear me

Jennings's Mrs. of well very think I though this; is objection "My
or pleasure, us afford can society whose woman a not is she heart,
consequence." us give will protection whose

society, her of "but mother, her replied true," very is "That
thing any have scarcely will you people, other of that from separately
Lady with public in appear always almost will you and all, at
Middleton."

said Jennings," Mrs. of dislike her by away frightened is Elinor "If
I invitation. her accepting MY prevent not need it least "at Marianne,
every with up put could I sure am I and scruples, such no have
effort." little very with kind that of unpleasantness

towards indifference of display this at smiling help not could Elinor
in difficulty had often had she whom to person, a of manners the
resolved and politeness; tolerable with behave to Marianne persuading
go would she going, in persisted sister her if that herself, within
left be should Marianne that proper it think not did she as likewise,
should Jennings Mrs. that or judgment, own her of guidance sole the to
her of comfort the all for Marianne of mercy the to abandoned be
easily more the was she determination this To hours. domestic
was account, Lucy's by Ferrars, Edward that recollecting by reconciled,
any without visit, their that and February; before town in be to not
finished. previously be might abridgement, unreasonable

are objections "these Dashwood; Mrs. said go," BOTH you have will "I
and London, in being in pleasure much have will You nonsensical.
to condescend ever would Elinor if and together; being in especially
of variety a from there it foresee would she enjoyment, anticipate
her improving from some expect perhaps, would, she sources;
family." sister-in-law's her with acquaintance

her weaken to attempting of opportunity an for wished often had Elinor
the that herself, and Edward of attachment the on dependence mother's
this on now and revealed, were truth whole the when less be might shock
begin to herself forced she success, of hopeless almost though attack,
Ferrars Edward like "I could, she as calmly as saying, by design her
of rest the to as but him; see to glad be always shall and much, very
am I whether me, to indifference perfect of matter a is it family, the
not." or them to known ever

in eyes her up lifted Marianne nothing. said and smiled, Dashwood Mrs.
held have well as might she that conjectured Elinor and astonishment,
tongue. her

the that settled finally was it discourse, farther little very After
the received Jennings Mrs. accepted. fully be should invitation
kindness of assurances many and joy, of deal great a with information
was John Sir her. to merely pleasure of matter a it was nor care; and
of dread the was anxiety prevailing whose man, a to for delighted;
in inhabitants of number the to two, of acquisition the alone, being
being of trouble the took Middleton Lady Even something. was London,
for as and way; her of out rather herself putting was which delighted,
in happy so been never had they Lucy, especially Steeles, Miss the
them. made intelligence this as lives their

with wishes her counteracted which arrangement the to submitted Elinor
herself, to regard With feel. to expected had she than reluctance less
and not, or town to went she whether unconcern of matter a now was it
her and plan, the with pleased thoroughly so mother her saw she when
all to restored manner, and voice, look, in it by exhilarated sister
she gaiety, usual her than more to elevated and animation, usual her
allow hardly would and cause, the with dissatisfied be not could
consequence. the distrust to herself

the was great so happiness, beyond degree a almost was joy Marianne's
Her gone. be to impatience her and spirits her of perturbation
calmness; to restorative only her was mother her quit to unwillingness
excessive. was score that on grief her parting of moment the at and
of one only the was Elinor and less, hardly was affliction mother's Her
of short thing any as separation the consider to seemed who three, the
eternal.

The January. in week first the in place took departure Their
their kept Steeles Miss The week. a about in follow to were Middletons
the of rest the with only it quit to were and park, the at station
family.



26 CHAPTER


and Jennings, Mrs. with carriage the in herself find not could Elinor
guest, her as and protection, her under London to journey a beginning
acquaintance their had short so situation, own her at wondering without
and age in they were unsuited wholly so been, lady that with
measure a such against objections her been had many so and disposition,
happy that with all, had objections these But before! days few a only
been shared, equally mother her and Marianne which youth of ardour
doubt occasional every of spite in Elinor, and overlooked; or overcome
delightful of rapture the witness not could constancy, Willoughby's of
of eyes the in beamed and soul whole the filled which expectation
cheerless how prospect, own her was blank how feeling without Marianne,
would she gladly how and comparison, the in mind of state own her
same the have to situation Marianne's of solicitude the in engage
a short, A hope. of possibility same the view, in object animating
intentions Willoughby's what decide now must however time short very
eagerness Marianne's town. in already was he probability all in were;
was Elinor and there; him finding on dependence her declared gone be to
character his to as light new every gaining upon only not resolved
her, give could others of intelligence the or observation own her which
such with sister her to behaviour his watching upon likewise but
meant, he what and was he what ascertain to as attention, zealous
her of result the Should place. taken had meetings many before
open to events all at determined was she unfavourable, be observations
be would exertions her otherwise, be it should sister; her of eyes the
selfish every avoid to learn then must nature--she different a of
satisfaction her lessen might which regret every banish and comparison,
Marianne. of happiness the in

they as behaviour Marianne's and journey, their on days three were They
and complaisance future what of specimen happy a was travelled
in sat She be. to expected be might Jennings Mrs. to companionableness
scarcely and meditations, own her in wrapt way, the all almost silence
beauty picturesque of object any when except speaking, voluntarily ever
exclusively delight of exclamation an her from drew view their within
Elinor therefore, conduct this for atone To sister. her to addressed
had she which civility of post the of possession immediate took
Jennings, Mrs. to attention greatest the with behaved herself, assigned
she whenever her to listened and her, with laughed her, with talked
all with both them treated side her on Jennings Mrs. and could;
and ease their for occasion every on solicitous was kindness, possible
their choose them make not could she that disturbed only and enjoyment,
preferring their of confession a extort nor inn, the at dinners own
by town reached They cutlets. veal to fowls boiled or cod, to salmon
journey, a such after released, be to glad day, third the o'clock three
luxury the all enjoy to ready and carriage, a of confinement the from
fire. good a of

ladies young the and up, fitted handsomely and handsome, was house The
It apartment. comfortable very a of possession in put immediately were
a hung still mantelpiece the over and Charlotte's, been formerly had
having her of proof in performance, her of silks coloured in landscape
effect. some to town in school great a at years seven spent

their from hours two than less in ready be to not was dinner As
her to writing in interval the employ to determined Elinor arrival,
did Marianne moments few a In purpose. that for down sat and mother,
you not "had Elinor; said Marianne," home, writing am "I same. the
two?" or day a for letter your defer better

and hastily, Marianne, replied mother," my to write to going NOT am "I
it more; no said Elinor inquiry. farther any avoid to wishing if as
and Willoughby; to writing be then must she that her struck immediately
however that, was, followed instantly as which conclusion the
be must they affair, the conduct to wish might they mysteriously
her gave satisfactory, entirely not though conviction, This engaged.
alacrity. greater with letter her continued she and pleasure,
no be could it length in minutes; few very a in finished was Marianne's
with directed and sealed, up, folded then was it note; a than more
the in W large a distinguish could she thought Elinor rapidity. eager
the ringing Marianne, than complete it was sooner no and direction;
conveyed letter that get to it answered who footman the requested bell,
once. at matter the decided This post. two-penny the to her for

them in flutter a was there but high; very continued still spirits Her
this and sister, her to pleasure much giving their prevented which
any eat scarcely could She on. drew evening the as increased agitation
seemed room, drawing the to returned afterwards they when and dinner,
carriage. every of sound the to listening anxiously

much being by Jennings, Mrs. that Elinor to satisfaction great a was It
tea The passing. was what of little see could room, own her in engaged
more disappointed been Marianne had already and in, brought were things
suddenly was one loud a when door, neighbouring a at rap a by once than
Elinor house, other any at one for mistaken be not could which heard
Marianne, and approach, Willoughby's announcing its of secure felt
this silent; was thing Every door. the towards moved up, starting
few a advanced door, the opened she seconds; many borne be not could
returned minute, a half listening after and stairs, the towards steps
heard having of conviction a which agitation the all in room the into
that at feelings her of ecstasy the in produce; naturally would him
Willoughby, is it Elinor, "Oh, exclaiming, help not could she instant
arms, his into herself throw to ready almost seemed and is!" it indeed
appeared. Brandon Colonel when

immediately she and calmness, with borne be to shock a great too was It
her time same the at but too; disappointed was Elinor room. the left
felt she and her; with welcome his ensured Brandon Colonel for regard
perceive should sister her to partial so man a that hurt particularly
seeing in disappointment and grief but nothing experienced she that
even he that him, by unnoticed not was it that saw instantly She him.
and astonishment such with room, the quitted she as Marianne observed
demanded civility what of recollection the him left hardly as concern,
herself. towards

he. said ill?" sister your "Is

of talked then and was, she that distress some in answered Elinor
which to thing every of and fatigues; over and spirits, low head-aches,
behaviour. sister's her attribute decently could she

recollect to seeming but attention, earnest most the with her heard He
of speak to directly began and subject, the on more no said himself,
about inquiries usual the making London, in them seeing at pleasure his
behind. left had they friends the and journey, their

side, either on interest little very with way, of kind calm this In
thoughts the and spirits, of out them of both talk, to continued they
whether ask to much very wished Elinor elsewhere. engaged both of
by pain him giving of afraid was she but town, in then were Willoughby
something, saying of way by length, at and rival; his after enquiry any
last. him seen had she since ever London in been had he if asked she
have I since; ever "almost embarrassment, some with replied, he "Yes,"
in been never has it but days, few a for Delaford at twice or once been
Barton." to return to power my

to back brought immediately said, was it which in manner the and This,
with place, that quitting his of circumstances the all remembrance her
she and Jennings, Mrs. to caused had they suspicions and uneasiness the
the on curiosity more much implied had question her that fearful was
felt. ever had she than subject

usual her with she, said Colonel," "Oh! in. came soon Jennings Mrs.
not could I you--sorry see to glad monstrous am "I cheerfulness, noisy
a me about look to forced been have I but pardon, your before--beg come
been have I since while long a is it for matters; my settle and little,
do to things odd little of world a always has one know you and home, at
to Cartwright had have I then and time; any for away been has one after
dinner! since ever bee a as busy as been have I Lord, with-- settle
town in be should I that out conjure to you came how Colonel, pray, But
today?"

been have I where Palmer's, Mr. at it hearing of pleasure the had "I
dining."

does How house? their at do all they do how and well, did; you "Oh,
time." this by size fine a is she you warrant I do? Charlotte

you, tell to commissioned am I and well, quite appeared Palmer "Mrs.
to-morrow." her see certainly will you that

two brought have I Colonel, Well, much. as thought I sure, be to "Ay,
now, them of one but see you is, see--that you me, with ladies young
too--which Marianne, Miss friend, Your somewhere. another is there but
Mr. and you what know not do I hear. to sorry be not will you
be to thing fine a is it Ay, her. about you between do will Willoughby
very was never I but once, young was I Well! handsome. and young
I and husband, good very a got I However, me. for luck handsome--worse
has he man! poor Ah! more. do can beauty greatest the what know don't
you have where Colonel, But better. and years eight these dead been
Come, on? go business your does how And parted? we since to been
friends." among secrets no have let's come,

but inquiries, her all to mildness accustomary his with replied He
and tea, the make to began now Elinor any. in her satisfying without
again. appear to obliged was Marianne

silent and thoughtful more became Brandon Colonel entrance, her After
to him on prevail not could Jennings Mrs. and before, been had he than
were ladies the and evening, that appeared visitor other No long. stay
bed. to early go to agreeing in unanimous

looks. happy and spirits recovered with morning next the rose Marianne
the in forgotten seemed before evening the of disappointment The
finished long not had They day. that happen to was what of expectation
and door, the at stopped barouche Palmer's Mrs. before breakfast their
see to delighted so room: the into laughing came she minutes few a in
pleasure most received she whether say to hard was it that all, them
at surprised So again. Dashwoods Miss the or mother her meeting from
all expected rather had she what was it though town, to coming their
having after invitation mother's her accepting their at angry so along;
forgiven have never would she time same the at though own, her declined
come! not had they if them

think you do "What she; said you," see to happy so be will Palmer "Mr.
was it what forget I Mama? with coming your of heard he when said he
droll!" so something was it but now,

chat, comfortable called mother her what in spent two or hour an After
their all concerning inquiry of variety every in words, other in or
on cause without laughter in and side, Jennings's Mrs. on acquaintance
all should they that latter the by proposed was it Palmer's, Mrs.
to morning, that business had she where shops some to her accompany
likewise having as consented, readily Elinor and Jennings Mrs. which
at it declining though Marianne, and themselves; make to purchases some
likewise. go to induced was first

Bond In watch. the on always evidently was she went, they Wherever
in were eyes her lay, business their of much where especially, Street
mind her engaged, were party the shop whatever in and inquiry; constant
all from them, before actually thing every from abstracted equally was
dissatisfied and Restless others. the occupied and interested that
article any of opinion her obtain never could sister her where, every
received she both: them concern equally might it however purchase, of
and again, home at be to impatient only was anything; from pleasure no
Mrs. of tediousness the at vexation her govern difficulty with could
new; or expensive, pretty, thing every by caught was eye whose Palmer,
her away dawdled and none, on determine could all, buy to wild was who
indecision. and rapture in time

had sooner no and home; returned they before morning the in late was It
when and stairs, up eagerly flew Marianne than house the entered they
sorrowful a with table the from turning her found she followed, Elinor
there. been had Willoughby no that declared which countenance,

to she said out?" went we since me for here left been letter no "Has
the in answered was She parcels. the with entered then who footman the
certain you "Are replied. she it?" of sure quite you "Are negative.
note?" or letter any left has porter no servant, no that

had. none that replied man The

she as voice, disappointed and low a in she, said odd!" very "How
window. the to away turned

sister her regarding herself, within Elinor repeated indeed!" odd, "How
not would she town in be to him known not had she "If uneasiness. with
Magna; Combe to written have would she did; she as him, to written have
write! nor come neither should he that odd how town, in is he if and
engagement an permitting in wrong be must you mother, dear my Oh!
in on carried be to known, little so man a young, so daughter a between
will how and inquire; to long I manner! a mysterious so doubtful, so
borne." be interference MY

continued appearances if that consideration, some after determined, She
in represent would she were, now they as unpleasant as longer days many
serious some of necessity the mother her to manner strongest the
affair. the into enquiry

intimate Jennings's Mrs. of ladies elderly two and Palmer Mrs.
with dined morning, the in invited and met had she whom acquaintance,
evening her fulfill to tea after soon them left former The them.
table whist a making in assist to obliged was Elinor and engagements;
she as occasions, these on use no of was Marianne others. the for
her at therefore was time her though but game; the learn never would
pleasure of productive more means no by was evening the disposal, own
of anxiety the all in spent was it for Elinor, to than her to
endeavoured sometimes She disappointment. of pain the and expectation
she and aside, thrown soon was book the but read; to minutes few a for
and backwards walking of employment interesting more the to returned
the to came she whenever moment a for pausing room, the across forwards
rap. long-expected the distinguishing of hopes in window,



27 CHAPTER


they when Jennings, Mrs. said longer," much holds weather open this "If
leaving like not will John "Sir morning, following the breakfast at met
day's a lose to sportsmen for thing sad a 'tis week; next Barton
to seem they do; they when them pity always I souls! Poor pleasure.
heart." to much so it take

the to walking and voice, cheerful a in Marianne, cried true," is "That
that. of thought not had "I day. the examine to spoke, she as window
country." the in sportsmen many keep will weather This

it. by restored were spirits good her all recollection, lucky a was It
sat she as continued, she indeed," THEM for weather charming is "It
they much "How countenance. happy a with table breakfast the to down
be cannot "it anxiety) of return little a (with But" it! enjoy must
a such after and year, the of time this At long. last to expected
Frosts it. of more little very have certainly shall we rain, of series
day another In severity. with probability all in and in, set soon will
longer--nay, last hardly can mildness extreme this perhaps; two or
tonight!" freeze may it perhaps

from Jennings Mrs. prevent to wishing Elinor, said rate," any "At
we say dare "I did, she as clearly as thoughts sister's her seeing
week." next of end the by town in Middleton Lady and John Sir have shall

way." own her has always Mary do. we you warrant I'll dear, my "Ay,

by Combe to write will "she Elinor, conjectured silently now," "And
post." day's this

privacy a with away sent and written was letter the DID, she if But
the Whatever fact. the ascertain to watchfulness her all eluded which
thorough feeling from was Elinor as far and be, might it of truth
could she spirits, in Marianne saw she while yet it, about contentment
happy spirits; in was Marianne And herself. uncomfortable very be not
of expectation her in happier still and weather, the of mildness the in
frost. a

Mrs. of houses the at cards leaving in spent chiefly was morning The
and town; in being her of them inform to acquaintance Jennings's
wind, the of direction the observing in busy time the all was Marianne
the in alteration an imagining and sky the of variations the watching
air.

There Elinor? morning, the in was it than colder it find you "Don't
warm hands my keep hardly can I difference. decided very a me to seems
seem clouds The think. I yesterday, so not was It muff. my in even
clear a have shall we and moment, a in out be will sun the too, parting
afternoon."

persevered, Marianne but pained; and diverted alternately was Elinor
in morning every and fire, the of brightness the in night every saw and
approaching of symptoms certain the atmosphere, the of appearance the
frost.

Mrs. with dissatisfied be to reason greater no had Dashwoods Miss The
her with than acquaintance, of set and living, of style Jennings's
her in thing Every kind. invariably was which themselves, to behaviour
and plan, liberal most the on conducted was arrangements household
she regret, Middleton's Lady to whom, friends, city old few a excepting
at could introduction an whom to one no visited she dropped, never had
find to Pleased companions. young her of feelings the discompose all
had she than particular that in situated comfortably more herself
real much of want the for compound to willing very was Elinor expected,
or home at whether which, parties, evening their of any from enjoyment
her. amuse to little have could cards, for only formed abroad,

with was house, the to invitation general a had who Brandon, Colonel
Elinor, to talk and Marianne at look to came he day; every almost them
from than him with conversing from satisfaction more derived often who
much with time same the at saw who but occurrence, daily other any
a was it feared She sister. her for regard continued his concern
which with earnestness the see to her grieved It regard. strengthening
than worse certainly were spirits his and Marianne, watched often he
Barton. at when

was Willoughby that certain became it arrival, their after week a About
the from in came they when table the on was card His arrived. also
drive. morning's

out." were we while here been has "he Marianne, cried God!" "Good
to ventured now London, in being his of assured be to rejoiced Elinor,
Marianne But tomorrow." again call will he it, upon "Depend say,
with escaped entrance, Jennings's Mrs. on and her, hear to hardly seemed
card. precious the

of those to restored Elinor, of spirits the raised it while event, This
this From agitation. former their all, than more and all, sister her
every him seeing of expectation the quiet; never was mind her moment
being on insisted She thing. any for unfit her made day, the of hour
out. went others the when morning, next the behind, left

Street Berkeley in passing be might what of full were thoughts Elinor's
they when sister her at glance moment's a but absence; their during
second no paid had Willoughby that her, inform to enough was returned
table. the on laid and in, brought then just was note A there. visit

forward. hastily stepping Marianne, cried me!" "For

mistress." my for ma'am, "No,

up. instantly it took convinced, not Marianne, But

provoking!" how Jennings; Mrs. for indeed is "It

longer be to unable Elinor, said then?" letter, a expecting are "You
silent.

much." little--not a "Yes,

Marianne." me, in confidence no have "You pause. short a After

no in confidence have who YOU--you from reproach this Elinor, "Nay,
one!"

have I Marianne, "indeed, confusion; some in Elinor returned "Me!"
tell." to nothing

alike. are then situations "our energy, with Marianne answered I," "Nor
not do you because you, tell; to thing any us of neither have We
nothing." conceal I because I, and communicate,

was she which herself, in reserve of charge this by distressed Elinor,
to circumstances, such under how, not knew away, do to liberty at not
Marianne. in openness greater for press

it read she her, given being note the and appeared, soon Jennings Mrs.
Conduit in arrival their announcing Middleton, Lady from was It aloud.
and mother her of company the requesting and before, night the Street
a and part, John's Sir on Business evening. following the cousins
Street. Berkeley in calling their prevented own, her on cold violent
drew appointment of hour the when but accepted; was invitation The
that Jennings, Mrs. to civility common in was it as necessary near,
difficulty some had Elinor visit, a such on her attend both should they
of nothing seen had she still for go, to sister her persuading in
abroad, amusement for indisposed more not was therefore and Willoughby;
absence. her in again calling his of risk the run to unwilling than

not is disposition that over, was evening the when found, Elinor
settled scarcely although for abode, of change a by altered materially
twenty nearly him, around collect to contrived had John Sir town, in
affair, an was This ball. a with them amuse to and people, young
an country, the In approve. not did Middleton Lady which of however,
the where London, in but allowable; very was dance unpremeditated
it attained, easily less and important more was elegance of reputation
it have to girls, few a of gratification the for much too risking was
nine or eight of dance small a given had Middleton Lady that known
collation. side-board mere a and violins, two with couple,

had they whom former, the from party; the of were Palmer Mrs. and Mr.
avoid to careful was he as town, in arrival their since before seen not
therefore and mother-in-law, his to attention any of appearance the
their on recognition of mark no received they her, near came never
they who know to seeming without slightly, them at looked He entrance.
the of side other the from Jennings Mrs. to nodded merely and were,
it entered: she as apartment the round glance one gave Marianne room.
to ill-disposed equally down, sat she there--and not was enough--HE was
about assembled been had they After pleasure. communicate or receive
his express to Dashwoods Miss the towards sauntered Palmer Mr. hour, an
first been had Brandon Colonel though town, in them seeing on surprise
said himself had he and house, his at arrival their of informed
come. to were they that hearing on droll very something

he. said Devonshire," in both were you thought "I

Elinor. replied you?" "Did

again?" back go you do "When

discourse. their ended thus And know." not do "I

was she as life, her in dance to unwilling so been Marianne had Never
She exercise. the by fatigued much so never and evening, that
Street. Berkeley to returned they as it of complained

very that all of reason the know "we Jennings, Mrs. said aye," "Aye,
you there, been had nameless, be shall who person certain a if well;
very not was it truth the say to and tired: bit a been have not would
invited." was he when meeting the you give to not him of pretty

Marianne. cried "Invited!"

him met John Sir seems it for me, told Middleton daughter my "So
but more, no said Marianne morning." this street the in somewhere
doing be to situation this in Impatient hurt. exceedingly looked
to resolved Elinor relief, sister's her to lead might that something
fears her awakening by hoped and mother, her to morning next the write
been had which inquiries those procure to Marianne, of health the for
by measure this on bent eagerly more still was she and delayed; long so
again was Marianne that morrow, the on breakfast after perceiving
other any to be to it suppose not could she for Willoughby, to writing
person.

on herself by out went Jennings Mrs. day, the of middle the About
too Marianne, while directly, letter her began Elinor and business,
one from walked conversation, for anxious too employment, for restless
meditation. melancholy in fire the by down sat or other, the to window
all relating mother, her to application her in earnest very was Elinor
her urging inconstancy, Willoughby's of suspicions her passed, had that
account an Marianne from demand to affection and duty of plea every by
him. to respect with situation real her of

and visitor, a foretold rap a when finished, scarcely was letter Her
the from him seen had who Marianne, announced. was Brandon Colonel
he before room the left kind, any of company hated who and window,
expressing though and grave, usually than more looked He it. entered
in somewhat had he if as alone, Dashwood Miss finding at satisfaction
word. a saying without time some for sat her, tell to particular
her which in make to communication some had he that persuaded Elinor,
the not was It opening. its expected impatiently concerned, was sister
than more for, conviction; of kind same the feeling her of time first
looks sister "your of observation the with beginning before, once
appeared had he spirits," of out seems sister "your or to-day," unwell
something inquiring, of or disclosing, of either point, the on
silence their minutes, several of pause a After her. about particular
was he when agitation, some of voice a in her asking his by broken, was
not was Elinor brother? a of acquisition the on her congratulate to
obliged was ready, answer no having and question, a such for prepared
He meant? he what asking of expedient, common and simple the adopt to
Mr. to engagement sister's "your replied, he as smile to tried
known." generally very is Willoughby

do family own her "for Elinor, returned known," generally be cannot "It
it." know not

my afraid am I pardon, your beg "I said, and surprised looked He
secrecy any supposed not had I but impertinent; been has inquiry
universally is marriage their and correspond, openly they as intended,
of." talked

mentioned?" it heard have you can whom By be? that can "How

are you whom with others by nothing, know you whom of some many--by "By
But Middletons. the and Palmer, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. intimate, most
perhaps is mind the where for it, believed have not might I still
to something find always will it convinced, be to unwilling rather
today, in me let servant the when not, had I if doubts, its support
in Willoughby Mr. to directed hand, his in letter a seen accidentally
I before convinced was I but inquire, to came I writing. sister's your
it Is settled? finally thing every Is question. the ask could
of chance no have could I and right, no have I But to-? impossible
in wrong been have I believe I Dashwood. Miss me, Excuse succeeding.
I prudence your on and do, to what know hardly I but much, so saying
absolutely all is it that me Tell dependence. strongest the have
if concealment, short in that attempt, any that on, resolved
remains." that all is possible, be concealment

for love his of avowal direct a Elinor to conveyed which words, These
to able immediately not was She much. very her affected sister, her
for debated she recovered, were spirits her when even and anything, say
real The give. to proper most be would it answer the on time, short a
known little so was sister her and Willoughby between things of state
liable as be might she it, explain to endeavouring in that herself, to
that convinced was she as Yet little. too as much too say to
Colonel of hope no leave could Willoughby, for affection Marianne's
and be, might affection that of event the whatever success, Brandon's
thought she censure, from conduct her shield to wished time same the at
than more say to consideration, some after kind, and prudent most it
though that therefore, acknowledged, She believed. or knew really she
they which on terms the of themselves by informed been never had she
and doubt, no had she affection mutual their of other, each with stood
hear. to astonished not was she correspondence their of

speak, to ceasing her on and attention, silent with her to listened He
emotion, of voice a in saying after and seat, his from directly rose
he that Willoughby to happiness; imaginable all wish I sister your "to
away. went and leave, her,"--took deserve to endeavour may

to conversation, this from feelings comfortable no derived Elinor
the on left, was she points; other on mind her of uneasiness the lessen
Brandon's Colonel of impression melancholy a with contrary,
her by removed, it wishing from even prevented was and unhappiness,
it. confirm must that event very the for anxiety



28 CHAPTER


Elinor make to days, four or three next the during occurred Nothing
Willoughby for mother; her to applying in done, had she what regret
time that of end the about engaged were They wrote. nor came neither
kept was Jennings Mrs. which from party, a to Middleton Lady attend to
party, this for and daughter; youngest her of indisposition the by away
seeming and appearance, her of careless dispirited, wholly Marianne,
one without prepared, staid, or went she whether indifferent equally
the by sat She pleasure. of expression one or hope of look
Middleton's Lady of moment the till tea, after fire drawing-room
attitude, her altering or seat, her from stirring once without arrival,
and presence; sister's her of insensible and thoughts, own her in lost
the at them for waited Middleton Lady that told were they last at when
expected. was one any that forgotten had she if as started she door,

as soon as and destination, of place the at time due in arrived They
the ascended alighted, allow, would them before carriages of string the
another to landing-place one from announced names their heard stairs,
full quite up, lit splendidly room a entered and voice, audible an in
of tribute their paid had they When hot. insufferably and company, of
permitted were they house, the of lady the to curtsying by politeness
and heat the of share their take and crowd, the in mingle to
some After add. necessarily must arrival their which to inconvenience,
to down sat Middleton Lady less, doing or little saying in spent time
and she about, moving for spirits in not was Marianne as and Cassino,
great no at themselves placed chairs, to succeeding luckily Elinor
table. the from distance

perceived Elinor before long, manner this in remained not had They
earnest in them, of yards few a within standing Willoughby,
soon She woman. young looking fashionable very a with conversation
to attempting without but bowed, immediately he and eye, his caught
her; see but not could he though Marianne, approach to or her, to speak
turned Elinor lady. same the with discourse his continued then and
by unobserved be could it whether see to Marianne, to involuntarily
countenance whole her and him, perceived first she moment that At her.
him towards moved have would she delight, sudden with glowing
her. of hold caught sister her not had instantly,

does why there--Oh! is there--he is "he exclaimed, she heavens!" "Good
him?" to speak I cannot why me? at look not he

you what betray not do "and Elinor, cried composed," be pray "Pray,
yet." you observed not has he Perhaps present. body every to feel

be to and herself; believe could she than more was however This
it Marianne, of reach the beyond only not was moment a such at composed
affected which impatience of agony an in sat She wish. her beyond was
feature. every

up, started she both; them regarded and again, round turned he last At
to hand her out held affection, of tone a in name his pronouncing and
than Elinor to rather himself addressing and approached, He him.
observe to not determined and eye, her avoid to wishing if as Marianne,
and Dashwood, Mrs. after manner hurried a in inquired attitude, her
all of robbed was Elinor town. in been had they long how asked
But word. a say to unable was and address, an such by mind of presence
was face Her expressed. instantly were sister her of feelings the
emotion, greatest the of voice a in exclaimed, she and over, crimsoned
not you Have this? of meaning the is what Willoughby, God! "Good
me?" with hands shake not you Will letters? my received

he and him, to painful seemed touch her but it, avoid then not could He
evidently was he time this all During moment. a for only hand her held
its saw and countenance his watched Elinor composure. for struggling
spoke he pause, moment's a After tranquil. more becoming expression
calmness. with

Tuesday, last Street Berkeley in calling of honour the myself did "I
find to enough fortunate not was I that regretted much very and
hope." I lost, not was card My home. at Jennings Mrs. and yourselves

wildest the in Marianne cried notes?" my received not you have "But
What mistake. dreadful sure--some am I mistake some is "Here anxiety.
tell sake heaven's for Willoughby; me, Tell it? of meaning the be can
matter?" the is what me,

embarrassment his all and changed complexion his reply; no made He
he whom with lady young the of eye the catching on if, as but returned;
exertion, instant of necessity the felt he talking, previously been had
pleasure the had I "Yes, saying, after and again, himself recovered he
so were you which town, in arrival your of information the receiving of
joined and bow slight a with away hastily turned me," send to as good
friend. his

into sunk stand, to unable and white, dreadfully looking now Marianne,
tried faint, her see to moment every expecting Elinor, and chair, her
with her reviving while others, of observation the from her screen to
water. lavender

force "and speak, could she as soon as cried, she Elinor," him, to "Go
him to speak again--must him see must I him Tell me. to come to him
this till peace moment's a have not shall rest--I cannot I instantly.--
him to go Oh other.-- or misapprehension dreadful explained--some is
moment." this

is This wait. must you Marianne, dearest my No, done? be that can "How
tomorrow." till only Wait explanations. for place the not

him following from her prevent she could however difficulty With
least, at wait, to agitation, her check to her persuade to and herself;
more with him to speak might she till composure, of appearance the with
continued Marianne for impossible; was effect, more and privacy
feelings, her of misery the to voice low a in way give to incessantly
Willoughby saw Elinor time short a In wretchedness. of exclamations by
Marianne telling and staircase, the towards door the by room the quit
that again him to speaking of impossibility the urged gone, was he that
begged instantly She calm. be to her for argument fresh a as evening,
was she as home, them take to Middleton Lady entreat would sister her
longer. minute a stay to miserable too

informed being on rubber, a of middle the in though Middleton, Lady
her to moment a for object to polite too was unwell, was Marianne that
they friend, a to cards her over making and away, going of wish
was word a Scarcely found. be could carriage the soon as departed
a in was Marianne Street. Berkeley to return their during spoken
Jennings Mrs. as but tears; for even oppressed much too agony, silent
room, own their to directly go could they home, come not luckily was
soon was She herself. to little a her restored hartshorn where
her alone, being of desirous seemed she as and bed, in and undressed
Jennings, Mrs. of return the waited she while and her, left then sister
past. the over thinking for enough leisure had

and Willoughby between subsisted had engagement of kind some That
it, of weary was Willoughby that and doubt, not could she Marianne
own her feed still might Marianne however for clear; equally seemed
or mistake to behaviour such attribute not could SHE wishes,
of change thorough a but Nothing kind. any of misapprehension
still been have would indignation Her it. for account could sentiment
which embarrassment that witnessed not she had was, it than stronger
prevented and misconduct, own his of consciousness a speak to seemed
with sporting been have to as unprincipled so him believing from her
that design any without first, the from sister her of affections the
and regard, his weakened have might Absence investigation. bear would
a such that but it, overcome to him determined have might convenience
doubt. to herself bring not could she existed formerly had regard

already must meeting a unhappy so which pangs the on Marianne, for As
in her await might which severe more still those on and her, given have
deepest the without reflect not could she consequence, probable its
she while for comparison; the in gained situation own Her concern.
in divided be might they however ever, as much as Edward ESTEEM could
circumstance every But supported. always be might mind her future,
misery the heighten to uniting seemed evil an such embitter could that
and immediate an Willoughby--in from separation final a in Marianne of
him. with rupture irreconcilable



29 CHAPTER


sun the or day, next the fire their lit had house-maid the Before
only Marianne, January, in morning gloomy cold, a over power any gained
sake the for window-seats the of one against kneeling was dressed, half
fast as writing and it, from command could she light little the all of
situation, this In her. permit would tears of flow continual a as
perceived first sobs, and agitation her by sleep from roused Elinor,
anxiety, silent with moments few a for her observing after and her;
gentleness, considerate most the of tone a in said,

ask-?" I may "Marianne,

all." know soon will you nothing; "ask replied, she Elinor," "No,

no lasted said, was this which with calmness desperate of sort The
return a by followed immediately was and spoke, she while than longer
could she before minutes some was It affliction. excessive same the of
still which grief of bursts frequent the and letter, her with on go
of enough proofs were pen, her withhold to intervals, at her, obliged
the for writing was she that was it probable than more how feeling her
Willoughby. to time last

and power; her in attention unobtrusive and quiet every her paid Elinor
not had more, still her tranquilize and sooth to tried have would she
nervous most the of eagerness the all with her, entreated Marianne
such In world. the for her to speak to not irritability,
long be not should they that both for better was it circumstances,
prevented only not mind Marianne's of state restless the and together;
but dressed, was she after moment a room the in remaining from her
her made place, of change continual and solitude once at requiring
every of sight the avoiding time, breakfast till house the about wander
body.

and thing; any eat to attempted nor ate, neither she breakfast At
in not her, urging in not employed, all then was attention Elinor's
to endeavouring in but her, regard to appearing in nor her, pitying
herself. to entirely notice Jennings's Mrs. engage

a lasted it Jennings, Mrs. with meal favourite a was this As
it, after themselves, setting just were they and time, considerable
to delivered was letter a when table, working common the round
a of turning and, servant, the from caught eagerly she which Marianne,
as saw who Elinor, room. the of out ran instantly paleness, death-like
come must it that direction, the seen had she if as this, by plainly
her made as heart at sickness a such immediately felt Willoughby, from
as tremour general a such in sat and head, her up hold to able hardly
good That notice. Jennings's Mrs. escape to impossible it fear her made
from letter a received had Marianne that only saw however, lady,
she which and joke, good very a her to appeared which Willoughby,
to it find would she that laugh, a with hoping, by accordingly, treated
in employed busily too was she distress, Elinor's Of liking. her
and all; at thing any see to rug, her for worsted of lengths measuring
said, she disappeared, Marianne as soon as talk, her continuing calmly

my in love in desperately so woman young a saw never I word, my "Upon
foolish be to used they yet and her, to nothing were girls MY life!
I creature. altered an quite is she Marianne, Miss for as but enough;
much waiting her keep won't he heart, my of bottom the from hope,
forlorn. and ill so look her see to grievous quite is it for longer,
married?" be to they are when Pray,

moment, that at than speak to disposed less never though Elinor,
therefore, and, this, as attack an such answer to herself obliged
yourself talked Ma'am, really, you have "And replied, smile, to trying
I Willoughby? Mr. to engaged being sister's my of persuasion a into
to seems question a serious so but joke, a only been had it thought
deceive not will you that therefore, beg, must I and more; imply
me surprise would nothing that you assure do I longer. any yourself
married." be to going being their of hear to than more

we Don't so? talk you can how Dashwood! Miss shame, for shame, "For
in ears and head over were they that match, a be must it that know all
see I not Did met? they moment first the from other each with love
I not did and long; day all and day, every Devonshire in together them
wedding buy to purpose on me with town to came sister your that know
it about sly so are you Because do. won't this come, Come, clothes?
such no is it but senses; any has else nobody think you yourself,
so ever this town over all known been has it for you, tell can I thing,
Charlotte." does so and it of body every tell I long.

mistaken. are "you seriously, very Elinor, said Ma'am," "Indeed,
and report, the spreading in thing unkind very a doing are you Indeed,
now." me believe not will you though have you that find will you

more, say to spirits not had Elinor but again, laughed Jennings Mrs.
hurried written, had Willoughby what know to events all at eager and
Marianne saw she door, the opening on where, room, their to away
hand, her in letter one grief, by choked almost bed, the on stretched
without but near, drew Elinor her. by laying others three or two and
kissed hand, her took bed, the on herself seating and word; a saying
of burst a to way gave then and times, several affectionately her
The Marianne's. than violent less scarcely was first at which tears,
of tenderness the all feel to seemed speak, to unable though latter,
she affliction, joint in spent thus time some after and behaviour, this
face her covering then and hands; Elinor's into letters the all put
knew who Elinor, agony. with screamed almost handkerchief, her with
its have must it, witness to was it as shocking grief, such that
spent somewhat had suffering of excess this till her by watched course,
as read letter, Willoughby's to eagerly turning then and itself,
follows:

January. Street, "Bond
MADAM, DEAR "MY

your receiving of honour the had just have "I
sincere my return to beg I which for letter,
there find to concerned much am I acknowledgments.
did that night last behaviour my in anything was
at quite am I though and approbation; your meet not
so be could I point what in discover to loss a
your entreat I you, offend to as unfortunate
been have to you assure can I what of forgiveness
on reflect never shall I unintentional. perfectly
Devonshire in family your with acquaintance former my
flatter and pleasure, grateful most the without
or mistake any by broken be not will it myself
your for esteem My actions. my of misapprehension
so been have I if but sincere; very is family whole
than more of belief a to rise give to as unfortunate
myself reproach shall I express, to meant or felt, I
professions my in guarded more been having not for
more meant have ever should I That esteem. that of
understand you when impossible, be to allow will you
elsewhere, engaged long been have affections my that
before believe, I weeks, many be not will it and
great with is It fulfilled. is engagement this
the returning in commands your obey I that regret
you, from honoured been have I which with letters
bestowed obligingly so you which hair, of lock the and
me. on

Madam, dear am, "I
obedient most "Your
servant, "humble
WILLOUGHBY." "JOHN


Miss by read be must this as letter a such indignation what With
it that it, began she before aware, Though imagined. be may Dashwood,
their confirm and inconstancy, his of confession a bring must
be could language such that aware not was she ever, for separation
capable Willoughby supposed have she could nor it; announce to suffered
and honourable every of appearance the from far so departing of
to as gentleman, a of decorum common the from far feeling--so delicate
bringing of instead which, letter a cruel: impudently so letter a send
no acknowledged regret, of professions any release a of desire his with
of letter whatever--a affection peculiar all denied faith, of breach
be to writer its proclaimed which and insult, an was line every which
villainy. hardened in deep

read then astonishment; indignant with time some for it over paused She
her increase to served only perusal every but again; and again it
him, against feelings her were bitter so and man, the of abhorrence
wound might she lest speak, to herself trust not dared she that
to loss a as not disengagement, their treating by deeper still Marianne
most and worst the from escape an as but good possible any of her
unprincipled an with life, for connection, a evils, all of irremediable
important. most the blessing a real, most the deliverance a as man,

the on letter, the of contents the on meditations earnest her In
the on probably, and it, dictate could which mind that of depravity
other no had who person, different very a of mind different very
with him gave heart her what than affair the with whatever connection
her of distress immediate the forgot Elinor passed, that thing every
so and unread, yet lap her on letters three had she that forgot sister,
hearing on when that room, the in been had she long how forgot entirely
who see to window the to went she door, the to up drive carriage a
to astonishment all was she early, unreasonably so coming be could
ordered been not had knew she which chariot, Jennings's Mrs. perceive
of hopeless though Marianne, quit to not Determined one. till
excuse to away hurried she ease, her to present, at contributing,
being sister her of account on Jennings, Mrs. attending from herself
for concern good-humoured thoroughly a with Jennings, Mrs. indisposed.
seeing after Elinor, and readily, most excuse the admitted cause, its
rise to attempting found she whom Marianne, to returned off, safe her
from her prevent to time in just reached she whom and bed, the from
rest proper of want long a from giddy and faint floor, the on falling
many and appetite, any had she since days many was it for food; and
longer no was mind her when now, and slept; really had she since nights
was this all of consequence the suspense, of fever the by supported
nervous general a and stomach, weakened a head, aching an in felt
directly, her for procured Elinor which wine, of glass A faintness.
some express to able last at was she and comfortable, more her made
saying, by kindness, her of sense

you!" make I unhappy how Elinor! "Poor

do, COULD I thing any were "there sister, her replied wish," only "I
you." to comfort of be might which

Marianne, for much too was been, have would else thing every as This,
am I Elinor, "Oh! heart, her of anguish the in exclaim, only could who
sobs. in lost entirely was voice her before indeed," miserable,

in grief unresisted of torrent this witness longer no could Elinor
silence.

kill not would you "if cried, she Marianne," dear yourself, "Exert
her of think mother; your of Think you. love who all and yourself
yourself." exert must you sake her for suffer: YOU while misery

I if me, leave me, "leave Marianne; cried cannot," I cannot, "I
so. me torture not do but me! forget me, hate me, leave you; distress
of talk to own their of sorrow no have who those, for easy how Oh!
I what of idea an have cannot YOU Elinor, happy Happy, exertion!
suffer."

believe you can knew!--And you if Ah! Marianne? happy, ME call you "Do
wretched!" so you see I while so, be to me

"I neck; sister's her round arms her throwing me," forgive me, "Forgive
you yet but have; you heart a what know I me; for feel you know
away do can what, oh you--what, loves Edward happy; be must are--you
that?" as happiness such

solemnly. Elinor, said circumstances," many "Many,

You you. only and you, loves "he wildly, Marianne cried no," no, "No,
grief." no have CAN

state." this in you see I while pleasure no have can "I

nothing which misery a is Mine otherwise. me see never will you "And
away." do can

Is friends? no comforts? no you Have Marianne. so, talk not must "You
you as Much consolation? for opening no leaves as such loss your
of discovery the if suffered have would you what of think now, suffer
engagement your period--if later a to delayed been had character his
been, have might it as months, and months for on carried been had
unhappy of day additional Every it. to end an put to chose he before
dreadful." more blow the made have would side, your on confidence,

engagement." no been has "there Marianne, cried "Engagement!"

engagement!" "No

faith no broken has He him. believe you as unworthy so not is he "No,
me." with

you." loved he that you told he "But

never but implied, day every was It absolutely. "Yes--no--never
never it been--but had it thought I Sometimes declared. professedly
was."

him?"-- to wrote you "Yet

cannot I But passed?-- had that all after wrong be that "Yes--could
talk."

now which letters three the to again turning and more, no said Elinor
the over ran directly before, than curiosity stronger much a raised
on him sent had sister her what was which first, The all. of contents
effect. this to was town, in arrival their

January. Street, Berkeley

on Willoughby, be, will you surprised "How
something feel will you think I and this; receiving
town. in am I that know you when surprise, than more
Mrs. with though hither, coming of opportunity An
resist. not could we temptation a was Jennings,
here come to time in this receive may you wish I
rate any At it. on depend not will I but to-night,
adieu. present, the For to-morrow. you expect shall I

"M.D."

dance the after morning the on written been had which note, second Her
words:-- these in was Middletons', the at

having in disappointment my express cannot "I
astonishment my nor yesterday, before day the you missed
which note a to answer any received having not at
expecting been have I ago. week a above you sent I
every you, see to more still and you, from hear to
possible, as soon as again call Pray day. the of hour
this expected having my of reason the explain and
time, another earlier come better had You vain. in
last were We one. by out generally are we because
dance. a was there where Middleton's, Lady at night
the of be to asked were you that told been have I
much very be must You so? be it could But party.
be could that if parted, we since indeed altered
suppose not will I But there. not you and case, the
your receive to soon very hope I and possible, this
otherwise. being its of assurance personal

"M.D."

these:-- were him to note last her of contents The

your by Willoughby, imagine, to I am "What
explanation an demand I Again night? last behaviour
pleasure the with you meet to prepared was I it. of
the with produced, naturally separation our which
appeared Barton at intimacy our which familiarity
have I indeed! repulsed was I justify. to me to
excuse to endeavouring in night wretched a passed
than less called be scarcely can which conduct a
to able been yet not have I though but insulting;
behaviour, your for apology reasonable any form
of justification your hear to ready perfectly am I
purposely or misinformed, been perhaps have You it.
have may which me, concerning something in deceived,
is, it what me Tell opinion. your in me lowered
shall I and acted, you which on grounds the explain
It you. satisfy to able being in satisfied, be
ill think to obliged be to indeed me grieve would
that learn to am I if it, do to am I if but you; of
that you, believed hitherto have we what not are you
your that insincere, was all us for regard your
let deceive, to only intended was me to behaviour
at are feelings My possible. as soon as told be it
wish I indecision; dreadful of state a in present
be will side either on certainty but you, acquit to
are sentiments your If suffer. now I what to ease
notes, my return will you were, they what longer no
possession. your in is which hair my of lock the and

"M.D."

been have could confidence, and affection of full so letters, such That
unwilling been have would sake, Willoughby's for Elinor, answered, so
the to her blind not did him of condemnation her But believe. to
silently was she and all; at written been having their of impropriety
proofs unsolicited such hazarded had which imprudence the over grieving
severely most and preceding, anything by warranted not tenderness, of
finished had she that perceiving Marianne, when event, the by condemned
any what but nothing contained they that her to observed letters, the
situation. same the in written have would one

if as him, to engaged solemnly as be "to added, she myself," felt "I
other." each to us bound had covenant legal strictest the

the feel not did he unfortunately "but Elinor; said it," believe can "I
same."

know I it. felt he weeks and weeks Elinor--for same, the feel DID "He
the but nothing (and now, him changed have may Whatever did. he
dear as once was I it), done have can me against employed art blackest
can he now which hair, of lock This wish. could soul own my as him to
earnest most the with me of begged was up, give readily so
his heard you had manner, his look, his seen you Had supplication.
being our of evening last the forgot you Have moment! that at voice
me told he When too! parted we that morning The Barton? at together
I distress--can again--his met we before weeks many be might it that
distress?" his forget ever

had emotion this when but more; no say could she two or moment a For
tone, firmer a in added, she away, passed

Willoughby." by not but used; cruelly been have I "Elinor,

been have he can whom By himself? but who Marianne, "Dearest
instigated?"

rather could I heart. own his by than rather world, the all "By
me ruin to together leagued acquaintance my of creature every believe
This cruelty. such of capable nature his believe than opinion, his in
your but short, in one, any be--or she writes--whoever he whom of woman
me. bely to barbarous so been have may Edward, and mama, self, dear own
not would I whom world the in creature a there is three, you Beyond
well?" so know I heart whose Willoughby, than evil of suspect rather

so been have may "Whoever replied, only and contend, not would Elinor
triumph, malignant their of cheated be them let enemy, your detestably
own your of consciousness the nobly how seeing by sister, dear my
a is It spirits. your supports intentions good and innocence
malevolence." such resists which pride laudable and reasonable

care I pride. no has mine as such "misery Marianne, cried no," "No,
be may so me seeing of triumph The wretched. am I that knows who not
be may little suffer who they Elinor, Elinor, world. the all to open
return or insult, resist like--may they as independent and proud
they wretched--and be must feel--I must I cannot. I mortification--but
can." that it of consciousness the enjoy to welcome are

mine--" and sake mother's my for "But

so am I when happy appear to But own. my for than more do would "I
it?" require can who miserable--Oh!

walking in employed was Elinor silent. both were they Again
fire, the to window the from window, the to fire the from thoughtfully
discerning or one, from warmth received she that knowing without
bed, the of foot the at seated Marianne, and other; the through objects
up took again posts, its of one against leaning head her with
sentence, every over shuddering after and, letter, Willoughby's
exclaimed--

yours! be this could Willoughby, Willoughby, Oh, much! too is "It
Whatever can. nothing Elinor, you. acquit can cruel--nothing Cruel,
his suspended have to not he me--ought against heard have might he
power the me given have to it, of me told have to not he ought belief?
letter,) the from it (repeating hair, of lock 'The myself? clearing of
unpardonable. is me'--That on bestowed obligingly so you which
Oh, words? those wrote you when heart your was where Willoughby,
justified?" be he can insolent!--Elinor, barbarously

way." possible no in Marianne, "No,

it long been?--how have may art her what knows woman--who this yet "And
is her!--Who by contrived deeply how and premeditated, been have may
and young as of talk him hear ever I did be?--Whom she can she?--Who
one--he no one, no acquaintance?--Oh! female his among attractive
myself." of only me to talked

thus. ended it and agitated, greatly was Marianne ensued; pause Another

be we not Can mama. comfort and go must I home. go must I "Elinor,
to-morrow?" gone

Marianne!" "To-morrow,

sake--and Willoughby's for only came I here? stay I should why "Yes,
me?" regards Who me? for cares who now

more much Jennings Mrs. owe We to-morrow. go to impossible be would "It
a such prevent must kind commonest the of civility and civility; than
that." as removal hasty

I long, here stay cannot I but perhaps; two, or day another then, "Well
people. these all of remarks and questions the endure to stay cannot
of pity The pity? their bear to I am Palmers--how and Middletons The
that!" to say HE would what Oh, Middleton! Lady as woman a such

but so; did she moment a for and again, down lie to her advised Elinor
body and mind of pain restless in and ease; her give could attitude no
more and more growing till another, to posture one from moved she
at bed the on her keep difficulty with could sister her hysterical,
for call to constrained being of fearful was time some for and all,
length at was she which however, drops, lavender Some assistance.
Jennings Mrs. till time that from and use; of were take, to persuaded
motionless. and quiet bed the on continued she returned,



30 CHAPTER


without and return, her on room their to immediately came Jennings Mrs.
and door the opened answered, admittance of request her have to waiting
concern. real of look a with in walked

to compassion great of voice a in she dear?"--said my do you do "How
answer. to attempting without face her away turned who Marianne,

No bad.-- very looks she thing! Dashwood?--Poor Miss she, is "How
soon--a very married be to is He true. too but is it Ay, wonder.
Taylor Mrs. him. with patience no have I fellow! good-for-nothing
particular a by it told was she and ago, hour an half it of me told
believed have not should I sure am I else herself, Grey Miss of friend
can I all I, said Well, was. it as sink to ready almost was I and it;
my of lady young a used has he true, be this if that is, say
may wife his soul my all with wish I and ill, abominably acquaintance
may you dear, my say, always shall I so And out. heart his plague
if and way; this in on going men's of notion no have I it. on depend
not has he as dressing a such him give will I again, him meet I ever
Marianne; Miss dear my comfort, one is there But day. a many this had
your with and having; worth world the in man young only the not is he
won't I thing! poor Well, admirers. want never will you face pretty
and once at out cry her have better had she for longer, any her disturb
tonight coming are luckily Sandersons and Parrys The with. done have
her." amuse will that and know, you

she if as room, the of out tiptoe on walking away, went then She
noise. by increased be could affliction friend's young her supposed

with dining on determined sister, her of surprise the to Marianne,
down; go would she "no, But it. against her advised even Elinor them.
less." be would her about bustle the and well, very it bear could she
motive, a such by moment a for governed her have to pleased Elinor,
dinner, the out sit could she that possible hardly it believing though
could, she as well as her for dress her adjusting and more; no said
into her assist to ready was bed, the on remained still Marianne while
it. to summoned were they as soon as room dining the

calmer was and more ate she wretchedly, most looking though there, When
been she had or speak, to tried she Had expected. had sister her than
attentions ill-judged but well-meant Jennings's Mrs. half of conscious
a not but maintained; been have not could calmness this her, to
thoughts her of abstraction the and lips; her escaped syllable
her. before passing was that thing every of ignorance in her preserved

its though kindness, Jennings's Mrs. to justice did who Elinor,
made ridiculous, almost sometimes and distressing, often were effusions
her which civilities, those her returned and acknowledgments, those her
saw friend good Their herself. for return or make not could sister
her to due was thing every that felt and unhappy, was Marianne that
with therefore, her treated She so. less all at her make might which
the on child favourite a towards parent a of fondness indulgent the all
the by place best the have to was Marianne holidays. its of day last
to and house, the in delicacy every by eat to tempted be to was fire,
Elinor, not Had day. the of news the all of relation the by amused be
she mirth, all to check a seen sister, her of countenance sad the in
a cure to endeavours Jennings's Mrs. by entertained been have could
a and olives, and sweetmeats of variety a by love, in disappointment
was this all of consciousness the as however, soon, As fire. good
longer. no stay could she Marianne, on repetition continual by forced
to not sister her to sign a and Misery, of exclamation hasty a With
room. the of out hurried and up got directly she her, follow

it "how gone, was she as soon as Jennings, Mrs. cried soul!" "Poor
without away gone not is she if declare I And her! see to me grieves
seems nothing Lord! too! cherries dried the And wine! her finishing
I like, would she thing any of knew I if sure am I good. any her do to
to thing oddest the is it Well, it. for town the over all send would
is there when But ill! so girl pretty a such use should man a that me,
bless Lord other, the on none to next and side, one on money of plenty
things!--" such about more no care they you!

rich?" very her--is called you think I Grey then--Miss lady "The

smart, a her? see ever you Did dear. my pounds, thousand "Fifty
very aunt her remember I handsome. not but say, they girl stylish
family the But man. wealthy very a married she Henshawe; Biddy well,
it accounts, all by and pounds! thousand Fifty together. rich all are
No pieces. to all is he say they for wanted; it's before come won't
don't it Well, hunters! and curricle his with about dashing wonder!
makes and comes will, he who be man, young a when but talking; signify
fly to business no has he marriage, promises and girl, pretty a to love
is girl richer a and poor, grows he because only word his from off
let horses, his sell case, a such in he, don't Why him. have to ready
I once? at reform thorough a make and servants, his off turn house, his
matters till wait to ready been have would Marianne Miss you, warrant
of way the in nothing now-a-days; do won't that But round. came
age." this of men young the by up given be ever can pleasure

be to said she Is is? Grey Miss girl a of kind what know you "Do
amiable?"

her heard ever hardly I indeed her; of harm any heard never "I
day one that morning, this say did Taylor Mrs. that except mentioned;
would Ellison Mrs. and Mr. believed she that her, to hinted Walker Miss
could Ellison Mrs. and she for married, Grey Miss have to sorry be not
agree."-- never

Ellisons?" the are who "And

for choose may and age of is she now But dear. my guardians, "Her
a pausing after now," made!--What has she choice pretty a and herself;
moan to suppose, I room, own her to gone is sister poor moment--"your
dear, Poor her? comfort to get can one nothing there Is herself. by
shall we by-and-by Well, alone. be her let to cruel quite seems it
we shall What little. a her amuse will that and friends, few a have
cares she game round no there is but know; I whist hates She at? play
for?"

say, dare I Marianne, unnecessary. quite is kindness this ma'am, "Dear
I if her persuade shall I evening. this again room her leave not will
rest." wants she sure am I for bed, to early go to can

own her name her Let her. for best be will that believe I "Aye,
and bad so looking been has she wonder no Lord! bed. to go and supper,
been has suppose I matter this for two, or week last this down cast so
came that letter the so And that. as long as head her over hanging
it, of notion a had had I if sure am I soul! Poor it! finished today
you then But money. my all for it about her joked have not would I
being its of sure made I thing? a such guess I should how know,
be to like people young know you and letter, love common a but nothing
daughters my and John Sir concerned how Lord! them. about at laughed
have might I me about senses my had I If it! hear they when be will
I But it. of them told and home, way my in Street Conduit in called
tomorrow." them see shall

and Palmer Mrs. caution to you for sure, am I unnecessary be would "It
slightest the making or Willoughby, Mr. naming ever against John Sir
good-nature own Their sister. my before passed, has what to allusion
thing any know to appearing of cruelty real the them to out point must
to said be ever may that less the and present; is she when it about
my you as spared, be will feelings my more the subject, the on myself
believe." easily will madam dear

hear to you for terrible be must It indeed. do I that yes, Lord! "Oh!
a mention not would I sure am I sister, your for as and of; talked it
time. dinner all not did I saw You world. the for her to it about word
very all are they for daughters, my nor John, Sir would more No
I as hint, a them give I if especially considerate; and thoughtful
such about said is that less the think I part, my For will. certainly
what And forgot. and over blown 'tis sooner the better, the things,
know?" you do ever talking does

cases many in than perhaps so more harm; do only can it affair this "In
for which, circumstances by attended been has it for kind, similar a of
the become to unfit it make it, in concerned one every of sake the
has Willoughby--he Mr. to justice THIS do must I conversation. public
sister." my with engagement positive no broken

engagement positive No him. defend to pretend Don't dear! my "Law,
the on fixing and House, Allenham over all her taking after indeed!
hereafter!" in live to were they rooms very

and farther, subject the press not could sake, sister's her for Elinor,
though since, Willoughby's; for her of required not was it hoped she
enforcement the by little very gain could he much, lose might Marianne
Jennings, Mrs. sides, both on silence short a After truth. real the of
again. forth burst hilarity, natural her all with

be will it for ill-wind, an about saying true a 'tis dear, my "Well,
aye, last; at her have will He Brandon. Colonel for better the all
Lord! Mid-summer. by married an't they if now, me, Mind will. he that
It tonight. come will he hope I news! this over chuckle he'll how
year a thousand Two sister. your for match better a one to all be will
I aye, indeed; love-child, little the drawback--except or debt without
then and cost, small a at out 'prenticed be may she but her; forgot had
you; tell can I place, nice a is Delaford signify? it does what
and comforts of full place, fashioned old nice a call I what exactly
covered are that walls garden great with in shut quite conveniences;
in tree mulberry a such and country; the in fruit-trees best the with
were we time only the stuff did I and Charlotte how Lord! corner! one
a and stew-ponds, delightful some dove-cote, a is there Then, there!
for; wish could one that short, in thing, every and canal; pretty very
mile a of quarter a only and church, the to close is it moreover, and,
sit and go only you if for dull, never 'tis so turnpike-road, the from
carriages the all see may you house, the behind arbour yew old an in up
the in by hard butcher A place! nice a 'tis Oh! along. pass that
fancy, my To throw. stone's a within parsonage-house the and village,
to forced are they where Park, Barton than prettier times thousand a
than nearer neighbour a not have and meat, their for miles three send
can. I as soon as Colonel the up spirit shall I Well, mother. your
but CAN we If down. another drives know, you mutton, of shoulder One
head!" her of out Willoughby put

well very do shall "we Elinor, said Ma'am," THAT, do can we if "Ay,
to away went she rising, then And Brandon." Colonel without or with
room, own her in expected, she as found, she whom Marianne, join
which, fire, a of remains small the over misery, silent in leaning,
light. only her been had entrance, Elinor's till

received sister her that notice the all was me," leave better had "You
her. from

this, But bed." to go will you "if Elinor, said you," leave will "I
first at she suffering, impatient of perverseness momentary the from
persuasion, gentle though earnest, sister's Her do. to refused
her lay her saw Elinor and compliance, to her softened soon however,
quiet some get to way a in hoped, she as and pillow, the on head aching
her. left she before rest

by joined soon was she repaired, then she whither drawing-room, the In
hand. her in something, of full wine-glass, a with Jennings, Mrs.

have I that recollected just have "I entering, she, said dear," "My
was ever that house the in wine Constantia old finest the of some
poor My sister. your for it of glass a brought have I so tasted,
old his of touch a had he Whenever it! of was he fond how husband!
the in else thing any than good more him did it said he gout, colicky
sister." your to it take Do world.

the of difference the at smiling Elinor, replied Ma'am," "Dear
have I But are! you good "how recommended, was it which for complaints
think I as and asleep; almost hope, I and, bed, in Marianne left just
me give will you if rest, as her to service much so of be will nothing
myself." wine the drink will I leave,

minutes five been not had she that regretting though Jennings, Mrs.
she as Elinor, and compromise; the with satisfied was earlier,
a on effects its though that reflected, it, of chief the swallowed
healing its her, to importance little of present, at were, gout colicky
herself on tried reasonably as be might heart disappointed a on powers,
sister. her on as

manner his by and tea, at were party the while in came Brandon Colonel
that fancied immediately Elinor Marianne, for room the round looking of
he that short, in and, there, her see to wished nor expected neither he
was Jennings Mrs. absence. her occasioned what of aware already was
walked she entrance, his after soon for thought; same the by struck not
whispered-- and presided, Elinor where tea-table the to room the across
it; of nothing knows He see. you ever as grave as looks Colonel "The
dear." my him, tell do

look a with and, hers, to close chair a drew afterwards shortly He
her after inquired information, good his of her assured perfectly which
sister.

day, all indisposed been has "She she. said well," not is "Marianne
bed." to go to her persuaded have we and

morning this heard I "what replied, hesitatingly he then," "Perhaps,
at possible believe could I than it in truth more be may be--there may
first."

hear?" you did "What

man, a that short, think--in to reason had I whom gentleman, a "That
it know you If you? tell I shall how engaged--but be to KNEW I whom
spared." be may I must, you surely as already,

Willoughby's "Mr. calmness, forced with Elinor, answered mean," "You
have to seems This all. it know DO we Yes, Grey. Miss with marriage
unfolded first morning very this for elucidation, general of day a been
it?" hear you did Where unfathomable! is Willoughby Mr. us. to it

ladies Two business. had I where Mall, Pall in shop stationer's a "In
other the giving was them of one and carriage, their for waiting were
attempting little so voice a in match, intended the of account an
name The all. hear to not me for impossible was it that concealment,
my caught first repeated, frequently Willoughby, John Willoughby, of
thing every that assertion positive a was followed what and attention;
was Grey--it Miss with marriage his respecting settled finally now was
weeks, few a within even place take would secret--it a be to longer no
thing, One matters. other and preparations of particulars many with
still man the identify to served it because remember, I especially,
Combe to go to were they over, was ceremony the as soon more:--as
be would it astonishment!--but My Somersetshire. in seat his Magna,
learnt, I lady communicative The felt. I what describe to impossible
Mrs. a was gone, were they till shop the in stayed I for inquiry, on
Miss of name the is informed, since been have I as that, and Ellison,
guardian." Grey's

thousand fifty has Grey Miss that heard likewise you have But is. "It
explanation." an find may we thing, any in if that, In pounds?

stopped think"--he I least capable--at is Willoughby but so; be may "It
"And itself, distrust to seemed which voice a in added then moment; a
she--" did sister--how your

they that hope to only have I severe. very been have sufferings "Her
cruel most a is it been, has It short. proportionately be may
regard; his doubted never she believe, I yesterday, Till affliction.
was never he that convinced almost am I perhaps--but now, even and
some in and, deceitful! very been has He her. to attached really
him." about heart of hardness a seems there points,

does sister your But indeed! is, "there Brandon, Colonel said "Ah!"
do?" you as quite consider not does so--she said you think not--I

still would she eagerly how believe may and disposition, her know "You
could." she if him justify

the of removal the by afterwards, soon and answer; no made He
was subject the parties, card the of arrangement the and tea-things,
pleasure with them watched had who Jennings, Mrs. dropped. necessarily
Miss of effect the see to expected who and talking, were they while
Colonel on gaiety instantaneous an such in communication, Dashwood's
of youth, of bloom the in man a become have might as side, Brandon's
evening whole the remain amazement, with him, saw happiness, and hope
usual. than thoughtful and serious more



31 CHAPTER


the awoke Marianne expected, had she than sleep more of night a From
had she which in misery of consciousness same the to morning next
eyes. her closed

and felt; she what of talk to possible as much as her encouraged Elinor
and again subject the through gone had they ready, was breakfast before
on counsel affectionate and conviction steady same the with and again;
on opinions varying and feelings impetuous same the side, Elinor's
as be to Willoughby believe could she Sometimes before. as Marianne's,
every lost others, at and herself, as innocent as and unfortunate
she moment one At him. acquitting of impossibility the in consolation
at world, the all of observation the to indifferent absolutely was
third a at and ever, for it from herself seclude would she another
uniform, was she however, thing, one In energy. with it resist could
the possible, was it where avoiding, in point, the to came it when
to obliged when silence determined a in and Jennings, Mrs. of presence
Mrs. of belief the against hardened was heart Her it. endure
compassion. any with sorrows her into entering Jennings's

kindness Her feel. cannot "she cried; she be," cannot it no, no, "No,
wants she that All tenderness. not is good-nature her sympathy; not is
it." supply I because now me likes only she and gossip, is

her which to injustice the of assured be to this needed not had Elinor
irritable the by others, of opinion her in led often was sister
her by placed importance great too the and mind, own her of refinement
polished a of graces the and sensibility, strong a of delicacies the on
be there half than more if world, the of rest the half Like manner.
an and abilities excellent with Marianne, good, and clever are that
expected She candid. nor reasonable neither was disposition, excellent
she and own, her as feelings and opinions same the people other from
on actions their of effect immediate the by motives their of judged
together were sisters the while occurred, circumstance a Thus herself.
Mrs. of heart the sunk which breakfast, after room own their in
own her through because, estimation; her in lower still Jennings
though herself, to pain fresh of source a prove to chanced it weakness,
goodwill. utmost the of impulse an by it in governed was Jennings Mrs.

smiling, gaily countenance and hand, outstretched her in letter a With
saying, room, their entered she comfort, bringing of persuasion the from

good." you do will sure am I that something you bring I dear, my "Now,

her before placed imagination her moment one In enough. heard Marianne
contrition, and tenderness of full Willoughby, from letter a
and convincing; satisfactory, passed, had that all of explanatory
room the into eagerly rushing himself, Willoughby by followed instantly
assurances the eyes, his of eloquence the by feet, her at inforce, to
The next. the by destroyed was moment one of work The letter. his of
her; before was unwelcome, then till never mother, her of writing hand
an such followed which disappointment the of acuteness the in and,
had she instant, that till if, as felt she hope, than more of ecstasy
suffered. never

her in reach her within language, no Jennings Mrs. of cruelty The
could she now and expressed; have could eloquence, happiest of moments
with eyes her from streamed which tears the by only her reproach
its on lost entirely so however, reproach, violence--a passionate
still withdrew, she pity, of expressions many after that object,
was she when letter, the But comfort. of letter the to her referring
filled Willoughby comfort. little brought it, read to enough calm
and engagement, their of confident still mother, Her page. every
by roused been only had constancy, his on ever as warmly as relying
towards openness greater Marianne from intreat to application, Elinor's
affection such her, towards tenderness such with this, and both; them
each in happiness future their of conviction a such and Willoughby, for
it. of whole the through agony with wept she that other,

was mother her returned; now again home at be to impatience her All
mistaken her of excess very the through dearer ever; than her to dearer
gone. be to urgent wildly was she and Willoughby, in confidence
Marianne for better were it whether determine to herself unable Elinor,
of except own her of counsel no offered Barton, at or London in be to
she length at and known; be could wishes mother's their till patience
knowledge. that for wait to consent sister's her obtained

easy be not could she for usual; than earlier them left Jennings Mrs.
herself; as much as grieve to able were Palmers and Middletons the till
for alone out went attendance, offered Elinor's refusing positively and
the of aware heart, heavy very a with Elinor, morning. the of rest the
Marianne's by perceiving, and communicate, to going was she pain
then it, for foundation any laying in succeeded had she ill how letter,
entreat and passed, had what of account an mother her write to down sat
the into came who Marianne, while future; the for directions her
table the at fixed remained away, going Jennings's Mrs. on drawing-room
over grieving pen, her of advancement the watching wrote, Elinor where
fondly more still grieving and task, a such of hardship the for her
mother. her on effect its over

when hour, an of quarter a about continued had they manner this In
was noise, sudden any bear then not could nerves whose Marianne,
door. the at rap a by startled

been HAD we thought I too! early "So Elinor. cried be?" this can "Who
safe."

window-- the to moved Marianne

safe never are "We vexation. with she, said Brandon!" Colonel is "It
HIM." from

home." from is Jennings Mrs. as in, come not will "He

has who man "A room. own her to retreating THAT," to trust not will "I
on intrusion his in conscience no has time own his with do to nothing
others." of that

on founded was it though right, conjecture her proved event The
who Elinor, and in; come DID Brandon Colonel for error; and injustice
who and thither, him brought Marianne for solicitude that convinced was
his in and look, melancholy and disturbed his in solicitude THAT saw
sister her forgive not could her, after inquiry brief though anxious
lightly. so him esteeming for

first the after he, said Street," Bond in Jennings Mrs. met "I
more the was I and on; come to me encouraged she "and salutation,
you find might I that probable it thought I because encouraged, easily
sole wish--my object--my My doing. of desirous very was I which alone,
of means a be to is--is it believe I hope, it--I desiring in wish
comfort--but present comfort--not say not must I comfort;--no, giving
for regard My mind. sister's your to conviction lasting conviction,
by it, prove to me allow you mother--will your for yourself, for her,
sincere VERY a but nothing which circumstances some relating
am I think useful--I being of desire earnest an but regard--nothing
convincing in spent been have hours many so where justified--though
be may I fear to reason some not there is right, am I that myself
stopped. He wrong?"

Mr. of me tell to something have "You Elinor. said you," understand "I
will it telling Your farther. character his open will that Willoughby,
MY Marianne. shewn be can that friendship of act greatest the be
to tending information any by immediately insured be will gratitude
me let pray Pray, time. in it by gained be must HERS and end, that
it." hear

October,--but last Barton quitted I when brief, be to and, shall; "You
a me find will You back. farther go must idea--I no you give will this
A begin. to where know hardly I Dashwood; Miss narrator, awkward very
be SHALL it and necessary, be will believe, I myself, of account short
little have I "can heavily, sighing subject," a such On one. short a
diffuse." be to temptation

went sigh, another with then, and recollection, for moment a stopt He
on.

be to not is conversation--(it a forgotten entirely probably have "You
conversation you)--a on impression any make could it that supposed
a of evening the was Park--it Barton at evening one us between
in resembling, as known, once had I lady a to alluded I which dance--in
Marianne." sister your measure, some

pleased looked He it." forgotten NOT have "I Elinor, answered "Indeed,"
added, and remembrance, this by

tender of partiality the uncertainty, the by deceived not am I "If
well as them, between resemblance strong very a is there recollection,
of eagerness same the heart, of warmth same The person. as mind in
an relations, nearest my of one was lady This spirits. and fancy
Our father. my of guardianship the under and infancy, her from orphan
were we years earliest our from and same, the nearly were ages
not did I when time the remember cannot I friends. and playfellows
as such, was up, grew we as her, for affection my and Eliza; love
you gravity, cheerless and forlorn present my from judging perhaps,
I was, me, for Hers, felt. ever having of incapable me think might
and Willoughby Mr. to sister your of attachment the as fervent believe,
At unfortunate. less no cause, different a from though was, it
married--married was She ever. for me to lost was she seventeen
our and large, was fortune Her brother. my to inclination her against
be can that all is fear, I this, And encumbered. much estate family
guardian. and uncle her once at was who one, of conduct the for said
hoped had I her. love even not did he her; deserve not did brother My
for and difficulty, any under her support would me for regard her that
she for situation, her of misery the last at but did; it time some
though and resolution, her all overcame unkindness, great experienced
have I relate! I blindly how nothing--but that me promised had she
of hours few a within were We on. brought was this how you told never
my of folly, the or treachery, The Scotland. for together eloping
relation a of house the to banished was I us. betrayed maid cousin's
amusement, no society, no liberty, no allowed was she and distant, far
too fortitude her on depended had I gained. was point father's my till
so happy, been marriage her had one--but severe a was blow the and far,
at or it, to me reconciled have must months few a was, then I as young
the not was however This it. lament to now have not should I least
what not were pleasures his her; for regard no had brother My case.
unkindly. her treated he first the from and been, have to ought they
so lively, so young, so mind a upon this, of consequence The
resigned She natural. too but was Brandon's, Mrs. as inexperienced
it had happy and situation; her of misery the all to first at herself
the which regrets those overcome to lived not had she if been
a such with that, wonder we can But occasioned. me of remembrance
or advise to friend a without and inconstancy, provoke to husband
their after months few a only lived father my (for her restrain
should she Indies) East the in regiment my with was I and marriage,
the promote to meant I perhaps--but England, in remained I Had fall?
purpose that for and years, for her from removing by both of happiness
me," given had marriage her which shock The exchange. my procured had
trifling of "was agitation, great of voice a in continued, he
years two about heard, I when felt I what to nothing weight--was
gloom,--even this threw which THAT was It divorce. her of afterwards,
suffered--" I what of recollection the now

about minutes few a for walked hastily rising and more, no say could He
his by more still and relation, his by affected Elinor, room. the
took her, to coming and concern, her saw He speak. not could distress,
few A respect. grateful with it kissed and it, pressed hand, her
composure. with proceed to him enabled exertion silent of more minutes

returned I before period unhappy this after years three nearly was "It
seek to course of was arrive, DID I when care, first My England. to
could I melancholy. was it as fruitless as was search the but her; for
to reason every was there and seducer, first her beyond her trace not
of life a in deeper sink to only him from removed had she that fear
nor fortune, her to adequate not was allowance legal Her sin.
my from learnt I and maintenance, comfortable her for sufficient
months some over made been had it receiving of power the that brother
it, imagine he could calmly and imagined, He person. another to before
to her obliged had distress, consequent and extravagance, her that
I after and however, last, At relief. immediate some for it of dispose
former a for Regard her. find DID I England, in months six been had
to me carried misfortune, into fallen since had who own, my of servant
and debt; for confined was he where spunging-house, a in him visit
unfortunate my was confinement, similar a under house, same the in there,
every of suffering acute by down faded--worn altered--so So sister.
before figure sickly and melancholy the believe I could hardly kind!
whom on girl, healthful blooming, lovely, the of remains the be to me,
no have I her--but beholding so in endured I What doted. once had I
have it--I describe to attempting by feelings your wound to right
the in appearance, all to was, she That already. much too you pained
my was it situation a such in was--yes, consumption, a of stage last
time giving beyond her, for nothing do could Life comfort. greatest
her saw I given. was that and death; for preparation better a for
visited I attendants; proper under and lodgings, comfortable in placed
her in her with was I life: short her of rest the during day every her
moments." last

in feelings her spoke Elinor and himself; recover to stopped he Again
friend. unfortunate his of fate the at concern, tender of exclamation an

resemblance the "by he, said offended," be cannot hope, I sister, "Your
Their relation. disgraced poor my and her between fancied have I
sweet natural the had and same; the be cannot fortunes, their fates,
happier a or mind, firmer a by guarded been one the of disposition
other the see to live will you that all been have might she marriage,
distressing been have to seem I lead? this all does what to But be.
this--untouched as such subject Dashwood--a Miss Ah! nothing. for you
be WILL I all! at it handle to dangerous is years--it fourteen for
a child, only her care my to left She concise. collected--more more
then was who connection, guilty first her of offspring the girl, little
it kept always had and child, the loved She old. years three about
I would gladly and me; to trust precious a valued, a was It her. with
her over watching by sense, strictest the in it discharged have
I but it; allowed situations our of nature the had myself, education
at placed therefore was Eliza little my and home; no family, no had
my of death the after and could, I whenever there her saw I school.
the me to left which and ago, years five about happened (which brother,
I Delaford. at me visited she property,) family the of possession
in have I that aware well am I but relation; distant a her called
now is It her. with connection nearer much a of suspected been general
I that year,) fourteenth her reached just had (she ago years three
very a of care the under her place to school, from her removed
four of charge the had who Dorsetshire, in residing woman, respectable
I years two for and life; of time same the about of girls other five or
February, last But situation. her with pleased be to reason every had
allowed had I disappeared. suddenly she back, twelvemonth a almost
desire, earnest her at out,) turned since has it as (imprudently, her,
her attending was who friends, young her of one with Bath to go to
man, of sort good very a be to him knew I health. his for there father
with for, deserved, she than daughter--better his of well thought I and
would nothing, tell would she secrecy, ill-judged and obstinate most a
a father, her He, all. knew certainly she though clue, no give
believe, I really, could man, quick-sighted a not but well-meaning,
house, the to confined generally been had he for information; no give
acquaintance what making and town the over ranging were girls the while
was he as thoroughly as me, convince to tried he and chose; they
the in unconcerned entirely being daughter's his of himself, convinced
all gone; was she that but nothing learn could I short, In business.
I What conjecture. to left was months, long eight for rest, the
too." suffered I what and imagined; be may feared, I what thought,

Willoughby!"-- be--could it "could Elinor, cried heavens!" "Good

a in "came continued, he her," of me reached that news first "The
from me to forwarded was It October. last herself, from letter
party intended our of morning very the on it received I and Delaford,
suddenly, so Barton leaving my of reason the was this and Whitwell; to
body, every to strange appeared have time the at must sure am I which
Willoughby Mr. did Little some. to offence gave believe I which and
in incivility for me censured looks his when suppose, I imagine,
whom one of relief the to away called was I that party, the up breaking
have it would what it, known he HAD but miserable; and poor made had he
of smiles the in happy less or gay less been have he Would availed?
feel CAN who man no which that, done already had he No, sister? your
innocence and youth whose girl the left had He do. would another for
no with distress, utmost the of situation a in seduced, had he
had He address! his of ignorant friends, no help, no home, creditable
nor wrote, nor returned, neither he return; to promising her, left
her." relieved

Elinor. exclaimed thing!" every beyond is "This

than worse and dissipated, expensive, you; before now is character "His
what guess weeks, many it known now have I as this, all Knowing both.
on and ever, as him of fond as sister your seeing on felt have must I
felt have must I what guess him: marry to was she that assured being
alone, you found and week last you to came I When sakes. your all for
when do to what irresolute though truth; the know to determined came I
but then; you to strange seemed have must behaviour My known. WAS it
to deceived; so be to all you suffer To it. comprehend will you now
interfering of hope no had I do? I could what sister--but your see
yet might influence sister's your thought I sometimes and success; with
what tell can who usage, dishonorable such after now, But him. reclaim
may she however, been, have may they Whatever her. on designs his were
own her towards gratitude with turn WILL doubtless hereafter and now,
she when Eliza, poor my of that with it compares she when condition,
and girl, poor this of situation hopeless and wretched the considers
as still strong, so him for affection an with herself, to her pictures
which self-reproach, by tormented mind a with and own, her as strong
use its have must comparison this Surely life. through her attend must
They nothing. be to sufferings own her feel will She her. with
the On disgrace. no bring can and misconduct, no from proceed
them. by friend her more still made be must friend every contrary,
it, under fortitude her for respect and unhappiness, her for Concern
in however, discretion, own your Use attachment. every strengthen must
what best know must You you. told have I what her to communicating
believed heart my from and seriously, not I had but effect; its be will
have not would I regrets, her lessen might service, of be might it
family my of account this with you trouble to myself suffered
to intended been have to seem may which recital a with afflictions,
others." of expense the at myself raise

earnestness; grateful with speech this followed thanks Elinor's
to advantage material expecting her of assurance the with too attended
passed. had what of communication the from Marianne,

him acquit to endeavors her "by she, said pained," more been have "I
most the than more mind her irritates it for rest; the all by than
first at though Now, do. can unworthiness his of conviction perfect
Have easier. become soon will she sure am I much, suffer will she
Willoughby Mr. seen "ever silence, short a after continued, she you,"
Barton?" at him left you since

unavoidable." was meeting One have. I "once gravely, replied he "Yes,"

saying, anxiously, him at looked manner, his by startled Elinor,

to--" him met you have "What?

most though me, to confessed had Eliza way. other no him meet could "I
which town, to returned he when and lover; her of name the reluctantly,
to he appointment, by met we myself, after fortnight a within was
the and unwounded, returned We conduct. his punish to I defend,
abroad." got never therefore, meeting,

a and man a to but this; of necessity fancied the over sighed Elinor
it. censure to not presumed she soldier

unhappy the been "has pause, a after Brandon, Colonel said "Such,"
imperfectly so and daughter! and mother of fate the between resemblance
trust!" my discharged I have

town?" in still she "Is

near her found I for lying-in, her from recovered she as soon as "No;
there and country, the into child her and her removed I delivery, her
remains." she

Elinor dividing probably was he that afterwards, soon Recollecting,
again her from receiving visit, his to end an put he sister, her from
compassion of full her leaving and acknowledgments, grateful same the
him. for esteem and



32 CHAPTER


Miss by repeated were conversation this of particulars the When
was her on effect the were, soon very they as sister, her to Dashwood
Marianne that Not see. to hoped had former the as such entirely not
to listened she for it, of part any of truth the distrust to appeared
neither made attention, submissive and steady most the with all it
and Willoughby, of vindication no attempted remark, nor objection
But impossible. be to it felt she that tears her by shew to seemed
guilt this of conviction the that Elinor assured behaviour this though
the satisfaction with saw she though mind, her to home carried WAS
called, he when Brandon Colonel avoiding longer no her in it, of effect
of kind a with speaking, voluntarily even him, to speaking her in
violently less spirits her saw she though and respect, compassionate
did mind Her wretched. less her see not did she before, than irritated
the felt She dejection. gloomy a in settled was it but settled, become
the felt had she than heavily more yet character Willoughby's of loss
the Williams, Miss of desertion and seduction his heart; his of loss
ONCE might designs his what of doubt the and girl, poor that of misery
that spirits, her on much so altogether preyed herself, on been have
Elinor; to even felt she what of speak to herself bring not could she
sister her to pain more gave silence, in sorrows her over brooding and,
frequent most and open most the by communicated been have could than
them. of confession

and receiving on Dashwood Mrs. of language the or feelings the give To
what of repetition a give to only be would letter Elinor's answering
hardly disappointment a of said; and felt already had daughters her
than greater even indignation an and Marianne's, than painful less
other, each succeeding quickly her, from letters Long Elinor's.
her express to thought; and suffered she that all tell to arrived
with up bear would she entreat and Marianne, for solicitude anxious
of nature the must indeed Bad misfortune. this under fortitude
fortitude! of talk could mother her when be, affliction Marianne's
which regrets, those of origin the be must humiliating and mortifying
indulge! to not her wish could SHE

had Dashwood Mrs. comfort, individual own her of interest the Against
at where, any be to Marianne for better be would it that determined
be would view her within thing every where Barton, at than time, that
by manner, afflicting most and strongest the in past the back bringing
seen always had she as such her, before Willoughby placing constantly
all by therefore, daughters, her to it recommended She there. him
which, of length the Jennings; Mrs. to visit their shorten to not means
at comprise to all by expected been had fixed, exactly never though
of and objects, of occupations, of variety A weeks. six or five least
inevitable be would Barton, at procured be not could which company,
some into times, at Marianne, cheat hoped, she yet, might and there,
the as much amusement, some into even and herself, beyond interest
her. by spurned be now might both of ideas

her considered mother her again, Willoughby seeing of danger all From
his since country, the in as town in safe equally least at be to
her themselves called who all by dropped be now must acquaintance
negligence way: other's each in them bring never could Design friends.
in less had chance and surprise; a to exposed them leave never could
of retirement the in even than London of crowd the in favour its
at visit that paying while her before him force might it where Barton,
first at foreseeing from Dashwood, Mrs. which marriage, his on Allenham
one. certain a as expect to herself brought had event, probable a as

where remain to children her wishing for reason another yet had She
his and he that her told had son-in-law her from letter a were; they
judged she and February, of middle the before town in be to were wife
brother. their see sometimes should they that right it

she and opinion, mother's her by guided be to promised had Marianne
proved it though opposition, without therefore it to submitted
felt she though expected, and wished she what from different perfectly
by that and grounds, mistaken on formed wrong, entirely be to it
only the of her deprived it London in continuance longer her requiring
her of sympathy personal the wretchedness, her of alleviation possible
prevent must as scenes such and society such to her doomed and mother,
rest. moment's a knowing ever her

evil brought what that her, to consolation great of matter a was it But
other the on Elinor, and sister; her to good bring would herself to
Edward avoid to power her in be not would it that suspecting hand,
stay longer their though that thinking, by herself comforted entirely,
better be would it happiness, own her against militate therefore would
Devonshire. into return immediate an than Marianne for

Willoughby's hearing ever from sister her guarding in carefulness Her
knowing without though Marianne, away. thrown not was mentioned, name
nor Jennings, Mrs. neither for advantage; its all reaped herself, it
her. before him of spoke ever herself, Palmer Mrs. even nor John, Sir
towards extended have could forbearance same the that wished Elinor
day listen to obliged was she and impossible, was that but herself,
all. them of indignation the to day after

had he whom of man "A possible. it thought have not could John, Sir
He fellow! good-natured a Such well! think to reason such had always
an was It England! in rider bolder a was there believe not did
heart. his all with devil the at him wished He business. unaccountable
for might, he where him meet him, to word another speak not would He
covert, Barton of side the by be to were it if not No, world! the all
scoundrel a Such together. hours two for watching kept were they and
met they time last the only was It dog! deceitful a such fellow! a of
of end the was this and puppies! Folly's of one him offered had he that
it!"

to determined was "She angry. equally was way, her in Palmer, Mrs.
she that thankful very was she and immediately, acquaintance his drop
her all with wished She all. at him with acquainted been never had
signify, not did it but Cleveland; near so not was Magna Combe heart
much so him hated she visit; to off far too deal great a was it for
should she and again, name his mention to never resolved was she that
was." he good-for-nothing how saw, she everybody tell

the all procuring in shewn was sympathy Palmer's Mrs. of rest The
communicating and marriage, approaching the of power her in particulars
new the coachmaker's what at tell soon could She Elinor. to them
was portrait Willoughby's Mr. painter what by building, was carriage
seen. be might clothes Grey's Miss warehouse what at and drawn,

a was occasion the on Middleton Lady of unconcern polite and calm The
the by were often they as oppressed spirits, Elinor's to relief happy
be to her to comfort great a was It others. the of kindness clamorous
circle their among least at person ONE in interest no exciting of sure
meet would who ONE was there that know to comfort great a friends: of
for anxiety any or particulars, after curiosity any feeling without her
health. sister's her

the of circumstances the by times, at raised is qualification Every
down worried sometimes was she and value; real its than more to moment,
to indispensable more as good-breeding rate to condolence officious by
good-nature. than comfort

day, every once about affair the of sense her expressed Middleton Lady
very is "It saying, by often, very occurred subject the if twice, or
gentle though continual this of means the by and indeed!" shocking,
first the from Dashwoods Miss the see to only not able was vent,
without them see to soon very but emotion, smallest the without
the supported thus having and matter; the of word a recollecting
was what of censure decided her spoken and sex, own her of dignity
the to attend to liberty at herself thought she other, the in wrong
rather (though determined therefore and assemblies, own her of interest
once at would Willoughby Mrs. as that John) Sir of opinion the against
soon as her with card her leave to fortune, and elegance of woman a be
married. she as

unwelcome never were enquiries unobtrusive delicate, Brandon's Colonel
intimate of privilege the earned abundantly had He Dashwood. Miss to
with zeal friendly the by disappointment, sister's her of discussion
with conversed always they and it, soften to endeavoured had he which
disclosing of exertion painful the for reward chief His confidence.
eye pitying the in given was humiliations, present and sorrows past
her of gentleness the and him, observed sometimes Marianne which with
or obliged, was she happen) often not did it (though whenever voice
his that him assured THESE him. to speak to herself oblige could
and himself, towards good-will of increase an produced had exertion
but hereafter; augmented farther being its of hopes Elinor gave THESE
the that only knew who this, all of nothing knew who Jennings, Mrs.
prevail neither could she that and ever, as grave as continued Colonel
for it make to her commission nor himself, offer the make to him on
of instead that, think to days, two of end the at began, him,
of end the by and Michaelmas, till married be not would they Midsummer,
understanding good The all. at match a be not would it that week a
the that declare to rather seemed Dashwood Miss and Colonel the between
all would arbour, yew the and canal, the mulberry-tree, the of honours
to ceased time some for had, Jennings Mrs. and HER; to over made be
Ferrars. Mrs. of all at think

Willoughby's of receipt the from fortnight a within February, in Early
he that sister her informing of office painful the had Elinor letter,
to conveyed intelligence the have to care taken had She married. was
was she as over, was ceremony the that known was it as soon as herself,
from it of notice first the receive not should Marianne that desirous
morning. every examining eagerly her saw she which papers, public the

on observation no made composure; resolute with news the received She
burst would they time short a after but tears; no shed first at and it,
less hardly state a in was she day, the of rest the for and out,
event. the expect to learnt first she when than pitiable

now Elinor and married; were they as soon as town left Willoughbys The
to them, of either seeing her of danger no be could there as hoped,
blow the since house the left yet never had who sister, her on prevail
before. done had she as degrees by again out go to fell, first

cousin's their at arrived lately Steeles, Miss two the time this About
again themselves presented Holburn, Buildings, Bartlett's in house
and Streets; Berkeley and Conduit in relations grand more their before
cordiality. great with all them by welcomed were

her gave always presence Their them. see to sorry was only Elinor
the to return gracious very a make to how knew hardly she and pain,
town. in STILL her finding in Lucy of delight overpowering

here you found not had I if disappointed quite been have should "I
"But word. the on emphasis strong a with repeatedly, she said STILL,"
leave not would you sure almost was I SHOULD. I thought always I
you that Barton, at know, you me, TOLD you though awhile; yet London
you that time, the at thought, I But MONTH. a above stay not should
would It point. the to came it when mind your change likely most would
and brother your before away went have to pity great a such been have
I gone. be to hurry no in be will you sure be to now And came. sister
WORD." YOUR to keep not did you glad amazingly am

her all use to forced was and her, understood perfectly Elinor
NOT. did she that appear it make to self-command

travel?" you did how "and Jennings, Mrs. said dear," my "Well,

quick with Steele, Miss replied you," assure I stage, the in "Not
to beau smart very a had and way, the all post came "we exultation;
join we'd thought we so and town, to coming was Davies Dr. us. attend
or ten paid and genteelly, very behaved he and post-chaise; a in him
did." we than more shillings twelve

is Doctor the and indeed! pretty, "very Jennings; Mrs. cried oh!" "Oh,
you." warrant I man, single a

laughs "everybody simpering, affectedly Steele, Miss said now," "There
they say cousins My why. think cannot I and Doctor, the about so me at
never I declare I part my for but conquest; a made have I sure are
your comes here 'Lord! another. to end hour's one from him about think
the crossing him saw she when day, t'other said cousin my Nancy,' beau,
you who think cannot I--I said indeed! beau, My house. the to street
mine." of beau no is Doctor The mean.

is Doctor do--the won't it talking--but pretty very is that aye, "Aye,
see." I man, the

beg I "and earnestness, affected with cousin, her replied indeed!" "No,
of." talked it hear ever you if it, contradict will you

she that assurance gratifying the her gave directly Jennings Mrs.
happy. completely made was Steele Miss and NOT, would certainly

Miss sister, and brother your with stay and go will you suppose "I
a after returning, Lucy, said town," to come they when Dashwood,
charge. the to hints, hostile of cessation

shall." we think not do I "No,

will." you say dare I yes, "Oh,

opposition. farther by her humour not would Elinor

for both you spare can Dashwood Mrs. that is it thing charming a "What
together!" time a long so

is visit their "Why, Jennings. Mrs. interposed indeed!" time, a "Long
begun!" just but

silenced. was Lucy

Miss said Dashwood," Miss sister, your see cannot we sorry am "I
room the left had Marianne for well--" not is she sorry am "I Steele.
arrival. their on

the miss to sorry equally be will sister My good. very are "You
with lately plagued much very been has she but you; seeing of pleasure
conversation." or company for unfit her make which head-aches, nervous

and Lucy as friends old such but pity! great a is that dear, "Oh,
word." a speak not would we sure am I and US; see might she think me!--I

was sister Her proposal. the declined civility, great with Elinor,
therefore and gown, dressing her in or bed, the upon down laid perhaps
them. to come to able not

see and go well as just can "we Steele, Miss cried all," that's if "Oh,
HER."

she but temper; her for much too impertinence this find to began Elinor
which reprimand, sharp Lucy's by it, checking of trouble the saved was
the to sweetness much give not did it though occasions, many on as now,
other. the of those governing in advantage of was sister, one of manners



33 CHAPTER


and entreaties, sister's her to yielded Marianne opposition, some After
an half for morning one Jennings Mrs. and her with out go to consented
and visits, no paying for however, conditioned, expressly She hour.
Street, Sackville in Gray's to them accompany than more no do would
few a of exchange the for negotiation a on carrying was Elinor where
mother. her of jewels old-fashioned

was there that recollected Jennings Mrs. door, the at stopped they When
as and call; to ought she whom on street the of end other the at lady a
young her while that resolved, was it Gray's, at business no had she
for return and visit her pay should she their's, transacted friends
them.

before people many so found Dashwoods Miss the stairs, the ascending On
to tend to liberty at person a not was there that room, the in them
done be could that All wait. to obliged were they and orders; their
the promise to seemed which counter the of end that at down sit to was,
is it and there, standing was only gentleman one succession; quickest
to politeness his exciting of hope without not was Elinor that probable
delicacy the and eye, his of correctness the But despatch. quicker a
orders giving was He politeness. his beyond be to proved taste, his of
and shape, size, its till and himself, for toothpick-case a for
debating and examining after which, of all determined, were ornaments
were shop, the in toothpick-case every over hour an of quarter a for
to leisure no had he fancy, inventive own his by arranged finally
comprised was what than ladies, two the on attention other any bestow
to served which notice of kind a stares; broad very four or three in
strong, of face, and person a of remembrance the Elinor on imprint
of style first the in adorned though insignificance, sterling natural,
fashion.

and contempt of feelings troublesome the from spared was Marianne
on and features, their of examination impertinent this on resentment,
of horrors different the all on deciding in manner his of puppyism the
remaining by inspection, his to presented toothpick-cases different the
thoughts her collect to able well as was she for all; it of unconscious
in her, around passing was what of ignorant as be and herself, within
bedroom. own her in as shop, Gray's Mr.

pearls, the and gold, the ivory, The decided. was affair the last At
last the named having gentleman the and appointment, their received all
of possession the without continued be could existence his which on day
and care, leisurely with gloves his on drew toothpick-case, the
as one a such but Dashwoods, Miss the on glance another bestowing
a with off walked admiration, express than demand to rather seemed
indifference. affected and conceit real of air happy

point the on was forward, business her bringing in time no lost Elinor
side. her at himself presented gentleman another when it, concluding of
surprise some with him found and face, his towards eyes her turned She
brother. her be to

very a make to enough just was meeting in pleasure and affection Their
far really was Dashwood John shop. Gray's Mr. in appearance creditable
them gave rather it again; sisters his see to sorry being from
and respectful were mother their after inquiries his and satisfaction;
attentive.

days. two town in been had Fanny and he that found Elinor

was it "but he, said yesterday," you upon call to much very wished "I
at beasts wild the see to Harry take to obliged were we for impossible,
Ferrars. Mrs. with day the of rest the spent we and Exchange; Exeter
on call to intended fully had I morning THIS pleased. vastly was Harry
so always has one but hour, half spare a find possibly could I if you,
a Fanny bespeak to here come am I town. to coming first on do to much
in call to able be certainly shall I think I tomorrow But seal.
I Jennings. Mrs. friend your to introduced be and Street, Berkeley
Middletons the And fortune. good very of woman a is she understand
I relations, mother-in-law's my As THEM. to me introduce must you too,
excellent are They respect. every them show to happy be shall
understand." I country, the in you to neighbours

friendliness their comfort, our to attention Their indeed. "Excellent
express." can I than more is particular, every in

indeed. glad extremely word; my upon it, hear to glad extremely am "I
are they fortune, large of people are they be; to ought it so But
to serve can that accommodation and civility every and you, to related
you so And expected. reasonably be might pleasant situation your make
for want and cottage little your in settled comfortably most are
the place: the of account charming most a us brought Edward nothing!
all you and was, ever that said, he kind, its of thing complete most
us to satisfaction great a was It thing. any beyond it enjoy to seemed
you." assure I it, hear to

to sorry not was and brother; her of ashamed little a feel did Elinor
Mrs. of arrival the by him, answering of necessity the spared be
for waited mistress his that her tell to came who servant, Jennings's
door. the at them

Jennings Mrs. to introduced was stairs, down them attended Dashwood Mr.
to able being of hope his repeating and carriage, her of door the at
leave. took day, next the them on call

from apology an at pretence a with came He paid. duly was visit His
engaged much so was she "but too; coming not for sister-in-law, their
where." any going for leisure no had she really that mother, her with
stand not should she that directly, him assured however, Jennings, Mrs.
she and it, like something or cousins, all were they for ceremony, upon
her bring and soon, very Dashwood John Mrs. on wait certainly should
perfectly were calm, though THEM, to manners His her. see to sisters
Colonel on and civil; attentively most Jennings, Mrs. to kind;
curiosity a with him eyed he himself, after soon in coming Brandon's
be to rich, be to him know to wanted only he that say, to seemed which
HIM. to civil equally

him with walk to Elinor asked he hour, an half them with staying After
Middleton. Lady and John Sir to him introduce and Street, Conduit to
as soon As consented. readily she and fine, remarkably was weather The
began. enquiries his house, the of out were they

fortune?" of man a he Is Brandon? Colonel is "Who

Dorsetshire." in property good very has he "Yes;

think, I and man; gentlemanlike most a seems He it. of glad am "I
respectable very a of prospect the on you congratulate may I Elinor,
life." in establishment

mean?" you do what brother! "Me,

What it. of convinced am and narrowly, him observed I you. likes "He
fortune?" his of amount the is

year." a thousand two about believe "I

of pitch a to up himself working then and a-year;" thousand "Two
it heart my all with wish I "Elinor, added, he generosity, enthusiastic
sake." your for much, as TWICE were

that sure very am I "but Elinor; replied you," believe I "Indeed
ME." marrying of wish smallest the not has Brandon Colonel

little very A mistaken. much very are you Elinor; mistaken, are "You
be may he present at just Perhaps him. secures side your on trouble
his back; hang him make may fortune your of smallness the undecided;
little those of some But it. against him advise all may friends
fix will give easily so can ladies which encouragements and attentions
should you why reason no be can there And himself. of spite in him,
on attachment prior any that supposed be to not is It him. for try not
is it kind, that of attachment an to as know you short, side--in your
have insurmountable--you are objections the question, the of out quite
man; the be must Brandon Colonel that. all see to not sense much too
with pleased him make to part my on wanting be shall civility no and
universal give must that match a is It family. your and you
his that"--lowering thing of kind a is it short, In satisfaction.
ALL to welcome exceedingly be whisper--"will important an to voice
to mean I is, "That added, he however, himself, Recollecting PARTIES."
Fanny settled; well you see to anxious truly all are friends say--your
assure I heart, at much very interest your has she for particularly,
am I woman, good-natured very a Ferrars, Mrs. too, mother her And you.
day." other the much as said she pleasure; great her give would it sure

answer. any vouchsafe not would Elinor

"something continued, he now," remarkable, something be would "It
the at settling sister a I and brother a have should Fanny if droll,
unlikely." very not is it yet And time. same

be to "going resolution, with Elinor, said Ferrars," Edward Mr. "Is
married?"

agitation. in thing a such is there but settled, actually not is "It
utmost the with Ferrars, Mrs. mother. excellent most a has He
if year, a thousand a him on settle and forward, come will liberality,
daughter only Morton, Miss Hon. the is lady The place. takes match the
desirable very A pounds. thousand thirty with Morton, Lord late the of
in place taking its of doubt a not have I and sides, both on connection
to away, give to mother a for deal great a is a-year thousand A time.
you give To spirit. noble a has Ferrars Mrs. but ever; for over make
came we as soon as day, other liberality:--The her of instance another
now, just us with plenty very be not could money that aware town, to
hundred two of amount the to hands Fanny's into bank-notes put she
great a at live must we for is, it acceptable extremely And pounds.
here." are we while expense

say, to herself forced she and compassion; and assent her for paused He

considerable; be certainly must country and town in both expenses "Your
one." large a is income your but

to mean not do I suppose. people many as say, dare I large, so "Not
will hope I and one, comfortable a undoubtedly is it however; complain,
on, carrying now Common, Norland of enclosure The better. be time in
within purchase little a made have I then And drain. serious most a is
where place, the remember must you Farm, Kingham East year; half this
in me for desirable very so was land The live. to used Gibson old
it felt I that property, own my adjoining immediately so respect, every
to conscience my to it answered have not could I it. buy to duty my
convenience; his for pay must man A hands. other any into fall it let
money." of deal vast a me cost HAS it and

worth." intrinsically and really it think you than "More

for day, next the again, it sold have might I that. not hope I "Why,
have might I purchase-money, the to regard with but, gave: I than more
low, so time that at were stocks the for indeed; unfortunate very been
banker's my in sum necessary the have to happened not had I if that
loss." great very to out sold have must I hands,

smile. only could Elinor

to coming first on had have we too expenses inevitable and great "Other
the all bequeathed know, well you as father, respected Our Norland.
were) they valuable very (and Norland at remained that effects Stanhill
an had he so; doing his at repine to me from it be Far mother. your to
in but, chose, he as property own his of dispose to right undoubted
of purchases large make to obliged been have we it, of consequence
may You away. taken was what of place the supply to &c. china, linen,
being from be must we far very how expenses, these all after guess,
is." kindness Ferrars's Mrs. acceptable how and rich,

you hope I liberality, her by assisted "and Elinor; said "Certainly,"
circumstances." easy in be to live yet may

"but replied; gravely he it," towards much do may two or year "Another
stone a not is There done. be to deal great a still is there however
the of plan the but nothing and green-house, Fanny's of laid
out." marked flower-garden

be?" to green-house the is "Where

come all are trees walnut old The house. the behind knoll the "Upon
many from object fine very a be will It it. for room make to down
before just down slope will flower-garden the and park, the of parts
thorns old the all away cleared have We pretty. exceedingly be and it,
brow." the over patches in grew that

very was and herself; to censure her and concern her kept Elinor
provocation. the share to present, not was Marianne that thankful

the away do to and clear, poverty his make to enough said now Having
his in sisters, his of each for ear-rings of pair a buying of necessity
began he and turn, cheerfuller a took thoughts his Gray's at visit next
Jennings. Mrs. as friend a such having on Elinor congratulate to

of style her house, indeed--Her woman valuable most a seems "She
acquaintance an is it and income; good exceeding an bespeak all living,
may end the in but hitherto, you to use great of been only not has that
a certainly is town to you inviting advantageous.--Her materially prove
a great so altogether speaks it indeed, and favour; your in thing vast
be not will you dies she when probability all in that you, for regard
leave." to deal great a have must She forgotten.--

her only has she for suppose; rather should I all, at "Nothing
children." her to descend will which jointure,

Few income. her to up lives she that imagined be to not is it "But
she saves, she whatever and THAT; do will prudence common of people
of." dispose to able be will

her to it leave should she that likely more it think not you do "And
us?" to than daughters,

I therefore and married, well exceedingly both are daughters "Her
farther. them remembering her of necessity the perceive cannot
and you, of notice much so taking her by opinion, my in Whereas,
on claim of sort a you given has she way, of kind this in you treating
not would woman conscientious a which consideration, future her
can she and behaviour; her than kinder be can Nothing disregard.
raises." it expectation the of aware being without this, all do hardly

your brother, Indeed, concerned. most those in none raises she "But
far." too you carries prosperity and welfare our for anxiety

have "people himself, recollect to seeming he, said sure," be to "Why,
is what Elinor, dear my But, power. their in little very have little,
colour, her lost has unwell, very looks she Marianne?-- with matter the
ill?" she Is thin. quite grown is and

several for her on complaint nervous a had has she well, not is "She
weeks."

illness an of thing any life, of time her At that. for sorry am "I
was She one! short very a been has Hers ever! for bloom the destroys
to likely as and saw; ever I as September, last girl a handsome as
please to beauty, of style her in something was There man. the attract
marry would she that say to used Fanny remember I particularly. them
of fond exceedingly is she what but not did; you than better and sooner
however. mistaken, be will She her. strike to happened it so but YOU,
five than more worth man a marry will NOW, Marianne whether question I
if deceived much very am I and utmost, the at a-year, hundred six or
Dorsetshire; of little very know I Dorsetshire! better. do not do YOU
it; of more know to glad exceedingly be shall I Elinor, dear my but,
the among myself and Fanny having your for answer can I think I and
visitors." your of pleased best and earliest

no was there that him convince to seriously very tried Elinor
expectation an was it but Brandon; Colonel marrying her of likelihood
really was he and relinquished, be to himself to pleasure much too of
the promoting and gentleman, that with intimacy an seeking on resolved
enough compunction just had He attention. possible every by marriage
exceedingly be to himself, sisters his for nothing done having for
from offer an and deal; great a do should else everybody that anxious
means easiest the was Jennings, Mrs. from legacy a or Brandon, Colonel
neglect. own his for atoning of

John Sir and home, at Middleton Lady find to enough lucky were They
on passed civilities of Abundance ended. visit their before in came
Dashwood Mr. though and anybody, like to ready was John Sir sides. all
very a as down him set soon he horses, about much know to seem not did
his in fashion of enough saw Middleton Lady while fellow: good-natured
Dashwood Mr. and having; worth acquaintance his think to appearance
both. with delighted away went

he as he, said Fanny," to carry to account charming a have shall "I
elegant most a really is Middleton "Lady sister. his with back walked
Mrs. And know. to glad be will Fanny sure am I as woman a Such woman!
elegant so not though woman, well-behaved exceedingly an too, Jennings
of even scruple any have not need sister Your daughter. her as
and case, the little a been has truth, the say to which, HER, visiting
a of widow the was Jennings Mrs. that knew only we for naturally; very
Ferrars Mrs. and Fanny and way; low a in money his all got had who man
daughters her nor she neither that prepossessed, strongly both were
now But with. associate to like would Fanny as women of kind such were
both." of account satisfactory most a her carry can I



34 CHAPTER


judgment, husband's her in confidence much so had Dashwood John Mrs.
her and Jennings Mrs. on both day next very the waited she that
former, the even finding by rewarded was confidence her and daughter;
unworthy means no by staying, were sisters her whom with woman the even
most the of one her found she Middleton, Lady for as and notice; her
world! the in women charming

a was There Dashwood. Mrs. with pleased equally was Middleton Lady
mutually which sides, both on selfishness hearted cold of kind
insipid an in other each with sympathised they and them; attracted
understanding. of want general a and demeanor, of propriety

the to Dashwood John Mrs. recommended which however, manners, same The
Jennings, Mrs. of fancy the suit not did Middleton Lady of opinion good
woman proud-looking little a than more nothing appeared she HER to and
any without sisters husband's her met who address, uncordial of
of for them; to say to anything having without almost and affection,
least at sat she Street, Berkeley on bestowed hour an of quarter the
silence. in half a and minutes seven

ask, to chuse not did she though know, to much very wanted Elinor
Fanny induced have would nothing but town; in then was Edward whether
that her tell to able till her, before name his mention to voluntarily
husband's her till or on, resolved was Morton Miss with marriage his
believed she because answered; were Brandon Colonel on expectations
be not could they that other, each to attached much very so still them
The occasion. every on deed and word in divided sedulously too
from flowed soon give, not would SHE which however, intelligence
compassion Elinor's claim to shortly very came Lucy quarter. another
Mr. with town in arrived had he though Edward, see to unable being on
fear for Buildings Bartlett's to come not dared He Dashwood. Mrs. and
be to not was meet, to impatience mutual their though and detection, of
write. but present at nothing do could they told,

short very a within town, in being his of himself them assured Edward
on found card his was Twice Street. Berkeley in calling twice by time,
Elinor engagements. morning's their from returned they when table, the
had she that pleased more still and called; had he that pleased was
him. missed

that, Middletons, the with delighted prodigiously so were Dashwoods The
to determined they anything, giving of habit the in much not though
invited began, acquaintance their after soon and dinner; them--a give
house good very a taken had they where Street, Harley in dine to them
invited were Jennings Mrs. and sisters Their months. three for
who, Brandon, Colonel secure to careful was Dashwood John and likewise,
eager his received were, Dashwoods Miss the where be to glad always
to were They pleasure. more much but surprise, some with civilities
to were sons her whether learn not could Elinor but Ferrars; Mrs. meet
to enough was however, HER, seeing of expectation The party. the of be
meet now could she though for engagement; the in interested her make
to promised once had which anxiety strong that without mother Edward's
perfect with her see now could she though introduction, an such attend
in being of desire her herself, of opinion her to as indifference
was like, was she what know to curiosity her Ferrars, Mrs. with company
ever. as lively as

soon was party, the anticipated thus she which with interest The
hearing her by pleasantly, than powerfully more increased, afterwards
it. at be to also were Steeles Miss the that

agreeable so Middleton, Lady to themselves recommended they had well So
certainly was Lucy though that her, to them made assiduities their had
as ready as was she genteel, even not sister her and elegant, so not
it and Street; Conduit in two or week a spend to them ask to John Sir
as soon as Steeles, Miss the to convenient particularly be to happened
a begin should visit their that known, was invitation Dashwoods' the
place. took party the before days few

the of nieces the as Dashwood, John Mrs. of notice the to claims Their
not might brother, her of care the had had years many for who gentleman
but table; her at seats them procuring towards however, much, done have
long had who Lucy, and welcome; be must they guests Middleton's Lady as
of view nearer a have to family, the to known personally be to wanted
opportunity an have to and difficulties, own her and characters their
life, her in happier been seldom had them, please to endeavouring of
card. Dashwood's John Mrs. receiving on was she than

to immediately began She different. very was effect its Elinor On
his as asked be must mother, his with lived who Edward that determine,
the for him see to and sister; his by given party a to was, mother
hardly Lucy!--she of company the in passed, that all after time, first
it! bear could she how knew

and reason, on entirely founded not were perhaps, apprehensions, These
her by not however, relieved were They truth. on all at not certainly
to herself believed who Lucy, of will good the by but recollection, own
Edward that her told she when disappointment severe a inflicting be
to hoped even and Tuesday, on Street Harley in be not would certainly
kept was he that her persuading by farther still pain the carrying be
conceal not could he which herself, for affection extreme the by away
together. were they when

ladies young two the introduce to was that came Tuesday important The
mother-in-law. formidable this to

stairs the up walked they as Lucy, said Dashwood!" Miss dear me, "Pity
Jennings, Mrs. after directly so arrived Middletons the together--for
nobody is time--"There same the at servant the followed all they that
stand. hardly can I declare me.--I for feel can that you, but here
my all that person the see shall I moment a gracious!--In Good
mother!"-- my be to is on--that depends happiness

the suggesting by relief immediate her given have could Elinor
own, her than rather mother, Morton's Miss being its of possibility
assured she that, doing of instead but behold; to about were they whom
utter the her--to pity did she that sincerity, great with and her,
at hoped herself, uncomfortable really though who, Lucy, of amazement
Elinor. to envy irrepressible of object an be to least

in formality, to even upright, woman, thin little, a was Ferrars Mrs.
Her aspect. her in sourness, to even serious, and figure, her
and beauty, without small, features her and sallow; was complexion
had brow the of contraction lucky a but expression; without naturally
it giving by insipidity, of disgrace the from countenance her rescued
of woman a not was She nature. ill and pride of characters strong the
the to them proportioned she general, in people unlike for, words; many
not her, escape did that syllables few the of and ideas; her of number
spirited the with eyed she whom Dashwood, Miss of share the to fell one
events. all at her disliking of determination

months few A behaviour.-- this by unhappy made be NOW not could Elinor
Ferrars' Mrs. in not was it but exceedingly; her hurt have would it ago
to manners her of difference the now;--and it by her distress to power
humble to made purposely seemed which difference a Steeles, Miss the
the see to smile but not could She her. amused only more, her
for person-- very the towards daughter and mother both of graciousness
known they had others, all of distinguished--whom particularly was Lucy
while mortify; to anxious most been have would they did, she as much as
sat them, wound to power no comparatively had who herself, she
so graciousness a at smiled she while But both. by slighted pointedly
which from folly mean-spirited the on reflect not could she misapplied,
Miss the which with attentions studied the observe nor sprung, it
all them despising thoroughly without continuance, its courted Steeles
four.

Miss and distinguished; honorably so being on exultation all was Lucy
happy. perfectly be to Davies Dr. about teazed be to only wanted Steele

thing every and numerous, were servants the one, grand a was dinner The
ability Master's the and show, for inclination Mistress's the bespoke
were which additions and improvements the of spite In it. support to
once having owner its of spite in and estate, Norland the to making
a at out sell to obliged being of pounds thousand some within been
to tried had he which indigence that of symptom any gave nothing loss,
conversation, of except kind, any of poverty it;--no from infer
Dashwood John considerable. was deficiency the there, appeared--but
wife his and hearing, worth was that himself for say to much not had
was it for this; in disgrace peculiar no was there But less. still had
all almost who visitors, their of chief the with case the much very
being for disqualifications these of other or one under laboured
of improved--want or natural either sense, of agreeable--Want
temper. of want spirits--or of elegance--want

poverty this dinner, after drawing-room the to withdrew ladies the When
discourse the supplied HAD gentlemen the for evident, particularly was
and land, inclosing politics, of variety variety--the some with
engaged only subject one and over; all was it then horses--but breaking
of heights comparative the was which in, came coffee till ladies the
were who William, son second Middleton's Lady and Dashwood, Harry
age. same the of nearly

determined been have might affair the there, been children the both Had
it present, was only Harry as but once; at them measuring by easily too
right a had body every and sides; both on assertion conjectural all was
over and over it repeat to and opinion, their in positive equally be to
liked. they as often as again

thus: stood parties The

the was son own her that convinced really each though mothers, two The
other. the of favour in decided politely tallest,

sincerity, more but partiality, less not with grandmothers, two The
descendant. own their of support in earnest equally were

other, the than parent one please to anxious less hardly was who Lucy,
not could and age, their for tall remarkably both were boys the thought
world the in difference smallest the be could there that conceive
as it, gave address greater yet with Steele, Miss and them; between
each. of favour in could, she as fast

which by side, William's on opinion her delivered once having Elinor,
the see not did more, still Fanny and Ferrars Mrs. offended she
when Marianne, and assertion; farther any by it enforcing of necessity
no had she that declaring by all, them offended hers, for on called
it. about thought never had she as give, to opinion

pair pretty very a painted had Elinor Norland, from removing her Before
and mounted just now being which sister-in-law, her for screens of
screens, these and room; drawing present her ornamented home, brought
gentlemen other the following his on Dashwood John of eye the catching
for Brandon Colonel to him by handed officiously were room, the into
admiration. his

of man a as you, "and he; said sister," eldest my by done are "These
whether know not do I them. with pleased be say, dare I will, taste,
she but before, performances her of any see to happened ever have you
well." extremely draw to reckoned general in is

connoisseurship, to pretensions all disclaiming though Colonel, The
by painted thing any done have would he as screens, the admired warmly
course of being others the of curiosity the on and Dashwood; Miss
Ferrars, Mrs. inspection. general for round handed were they excited,
look to requested particularly work, Elinor's being their of aware not
Lady of testimony gratifying received had they after and them; at
mother, her to them presented Fanny approbation, Middletons's
by done were they that time, same the at her, informing considerately
Dashwood. Miss

at them regarding without pretty,"--and Ferrars--"very Mrs. "Hum"--said
daughter. her to them returned all,

rude quite been had mother her that moment a for thought Fanny Perhaps
said, immediately she little, a colouring enough,--for,

of dread the again, then But they?" ma'am--an't pretty, very are "They
her, over came probably herself, encouraging too civil, too been having
added, presently she for

of style Morton's Miss in something are they think not you "Do
beautifully delightfully!--How most paint DOES Ma'am?--She painting,
done!" is landscape last her

well." thing every does SHE But indeed! "Beautifully

with displeased greatly already was this.--She bear not could Marianne
Elinor's at another, of praise ill-timed such and Ferrars; Mrs.
by meant principally was what of notion any not had she though expense,
warmth, with say to immediately her provoked it,

to Morton Miss is kind!--what particular very a of admiration is "This
think WE whom of Elinor is her?--it for cares, who or knows, us?--who
speak." and

hands, sister-in-law's her of out screens the took she saying, so And
admired. be to ought they as herself them admire to

more up herself drawing and angry, exceedingly looked Ferrars Mrs.
"Miss philippic, bitter this retort in pronounced ever, than stiffly
daughter." Morton's Lord is Morton

his at fright a in all was husband her and too, angry very looked Fanny
than warmth Marianne's by hurt more much was Elinor audacity. sister's
they as eyes, Brandon's Colonel but it; produced what by been had she
amiable was what only noticed he that declared Marianne, on fixed were
sister a see to bear not could which heart affectionate the it, in
point. smallest the in slighted

Mrs. of insolence cold The here. stop not did feelings Marianne's
foretell to her, to seemed, sister, her to behaviour general Ferrars's
heart wounded own her as Elinor, to distresses and difficulties such
of impulse strong a by urged and horror; with of think to her taught
sister's her to moment, a after moved she sensibility, affectionate
hers, to close cheek one and neck, her round arm one putting and chair,
voice, eager, but low, a in said

unhappy." YOU make them let Don't them. mind don't Elinor, dear "Dear,

her hiding and overcome, quite were spirits her more; no say could She
body's Every tears. into burst she shoulder, Elinor's on face
concerned.--Colonel was body every almost and called, was attention
did.--Mrs. he what knowing without them to went and up rose Brandon
her gave immediately dear," poor "Ah! intelligent very a with Jennings,
author the against enraged desperately so felt John Sir and salts; her
one to seat his changed instantly he that distress, nervous this of
of account brief a whisper, a in her, gave and Steele, Lucy by close
affair. shocking whole the

end an put to enough recovered was Marianne however, minutes, few a In
retained spirits her though rest; the among down sit and bustle, the to
evening. whole the passed, had what of impression the

voice, low a in Brandon, Colonel to brother her said Marianne!" "Poor
good such not has "She attention,-- his secure could he as soon as
Elinor's not has nervous,--she very is sister,--she her as health
trying very something is there that allow must one constitution;--and
personal her of loss the in beauty a BEEN HAS who woman young a to
WAS Marianne but perhaps, it think not would You attractions.
Elinor.-- as handsome as quite ago; months few a handsome remarkably
gone." all is it see you Now



35 CHAPTER


found had She satisfied.-- was Ferrars Mrs. see to curiosity Elinor's
between connection farther a make to tend could that thing every her in
her pride, her of enough seen had She undesirable.-- families the
comprehend to herself, against prejudice determined her and meanness,
and engagement, the perplexed have must that difficulties the all
otherwise been he had herself, and Edward of marriage, the retarded
sake, OWN her for thankful be to enough almost seen had she free;--and
other any under suffering from her preserved obstacle greater one that
her upon dependence all from her preserved creation, Ferrars's Mrs. of
she if least, at Or opinion. good her for solicitude any or caprice,
to fettered being Edward's in rejoice to quite herself bring not did
to OUGHT she amiable, more been Lucy had that determined, she Lucy,
rejoiced. have

the by elevated much very so be could spirits Lucy's that wondered She
so should vanity her and interest her Ferrars;--that Mrs. of civility
her paid only seemed which attention the make to as her blind much very
allow to herself--or to compliment a appear ELINOR, NOT was she because
because her, given only preference a from encouragement derive to her
been only not had so, was it that But unknown. was situation real her
the again over declared was but time, the at eyes Lucy's by declared
Middleton Lady desire, particular her at for openly, more morning next
alone, Elinor seeing of chance the on Street Berkeley in down her set
was. she happy how her tell to

soon Palmer Mrs. from message a for one, lucky a proved chance The
away. Jennings Mrs. carried arrived, she after

"I themselves, by were they as soon as Lucy, cried friend," dear "My
flattering so be anything Could happiness. my of you to talk to come
affable exceeding So yesterday? me treating of way Ferrars's Mrs. as
her;--but seeing of thoughts the dreaded I how know was!--You she as
her in affability an such was there introduced, was I moment very the
to fancy a took quite had she say, to seem should really as behaviour
struck quite you not was and all; it saw You so?-- it not was Now me.
it?" with

you." to civil very certainly was "She

deal vast a saw I civility?-- only but nothing see you "Civil!--Did
pride, me!--No but nobody of share the to fell as kindness Such more.
and sweetness same--all the just sister your and hauteur, no
affability!"

to her pressed still Lucy but else, something of talk to wished Elinor
go to obliged was Elinor and happiness; her for reason had she that own
on.--

"nothing she, said engagement," your known had they if "Undoubtedly,
was that as you;--but of treatment their than flattering more be could
case"-- the not

no was there quickly--"but Lucy so,"--replied say would you guessed "I
did she if me, like to seem should Ferrars Mrs. why world the in reason
my of out me talk shan't You thing. every is me liking her and not,
no be will there and well, end all will it sure am I satisfaction.
a is Ferrars Mrs. think. to used I what to all, at difficulties
women, delightful both are They sister. your is so and woman, charming
Mrs. agreeable how say you hear never should I wonder indeed!--I
was!" Dashwood

any. attempt not did and make, to answer no had Elinor this To

you speak;--sure don't low--you seem Dashwood?--you Miss ill, you "Are
well." an't

health." better in was never "I

I it. look not did you really but heart; my all with it of glad am "I
greatest the been have that you, ill; YOU have to sorry be should
done have should I what knows world!--Heaven the in me to comfort
friendship."-- your without

success. own her doubting though answer, civil a make to tried Elinor
replied, directly she for Lucy, satisfy to seemed it But

to next and me, for regard your of convinced perfectly am I "Indeed
Edward!--But have.--Poor I comfort greatest the is it love, Edward's
pretty meet and meet, to able be shall we thing, good one is there now
shall we so Dashwood, Mrs. with delighted Middleton's Lady for often,
his half spends Edward and say, dare I Street, Harley in deal good a be
will Ferrars Mrs. and Middleton Lady sister--besides, his with time
say to good so both were sister your and Ferrars Mrs. now;--and visit
such are They me.-- see to glad be always should they once, than more
of think I what sister your tell you ever if sure am women!--I charming
high." too speak cannot you her,

SHOULD she that hope to encouragement any her give not would Elinor But
continued. Lucy sister. her tell

took had Ferrars Mrs. if moment, a in it seen have should I sure am "I
for courtesy, formal a me made only had she If me. to dislike a
of notice any took had after never and word, a saying without instance,
mean--if I what know way--you pleasant a in me at looked never and me,
gave have should I way, of sort forbidding that in treated been had I
DOES she where For it. stood have not could I despair. in up all it
violent." most is it know I dislike,

by triumph, civil this to reply any making from prevented was Elinor
and Ferrars, Mr. announcing servant's the open, thrown being door's the
in. walking immediately Edward's

that shewed each of countenance the and moment; awkward very a was It
to seemed Edward and foolish; exceedingly looked all They so. was it
to as again, room the of out walk to inclination an great as have
unpleasantest its in circumstance, very The it. into farther advance
fallen had avoid, to anxious most been have each would they which form,
together were but together, three all only not were them.--They on
recovered ladies The person. other any of relief the without
forward, herself put to business Lucy's not was It first. themselves
could She up. kept be still must secrecy of appearance the and
him, addressing slightly after and tenderness, her LOOK only therefore
more. no said

her and sake his for she, was anxious so and do; to more had Elinor But
moment's a after herself, forced she that well, it do to own,
almost were that manner and look a with him, welcome to recollection,
still effort another struggle, another and open; almost and easy,
the nor Lucy, of presence the allow not would She them. improved
from her deter to herself, towards injustice some of consciousness
much very had she that and him, see to happy was she that saying
Street. Berkeley in before called he when home, from being regretted
as which, attentions those him paying from frightened be not would She
of eyes observant the by due, his were relation, a almost and friend a
her. watching narrowly be to them perceived soon she though Lucy,

enough courage had he and Edward, to re-assurance some gave manners Her
in ladies the of that exceeded still embarrassment his but down; sit to
might sex his though reasonable, rendered case the which proportion, a
nor Lucy's, of indifference the not had heart his for rare; it make
Elinor's. of ease the quite have conscience his could

no make to determined seemed air, settled and demure a with Lucy,
word; a say not would and others, the of comfort the to contribution
was who Elinor, from proceeded said, WAS that thing every almost and
health, mother's her about information the all volunteer to obliged
about, inquired have to ought Edward which &c. town, to coming their
did. never but

herself felt afterwards soon she for here; stop not did exertions Her
fetching of pretence under determine, to as disposed heroically so
and it, did really she and themselves; by others the leave to Marianne,
on minutes several away loitered she for manner, handsomest the in THAT
went she before fortitude, high-minded most the with landing-place, the
the for time was it however, done, once was that When sister. her to
the into her hurried joy Marianne's for cease; to Edward of raptures
every like was him seeing in pleasure Her immediately. drawing-room
met She spoken. strongly and itself, in strong feelings, her of other
the expressed that voice a and taken, be would that hand a with him
sister. a of affection

happiness!--This great of moment a is "this cried, she Edward!" "Dear
thing!" every for amends make almost would

such before but deserved, it as kindness her return to tried Edward
all they Again felt. really he what half say not dared he witnesses
was Marianne while silent; were all two or moment a for and down, sat
and Edward at sometimes tenderness, speaking most the with looking
other each in delight their that only regretting Elinor, at sometimes
first the was Edward presence. unwelcome Lucy's by checked be should
express and looks, altered Marianne's notice to was it and speak, to
her. with agree London finding not her of fear his

though earnestness, spirited with replied she me!" of think don't "Oh,
MY of think "don't spoke, she as tears with filled were eyes her
both." us for enough be must That see. you well, is Elinor health.

nor easy, more Elinor or Edward make to calculated not was remark This
no with Marianne at up looked who Lucy, of will good the conciliate to
expression. benignant very

might that thing any say to willing Edward, said London?" like you "Do
subject. another introduce

none. found have I but it, in pleasure much expected I all. at "Not
and afforded; has it comfort only the is Edward, you, of sight The
were!" always you what are you Heaven! thank

spoke. one paused--no She

take to Edward employ must "we added, presently she Elinor," think, "I
we suppose, I two, or week a In Barton. to return our in us of care
to unwilling very be not will Edward trust, I and, going; be shall
charge." the accept

even not knew, nobody was, it what but something, muttered Edward Poor
trace easily could and agitation, his saw who Marianne, But himself.
and satisfied, perfectly was herself, pleased best cause whatever to it
else. something of talked soon

so dull, So yesterday! Street Harley in Edward, day, a such spent "We
which head, that on you to say to much have I dull!--But wretchedly
now." said be cannot

her of assurance the defer she did discretion admirable this with And
her of and ever, than disagreeable more relatives mutual their finding
in more were they till mother, his with disgusted particularly being
private.

come?" not you did Edward?--Why there, not you were why "But

elsewhere." engaged was "I

met?" be to were friends such when that, was what But "Engaged!

on revenge some take to eager Lucy, cried Marianne," Miss "Perhaps,
no have they if engagements, upon stand never men young think "you her,
great." as well as little them, keep to mind

the of insensible entirely seemed Marianne but angry, very was Elinor
replied, calmly she for sting;

that sure very am I speaking, seriously for, indeed; so, "Not
believe really I And Street. Harley from Edward kept only conscience
scrupulous most the world; the in conscience delicate most the HAS he
make may it however and minute, however engagement, every performing in
giving of fearful most the is He pleasure. or interest his against
selfish, being of incapable most the and expectation, wounding of pain,
What! it. say will I and so, is it Edward, saw. ever I body any of
of friend no be must you praised!--Then yourself hear to never you are
to submit must esteem, and love my of accept will who those for mine;
commendation." open my

happened however, case, present the in commendation, her of nature The
her of thirds two of feelings the to ill-suited particularly be to
soon very he that Edward, to unexhilarating very so was and auditors,
away. go to up got

be." not must this Edward, dear "my Marianne; said soon!" so "Going

Lucy that persuasion her whispered she aside, little a him drawing And
he for failed, encouragement this even But longer. much stay not could
lasted visit his had him, outstaid have would who Lucy, and go; would
away. went afterwards soon hours, two

them. leaving her on Marianne, said often?" so here her bring can "What
Edward!" to teazing gone!--how her wanted we that see she not "Could

known longest the been has Lucy and friends, his all were so?--we "Why
as her see to like should he that natural but is It any. of him to
ourselves." as well

this that Elinor, know, "You said, and steadily, her at looked Marianne
have to hope only you If bear. cannot I which talking of kind a is
you case, the be to suppose must I as contradicted, assertion your
I it. do to world the in person last the am I that recollect to ought
really not are that assurances, of out tricked be to descend cannot
wanted."

more, say to her follow not dared Elinor and room; the left then She
give could she Lucy, to secrecy of promise her by was she as bound for
the as painful and Marianne; convince would that information no
was she be, might error an in continuing still her of consequences
Edward that was hope, could she that All it. to submit to obliged
hearing of distress the to himself or her expose often not would
of part other any of repetition the to nor warmth, mistaken Marianne's
every had she this meeting--and recent their attended had that pain the
expect. to reason



36 CHAPTER


the to announced newspapers the meeting, this after days few a Within
a of delivered safely was Esq. Palmer, Thomas of lady the that world,
least at paragraph, satisfactory and interesting very a heir; and son
before. it knew who connections intimate those all to

a produced happiness, Jennings's Mrs. to important highly event, This
a in influenced, and time, her of disposal the in alteration temporary
to wished she as for friends; young her of engagements the degree, like
as morning every thither went she Charlotte, with possible as much as be
evening; the in late till return not did and dressed, was she as soon
Middletons, the of request particular the at Dashwoods, Miss the and
comfort own their For Street. Conduit in day every of whole the spent
Mrs. in morning, the all least at remained, have rather much would they
wishes the against urged be to thing a not was it but house; Jennings's
and Middleton Lady to over made therefore were hours Their everybody. of
little as was fact in company, their whom by Steeles, Miss two the
sought. professedly was it as valued,

and former; the to companions desirable be to sense much too had They
on intruding as eye, jealous a with considered were they latter the by
monopolize. to wanted they which kindness the sharing and ground, THEIR
to behaviour Middleton's Lady than polite more be could nothing Though
they Because all. at them like really not did she Marianne, and Elinor
them believe not could she children, her nor herself flattered neither
them fancied she reading, of fond were they because and good-natured;
satirical; be to was it what knowing exactly without perhaps satirical:
easily and use, common in censure was It signify. not did THAT but
given.

the checked It Lucy. on and her on both restraint a was presence Their
was Middleton Lady other. the of business the and one, of idleness
was Lucy which flattery the and them, before nothing doing of ashamed
would they feared she times, other at administer and of think to proud
the of discomposed least the was Steele Miss offering. for her despise
to her reconcile to power their in was it and presence; their by three,
and full a her given have only them of either Would entirely. it
Willoughby, Mr. and Marianne between affair whole the of account minute
the of sacrifice the for rewarded amply herself thought have would she
occasioned. arrival their which dinner, after fire the by place best
out threw often she though for granted; not was conciliation this But
dropt once than more and Elinor, to sister her for pity of expressions
was effect no Marianne, before beaux of inconstancy the on reflection a
in disgust of or former, the from indifference of look a but produced,
their her made have might lighter yet even effort An latter. the
so But Doctor! the about her at laughed have only they Would friend.
that her, oblige to inclined others, the than anymore they, were little
without day whole a spend might she home, from dined John Sir if
kind was she what than subject, the on raillery other any hearing
herself. on bestow to enough

totally so were however, discontents, and jealousies these All
thing delightful a it thought she that Jennings, Mrs. by unsuspected
young her congratulated generally and together; be to girls the for
old stupid a of company the escaped having on night, every friends
at sometimes John's, Sir at sometimes them joined She long. so woman
excellent in came always she was, it wherever but house; own her
well Charlotte's attributing importance, and delight of full spirits,
detail a minute so exact, so give to ready and care, own her to doing
desire. to enough curiosity had Steele Miss only as situation, her of
complaint. daily her made she that of and her; disturb DID thing One
sex, his among opinion unfatherly but common, the maintained Palmer Mr.
at perceive, plainly could she though and alike; being infants all of
and baby this between resemblance striking most the times, different
his convincing no was there sides, both on relations his of one every
like exactly not was it that believe to him persuading no it; of father
to brought be even he could nor age; same the of baby other every
the in child finest the being its of proposition simple the acknowledge
world.

time this about which misfortune, a of relation the to now come I
sisters two her while that happened so It Dashwood. John Mrs. befell
another Street, Harley in her on calling first were Jennings Mrs. with
not itself in circumstance in--a dropt had acquaintance her of
imaginations the while But her. to evil produce to likely apparently
our of judgments wrong form to away them carry will people other of
happiness one's appearances, slight by it on decide to and conduct,
present the In chance. of mercy the at always be measure some in must
outrun far so to fancy her allowed lady last-arrived this instance,
Miss the of name the hearing merely on that probability, and truth
she sisters, Dashwood's Mr. be to them understanding and Dashwoods,
this and Street; Harley in staying be to them concluded immediately
of cards afterwards, two or day a within produced misconstruction
small a to sister, and brother their for as well as them for invitation
Mrs. that was, which of consequence The house. her at party musical
great exceedingly the to only not submit to obliged was Dashwood John
what but, Dashwoods, Miss the for carriage her sending of inconvenience
appearing of unpleasantness the all to subject be must worse, still was
not might they that tell could who and attention: with them treat to
disappointing of power The time? second a her with out go to expect
for enough; not was that But hers. be always must true, was it them,
be to know they which conduct of mode a on determined are people when
from better thing any of expectation the by injured feel they wrong,
them.

of habit the into much so degrees, by brought been now had Marianne
to indifference of matter a become was it that day, every out going
mechanically and quietly prepared she and not: or went she whether her,
smallest the expecting without though engagement, evening's every for
last the till knowing, without often very and any, from amusement
her. take to was it where moment,

as indifferent, perfectly so grown was she appearance and dress her To
her of whole the during it, on consideration the half bestow to not
of minutes five first the in Steele Miss from received it which toilet,
minute HER escaped Nothing finished. was it when together, being their
every asked and thing, every saw she curiosity; general and observation
of part every of price the knew she till easy never was thing;
altogether gowns her of number the guessed have could dress; Marianne's
hopes without not was and herself, Marianne than judgment better with
week, per cost washing her much how parted, they before out finding of
The herself. upon spend to year every had she much how and
generally was moreover, scrutinies, of kind these of impertinence
was douceur, its as meant though which compliment, a with concluded
after for all; of impertinence greatest the as Marianne by considered
the gown, her of make and value the into examination an undergoing
almost was she hair, her of arrangement the and shoes, her of colour
she and smart, vastly looked she word "her upon that told being of sure
conquests." many great a make would she say to dared

present the on dismissed she was this, as encouragement such With
enter to ready were they which carriage; brother's her to occasion,
very not punctuality a door, the at stopped it after minutes five
of house the to them preceded had who sister-in-law, their to agreeable
part their on delay some for hoping there was and acquaintance, her
coachman. her or herself either inconvenience might that

like party, The remarkable. very not were evening this of events The
real had who people many great a comprehended parties, musical other
all; at none had who more many great a and performance, the for taste
estimation, own their in usual, as were, themselves performers the and
in performers private first the friends, immediate their of that and
England.

no made she so, be to affecting nor musical, neither was Elinor As
it whenever pianoforte, grand the from eyes her turning of scruple
and harp, a of presence the by even unrestrained and her, suited
the in object other any on pleasure at them fix would violoncello,
of group a among perceived she glances excursive these of one In room.
toothpick-cases on lecture a them given had who he, very the men, young
and herself, at looking afterwards soon him perceived She Gray's. at
out find to determined just had and brother; her to familiarly speaking
Mr. and her, towards came both they when latter, the from name his
Ferrars. Robert Mr. as her to him introduced Dashwood

bow a into head his twisted and civility, easy with her addressed He
was he that done, have could words as plainly as her assured which
Happy Lucy. by be to described him heard had she coxcomb the exactly
his on less depended had Edward for regard her if her, for been it had
his then For relations! nearest his of merit the on than merit, own
the what to stroke finishing the given have must bow brother's
she while But begun. have would sister and mother his of ill-humour
that find not did she men, young two the of difference the at wondered
with charity all of out her put one, the of conceit of emptiness the
Robert different, WERE they Why other. the of worth and modesty the
hour's an of quarter a of course the in himself her to exclaimed
extreme the lamenting and brother, his of talking for, conversation;
proper in mixing from him kept believed really he which GAUCHERIE
any to less much it attributed generously and candidly he society,
education; private a of misfortune the to than deficiency, natural
material any particular, any without probably though himself, he while
school, public a of advantage the from merely nature, by superiority
man. other any as world the in mix to fitted well as was

often I so and more; nothing is it believe "I added, he soul," my "Upon
I Madam,' dear 'My it. about grieving is she when mother, my tell
now is evil The easy. yourself make must 'you her, to say always
you would Why doing. own your entirely been has it and irremediable,
to judgment, own your against Robert, Sir uncle, my by persuaded be
his of time critical most the at tuition, private under Edward place
myself, as well as Westminster to him sent only had you If life?
been have would this all Pratt's, Mr. to him sending of instead
and matter, the consider always I which in way the is This prevented.'
error." her of convinced perfectly is mother my

her be might whatever because, opinion, his oppose not would Elinor
not could she school, public a of advantage the of estimation general
satisfaction. any with family, Pratt's Mr. in abode Edward's of think

a "in observation, next his think,"--was I Devonshire, in reside "You
Dawlish." near cottage

rather seemed it and situation; its to as right him set Elinor
living without Devonshire, in live could anybody that him to surprising
their on however approbation hearty his bestowed He Dawlish. near
house. of species

there cottage; a of fond excessively am "I he, said part," own my "For
protest, I And them. about elegance much so comfort, much so always is
one build and land little a buy should I spare, to money any had I if
myself drive might I where London, of distance short a within myself,
I happy. be and me, about friends few a collect and time, any at down
friend My cottage. a build to build, to going is who body every advise
advice, my ask to purpose on day other the me to came Courtland Lord
decide to was I Bonomi's. of plans different three me before laid and
throwing immediately I, said Courtland,' dear 'My them. of best the on
means all by but them, of either adopt not 'do fire, the into all them
it. of end the be will fancy, I that And cottage.' a build

a in space no accommodations, no be can there that imagine people "Some
friend my at month last was I mistake. a all is this but cottage;
'But dance. a give to wished Elliott Lady Dartford. near Elliott's,
is it how me tell do Ferrars, dear 'my she; said done?' be it can how
ten hold will that cottage this in room a not is There managed. be to
there that saw immediately I be?' supper the can where and couple,
not do Elliott, Lady dear 'My said, I so it, in difficulty no be could
ease; with couple eighteen admit will parlour dining The uneasy. be
open be may library the drawing-room; the in placed be may card-tables
the in out set be supper the let and refreshments; other and tea for
the measured We thought. the with delighted was Elliott Lady saloon.'
the and couple, eighteen exactly hold would it found and dining-room,
you fact, in that, So plan. my after precisely arranged was affair
as be may comfort every it, about set to how know but do people if see,
dwelling." spacious most the in as cottage a in enjoyed well

the deserved he think not did she for all, it to agreed Elinor
opposition. rational of compliment

sister, eldest his than music in pleasure more no had Dashwood John As
thought a and else; thing any on fix to liberty at equally was mind his
for wife, his to communicated he which evening, the during him struck
Mrs. of consideration The home. got they when approbation, her
had guests, their sisters his supposing in mistake, Dennison's
such, become to invited really being their of propriety the suggested
would expense The home. from her kept engagements Jennings's Mrs. while
an altogether was it and more; not inconvenience the nothing, be
be to out pointed conscience his of delicacy the which attention
his to promise his from enfranchisement complete its to requisite
proposal. the at startled was Fanny father.

Lady affronting "without she, said done," be can it how see not do "I
be should I otherwise her; with day every spend they for Middleton,
any them pay to ready always am I know You it. do to glad exceedingly
But shews. evening this out them taking my as power, my in attention
her?" from away them ask I can How visitors. Middleton's Lady are they

her of force the see not did humility, great with but husband, Her
Conduit in manner this in week a spent already had "They objection.
the giving their at displeased be not could Middleton Lady and Street,
relations." near such to days of number same

said, vigor, fresh with then, and moment, a paused Fanny

power. my in was it if heart, my all with them ask would I love "My
a spend to Steeles Miss the ask to myself within settled just had I But
and girls; of kind good behaved, well very are They us. with days few
well very so did uncle their as them, to due is attention the think I
the but know; you year, other some sisters your ask can We Edward. by
like will you sure am I more. any town in be not may Steeles Miss
so and already, much very know, you them, like DO you indeed, them;
Harry!" with favourites such are they and mother; my does

Miss the inviting of necessity the saw He convinced. was Dashwood Mr.
resolution the by pacified was conscience his and immediately, Steeles
slyly however, time, same the at year; another sisters his inviting of
by needless, invitation the make would year another that suspecting
as Marianne and wife, Brandon's Colonel as town to Elinor bringing
visitor. THEIR

had that wit ready the of proud and escape, her in rejoicing Fanny,
and company her request to Lucy, to morning next the wrote it, procured
Lady as soon as Street, Harley in days, some for sister's, her
and really Lucy make to enough was This them. spare could Middleton
her, for working actually seemed Dashwood Mrs. happy. reasonably
Such views! her all promoting and hopes, her all cherishing herself;
all above was, family his and Edward with being of opportunity an
the invitation an such and interest, her to material most the things,
be not could that advantage an was It feelings! her to gratifying most
the and of; use made speedily too nor acknowledged, gratefully too
limits, precise any had before not had which Middleton, Lady to visit
days' two in end to meant always been have to discovered instantly was
time.

after minutes ten within was it as Elinor, to shown was note the When
the in share some time, first the for her, gave it arrival, its
vouchsafed kindness, uncommon of mark a such for Lucy; of expectations
good-will the that declare to seemed acquaintance, an short so on
against malice merely than more something from arose her towards
thing every do to address, and time by brought, be might and herself;
Lady of pride the subdued already had flattery Her wished. Lucy that
John Mrs. of heart close the into entry an made and Middleton,
of probability the open laid that effects were these and Dashwood;
greater.

Elinor reached that all and Street, Harley to removed Steeles Miss The
event. the of expectation her strengthened there, influence their of
accounts such home brought once, than more them on called who John, Sir
Mrs. striking. universally be must as in, were they favour the of
her in women young any with pleased much so been never had Dashwood
made book needle a them of each given had them; with was she as life,
know not did and name; Christian her by Lucy called emigrant; some by
them. with part to able be ever should she whether





ended.] II Volume editions, second and first the in point this [At




37 CHAPTER


felt mother her that fortnight, a of end the at well so was Palmer Mrs.
and, her; to time her of whole the up give to necessary longer no it
from returned day, a twice or once her visiting with herself contenting
the found she which in habits, own her and home, own her to period that
share. former their resume to ready very Dashwoods Miss

in resettled thus being their after morning fourth or third the About
to visit ordinary her from returning on Jennings, Mrs. Street, Berkeley
by sitting was Elinor where drawing-room, the entered Palmer, Mrs.
to her prepared as importance hurrying such of air an with herself,
idea, that form to only time her giving and wonderful; something hear
saying, by it, justify to directly began

news?" the heard you have Dashwood! Miss dear my "Lord!

it?" is What ma'am. "No,

Mr. to got I When all.-- it hear shall you But strange! so "Something
was She child. the about fuss a in quite Charlotte found I Palmer's,
pimples. over all was and fretted, and cried, ill--it very was it sure
is 'it I, says dear,' my 'Lord! and, directly, it at looked I So
same. the just said nurse and gum--' red the but world, the in nothing
for; sent was Donavan Mr. so satisfied, be not would she Charlotte, But
he so Street, Harley from in come just to happened he luckily and
said he Mama, ever as soon as and directly, over stepped
and gum, red the but world the in nothing was it that did, we as just
it again, away going was he as just so, And easy. was Charlotte then
of think to happened I how know not do I sure am I head, my into came
upon So news. any was there if him ask to head my into came it but it,
know to seemed and grave, looked and simpered, and smirked, he that,
any fear 'For whisper, a in said he last at and other, or something
to as care your under ladies young the reach should report unpleasant
I that say, to advisable it think I indisposition, sister's their
will Dashwood Mrs. hope I alarm; for reason great no is there believe
well.'" very do

ill?" Fanny is "What!

Mrs. 'is I, says 'Lord!' dear. my said, I what exactly is "That
of short the and long the and out; came all it then So ill?' Dashwood
Ferrars, Edward Mr. this. be to seems learn, can I all by matter, the
it as however, (but about you with joke to used I man young very the
Mr. it), in thing any never was there glad monstrous am I out, turns
my to twelvemonth this above engaged been has seems, it Ferrars, Edward
a knowing creature a not dear!--And my you, for Lucy!--There's cousin
a such believed have you Nancy!--Could except matter, the of syllable
another; one liking their in wonder great no is There possible?-- thing
nobody and them, between forward so brought be should matters that but
together, them see to happened never strange!--I is it!--THAT suspect
this so and Well, directly. out it found have should I sure am I or
nor she neither and Ferrars, Mrs. of fear for secret, great a kept was
very this matter;--till the of word a suspected sister or brother your
no but creature, well-meaning a is know, you who, Nancy, poor morning,
are 'they herself, to she thinks 'Lord!' out. all it popt conjurer,
it;' about difficulty no make will they sure be to Lucy, of fond so all
her at alone all sitting was who sister, your to went she away so, and
been just had she come--for to was what suspecting little carpet-work,
to thought she that before, minutes five only brother, your to saying
forget I other, or daughter Lord's some and Edward between match a make
pride. and vanity her all to was it blow a what think may you So who.
as screams such with immediately, hysterics violent into fell She
dressing-room own his in sitting was he as ears, brother's your reached
the in steward his to letter a writing about thinking stairs, down
for place, took scene terrible a and directly, flew he up So country.
on. going was what dreaming little time, that by them to come was Lucy
very used was she think I say, must I And HER. pity I soul! Poor
into her drove soon and fury, any like scolded sister your for hardly;
bitterly; cried and knees, her upon fell she Nancy, fit. fainting a
know not did he said and room, the about walked he brother, your and
minute a stay not should they declared Dashwood Mrs. do. to what
HIS upon down go to forced was brother your and house, the in longer
up packed had they till stay them let to her persuade to too, knees
so was he and again, hysterics into fell she THEN clothes. their
found Donavan Mr. and Donavan, Mr. for send would he that frightened
to ready door the at was carriage The uproar. this all in house the
came he as in stepping just were they and away, cousins poor my take
and walk; hardly could she says, he condition, a such in Lucy poor off;
your with patience no have I declare, I bad. as almost was she Nancy,
of spite in match a be will it heart, my all with hope, I and sister;
of hears he when in be will Edward Mr. poor taking a what Lord! her.
monstrous is he say they for scornfully! so used love his have To it!
in be to was he if wonder, not should I may. he well as her, of fond
I and He same. the just thinks Donavan Mr. passion!--and greatest the
is he that is, all of best the and it; about talk of deal great a had
Mrs. when call within be may he that Street, Harley to again back gone
cousins my ever as soon as for sent was she for it, of told is Ferrars
too; hysterics in be would SHE sure was sister your for house, the left
I them. of either for pity no have I care. I what for may, she so and
and money about to-do a such making people's of notion no have
should Lucy and Edward Mr. why earth on reason no is There greatness.
her by well very do to afford may Ferrars Mrs. sure am I for marry; not
than better knows she herself, nothing to next has Lucy though and son,
Mrs. if say, dare I thing; every of most the make to how body any
as make would she a-year, hundred five him allow only would Ferrars
Lord! eight. with would else body any as it with appearance an good
little a yours--or as cottage another such in live might they snug how
to them help could I believe I and men; two and maids, two bigger--with
fit would that place, of out sister a has Betty my for housemaid, a
exactly." them

collect to enough time had had Elinor as and ceased, Jennings Mrs. Here
such make and answer, an such give to able was she thoughts, her
produce. to supposed be naturally might subject the as observations,
interest extraordinary any of suspected not was she that find to Happy
the be might hoped often late of had she (as Jennings Mrs. that it; in
happy and Edward; to attached all at her imagine to ceased had case)
able well very felt she Marianne, of absence the in rest, the all above
judgment, her give to and embarrassment, without affair the of speak to
one every of conduct the on impartiality with believed, she as
it. in concerned

really event its of expectation own her what determine hardly could She
being its of notion the away drive to tried earnestly she though was;
and Edward of marriage the in than last, at otherwise end to possible
a be not could there though do, and say would Ferrars Mrs. What Lucy.
to anxious more still and hear; to anxious was she nature, its of doubt
much felt she HIM For himself. conduct would Edward how know
to pains some her cost it little--and very Lucy compassion;--for
all. at none party the of rest the little;--for that procure

the saw soon Elinor subject, other no on talk could Jennings Mrs. As
be to was time No discussion. its for Marianne preparing of necessity
truth, real the with acquainted her making in her, undeceiving in lost
others, by of talked it hear to her bring to endeavouring in and
any or sister, her for uneasiness any felt she that betraying without
Edward. against resentment

she what remove to going was one.--She painful a was office Elinor's
such give consolation,--to chief sister's her be to believed really
good her in ever for him ruin would feared she as Edward of particulars
situations, their in resemblance a by Marianne, make to opinion,-and
disappointment own her all feel strong, seem would fancy HER to which
to necessary was it be, must task a such as unwelcome But again. over
it. perform to hastened therefore Elinor and done, be

to or feelings, own her on dwell to wishing from far very was She
the as than otherwise any much, suffering as herself represent
Edward's of knowledge first her since practised had she self-command
Marianne. to practicable was what of hint a suggest might engagement,
given be not could it though and simple; and clear was narration Her
nor agitation, violent by accompanied not was it emotion, without
Marianne for hearer, the to rather belonged grief.--THAT impetuous
the be to was Elinor excessively. cried and horror, with listened
and theirs; in than less no distresses, own her in others of comforter
composure own her of assurances by given be could that comfort the all
but charge every from Edward of vindication earnest very a and mind, of
offered. readily was imprudence, of

seemed Edward neither. to credit give would time some for Marianne But
HAD she that did, Elinor as acknowledging and Willoughby; second a
for As herself! than less feel she could sincerely, most him loved
absolutely so unamiable, totally so her considered she Steele, Lucy
persuaded be not could she that man, sensible a attaching of incapable
of affection former any pardon, to afterwards and believe, to first at
and natural; been have to it admit even not would She her. for Edward
only which that by so, was it that convinced be to her left Elinor
mankind. of knowledge better a her, convince could

fact the state to than farther no reached had communication first Her
existed.--Marianne's had it time of length the and engagement, the of
of regularity all to end an put and in, broken then had feelings
her soothe to was done be could that all time some for and detail;
first The resentment. her combat and alarms, her lessen distress,
was,-- particulars, farther to led which side, her on question

you?" to written he has Elinor? you, to known been this has long "How

Barton to came first Lucy When months. four these it known have "I
engagement." her of confidence in me told she November, last Park

her which astonishment the expressed eyes Marianne's words, these At
exclaimed-- she wonder, of pause a After utter. not could lips

months?" four this of known you months!--Have "Four

it. confirmed Elinor

your on been this has misery, my all in me attending "What!--while
happy!"-- being for you reproached have I heart?--And

reverse!" the was I much how know then should you that fit not was "It

cheerful!--how calm!--so again.--"So Marianne months!"--cried "Four
supported?"-- been you have

me obliged Lucy, to promise duty.--My my doing was I that feeling "By
of hint any giving avoid to therefore, her, to it owed I secret. be to
in create to not friends, and family my to it owed I and truth; the
to power my in be not could it which me, about solicitude a them
satisfy."

struck. much seemed Marianne

added mother," my and yourself undeceive to wished often very have "I
betraying without it;--but attempted have I twice or once "and Elinor;
you." convinced have could never I trust, my

him!"-- loved you yet months!--and "Four

was others of comfort the while him;--and only love not did I But "Yes.
felt. I much how knowing from them spare to glad was I me, to dear
have not would I emotion. little with it of speak and think can I Now,
suffer longer no I you assure I for account; my on suffer you
not am I me. support to things many have I myself. materially
my of imprudence any by disappointment the provoked having of conscious
farther. it spreading without possible as much as it borne have I own,
I and happy; very him wish I misconduct. essential of Edward acquit I
harbour may he now though that duty, his doing always his of sure so am
sense, want not does Lucy so. become must he end the in regret, some
built.--And be may good thing every which on foundation the is that and
a of idea the in bewitching is that all after Marianne, all, after
one's of said be can that all and attachment, constant and single
not is it person, particular any on entirely depending happiness
Edward so.-- be should it that possible not is fit--it not is meant--it
and person in superior woman a marry will he Lucy; marry will
to him teach will habit and time and sex; her half to understanding
HER."-- to superior another thought ever he that forget

what of loss the "if Marianne, said thinking," of way your is such "If
your else, something by up made be to easily so is valued most is
be to less little a perhaps, are, self-command, your resolution,
comprehension." my within more brought are at.--They wondered

much.--For felt ever have I that suppose not do you.--You understand "I
without mind, my on hanging this all had have I Marianne, months, four
it that knowing creature; single a to it of speak to liberty at being
to explained were it whenever unhappy most mother my and you make would
told was It least.-- the in it for you prepare to unable yet you,
whose herself, person very the by me on forced manner a in was me,--it
thought, I as me, told and prospects; my all ruined engagement prior
to had have I therefore, suspicions, person's This triumph.-- with
most been have I where indifferent appear to endeavouring by oppose,
her had have once;--I only been not has it interested;--and deeply
known have I again.-- and again to listen to exultation and hopes
one hearing without ever, for Edward from divided be to myself
connection.--Nothing the desire less me make could that circumstance
to indifferent him declared anything has nor unworthy; him proved has
and sister, his of unkindness the against contend to had have I me.--
an of punishment the suffered have and mother; his of insolence the
been has this all And advantages.-- its enjoying without attachment,
only my been not has it well, too know you as when, time, a at on going
you feeling--surely ever of capable me think can you If unhappiness.--
which with mind of composure The NOW. suffered have I that suppose may
the matter, the consider to present at myself brought have I
of effect the been have admit, to willing been have I that consolation
of up spring not did exertion;--they painful and constant
No, first.-- at spirits my relieve to occur not did themselves;--they
nothing perhaps silence, to bound been not had I if Marianne.--THEN,
dearest my to owed I what even entirely--not me kept have could
unhappy."-- VERY was I that shewing openly friends--from

subdued.-- quite was Marianne

ever.--How for myself hate me made have "you cried, she Elinor," "Oh!
who comfort, only my been have who you!--you, to been I have barbarous
only be to seemed have who misery, my all in me with borne have
can I return only the this gratitude?--Is my this me!--Is for suffering
trying been have I myself, upon out cries merit your you?--Because make
away." it do to

of frame a such In confession. this followed caresses tenderest The
her from obtaining in difficulty no had Elinor in, now was she as mind
engaged Marianne request, her at and required; she promise whatever
of appearance least the with one any to affair the of speak to never
of increase smallest the betraying without Lucy meet bitterness;--to
bring should chance if himself, Edward see to even her;--and to dislike
These cordiality.-- usual her of diminution any without together, them
injured, had she that felt Marianne where concessions;--but great were
make. to her for much too be could reparation no

admiration.--She to discreet, being of promise her performed She
an with subject, the upon say to had Jennings Mrs. that all to attended
heard was and nothing, in her from dissented complexion, unchanging
Lucy of praise her to listened ma'am."--She "Yes, say, to times three
Jennings Mrs. when and another, to chair one from moving only with
her in spasm a only her cost it affection, Edward's of talked
feel Elinor made sister, her in heroism towards advances throat.--Such
herself. thing any to equal

their from visit a in it, of trial farther a brought morning next The
dreadful the over talk to aspect serious most a with came who brother,
wife. his of news them bring and affair,

as soon as solemnity, great with he said suppose," I heard, have "You
under place took that discovery shocking very the "of seated, was he
yesterday." roof our

speech. for moment a awful too seemed it assent; their looked all They

Ferrars Mrs. dreadfully. suffered "has continued, he sister," "Your
I distress--but complicated such of scene a been has it short too--in
us of any being our without weathered be may storm the that hope will
I But yesterday. all hysterics in was she Fanny! Poor overcome. quite
materially nothing is there says Donavan much. too you alarm not would
resolution her and one, good a is constitution her apprehended; be to
an of fortitude the with all, it borne has She thing. any to equal
one and again; anybody of well think shall never she says She angel!
such with deceived!--meeting so being after it, at wonder cannot
confidence much so shewn, been had kindness much so where ingratitude,
heart, her of benevolence the of out quite was It placed! been had
she because merely house; her to women young these asked had she that
well-behaved harmless, were attention, some deserved they thought
wished both we otherwise for companions; pleasant be would and girls,
your while us, with be to Marianne and you invited have to much very
so be to now And daughter. her attending was there, friend kind
her in Fanny poor says heart,' my all with wish, 'I rewarded!
them.'" of instead sisters your asked had we 'that way, affectionate

on. went he done, being which thanked; be to stopped he Here

is her, to it broke Fanny first when suffered, Ferrars Mrs. poor "What
been had affection truest the with she While described. be to not
that supposed be to it was him, for connection eligible most a planning
a person!--such another to engaged secretly time the all be could he
ANY suspected she If head! her entered have never could suspicion
to 'THERE, quarter. THAT in be not could it elsewhere, prepossession
quite was She safe.' myself thought have might 'I she, said sure,' be
be should what to as however, together, consulted We agony. an in
I But came. He Edward. for send to determined she last at and done,
to say could Ferrars Mrs. that All ensued. what relate to sorry am
well may you as too assisted engagement, the to end an put him make
avail. no of was entreaties, Fanny's and arguments, my by suppose
Edward thought never I disregarded. was thing every affection, Duty,
her him to explained mother His before. unfeeling so stubborn, so
she him told Morton; Miss marrying his of case in designs, liberal
land-tax, of clear which, estate, Norfolk the him on settle would
grew matters when even, offered a-year; thousand good a in brings
he if this, to opposition in and hundred; twelve it make to desperate,
certain the him to represented connection, low this in persisted still
she pounds thousand two own His match. the attend must that penury
far so and again; him see never would she all; his be should protested
he if that assistance, smallest the him affording from be she would
she support, better of view a with profession any into enter to were
it." in advancing him prevent to power her in all do would

hands her clapped indignation, of ecstasy an in Marianne, Here
possible!" be this can God! "Gracious cried, and together,

obstinacy the "at brother, her replied Marianne," wonder, you may "Well
very is exclamation Your these. as arguments such resist could which
natural."

and promises, her remembered she but retort, to going was Marianne
forbore.

said Edward vain. in urged "was continued, he however," this, "All
manner. determined most the in was say, did he what but little; very
would He engagement. his up give to him on prevail should Nothing
might." it what him cost it, to stand

be to able longer no sincerity, blunt with Jennings Mrs. cried "Then,"
Mr. pardon, your beg I man! honest an like acted has "he silent,
a him thought have should I otherwise, done had he if but Dashwood,
as well as business, the in concern little some have I rascal.
a not is there believe I and cousin, my is Steele Lucy for yourself,
good a deserves more who one nor world, the in girl of kind better
husband."

open not calm, was nature his but astonished; greatly was Dashwood John
especially anybody, offend to wished never he and provocation, to
resentment, any without replied, therefore He fortune. good of anybody

yours, of relation any of disrespectfully speak means no by would "I
woman, young deserving very a say, dare I is, Steele Lucy Miss madam.
impossible. be must connection the know, you case present the in but
her under man young a with engagement secret a into entered have to And
fortune large very such of especially woman a of son the care, uncle's
In extraordinary. little a altogether perhaps, is Ferrars, Mrs. as
whom person any of behaviour the upon reflect to mean not do I short,
happy; extremely her wish all We Jennings. Mrs. for, regard a have you
every as such been has whole, the throughout conduct Ferrars's Mrs. and
has It adopt. would circumstances, like in mother, good conscientious,
fear I and lot, own his drawn has Edward liberal. and dignified been
one." bad a be will it

wrung heart Elinor's and apprehension; similar her out sighed Marianne
a for threats, mother's his braving while Edward, of feelings the for
him. reward not could who woman

end?" it did how "and Jennings, Mrs. said sir," "Well,

is Edward rupture:-- unhappy most a in ma'am, say, to sorry am "I
house her left He notice. mother's his from ever for dismissed
do I town, in still is he whether or gone, is he where but yesterday,
inquiry." no make can course of WE for know; not

him?" of become to is what man!--and young "Poor

the to Born consideration. melancholy a is It ma'am! indeed, "What,
more situation a conceive cannot I affluence! such of prospect
on live man a can pounds--how thousand two of interest The deplorable.
for but might, he that recollection, the added is that to when it?--and
two of receipt the in been have months three within folly, own his
thousand thirty has Morton Miss (for a-year hundred five thousand,
must We condition. wretched more a myself to picture cannot I pounds,)
our of out totally is it because so, more the and him; for feel all
him." assist to power

very be should he sure am "I Jennings, Mrs. cried man!" young "Poor
I if him tell would I so and house; my at board and bed to welcome
own his at about living be should he that fit not is It him. see could
taverns." and lodgings at now, charge

she though Edward, towards kindness such for her thanked heart Elinor's
it. of form the at smiling forbear not could

Dashwood, John said himself," by well as done have only would he "If
been have now might he him, by do to disposed were friends his all "as
it as But nothing. for wanted have would and situation, proper his in
one is there And him. assist to power anybody's of out be must it is,
all--his than worse be must which him, against preparing more thing
settle to spirit, of kind natural very a with determined, has mother
on Edward's, been have might which immediately, Robert upon estate THAT
talking lawyer, her with morning this her left I conditions. proper
business." the over

way a has Everybody revenge. HER is "that Jennings, Mrs. said "Well!"
son one make to be, would mine think don't I But own. their of
me." plagued had another because independent,

room. the about walked and up got Marianne

John, continued man," a of spirit the to galling more be anything "Can
might which estate an of possession in brother younger his see to "than
sincerely." him for feel I Edward! Poor own? his been have

his concluded effusion, of kind same the in spent more minutes few A
really he that sisters his to assurances repeated with and visit;
and indisposition, Fanny's in danger material no was there believed
away; went he it, about uneasy very be therefore not need they that
present the on sentiments their in unanimous ladies three the leaving
the conduct, Ferrars's Mrs. regarded it as least at far as occasion,
Edward's. and Dashwoods',

and room; the quitted he as soon as forth burst indignation Marianne's
in unnecessary and Elinor, in impossible reserve made vehemence her as
the upon critique spirited very a in joined all they Jennings, Mrs.
party.



38 CHAPTER


only but conduct, Edward's of praise her in warm very was Jennings Mrs.
how knew only THEY merit. true its understood Marianne and Elinor
the was small how and disobedient, be to him tempt to had had he little
remain could that right, doing of consciousness the beyond consolation,
his in gloried Elinor fortune. and friends of loss the in him to
his for compassion in offences his all forgave Marianne and integrity;
public this by was, them between confidence though But punishment.
which on subject a not was it state, proper its to restored discovery,
it avoided Elinor alone. when dwelling of fond were them of either
the by thoughts, her upon more still fix to tending as principle, upon
Edward's of belief that Marianne, of assurances positive too warm, too
and away; do to wished rather she which herself for affection continued
topic a upon converse to trying in her, failed soon courage Marianne's
the by ever, than herself with dissatisfied more her left always which
own. her and conduct Elinor's between produced necessarily it comparison

had sister her as not but comparison; that of force the all felt She
of pain the all with it felt she now; exertion to her urge to hoped,
never had she that bitterly most regretted self-reproach, continual
penitence, of torture the only brought it but before; herself exerted
she that weakened much so was mind Her amendment. of hope the without
only it therefore and impossible, exertion present fancied still
more. her dispirited

affairs of afterwards, two or day a for them, by heard was new Nothing
the of much so though But Buildings. Bartlett's or Street, Harley in
had have might Jennings Mrs. that already, them to known was matter
after seeking without farther, knowledge that spreading in do to enough
and comfort of visit a pay to first the from resolved had she more,
the but nothing and could; she as soon as cousins her to inquiry
them to going her prevented had usual, than visitors more of hindrance
time. that within

so was particulars, the of knowledge their succeeding day third The
Gardens, Kensington to many draw to as Sunday a beautiful so fine,
Elinor and Jennings Mrs. March. in week second the only was it though
were Willoughbys the that knew who Marianne, but number; the of were
rather chose them, meeting of dread constant a had and town, in again
place. a public so into venture than home, at stay to

they after soon them joined Jennings Mrs. of acquaintance intimate An
continuing her by that sorry not was Elinor and Gardens, the entered
was she conversation, Jennings's Mrs. all engaging and them, with
Willoughbys, the of nothing saw She reflection. quiet to left herself
by could who anybody of nothing time some for and Edward, of nothing
last at But her. to interesting be gay, or grave whether chance any
who, Steele, Miss by accosted surprise, some with herself found she
meeting in satisfaction great expressed shy, rather looking though
of kindness particular the from encouragement receiving on and them,
their's. join to time, short a for party own her left Jennings, Mrs.
Elinor, to whispered immediately Jennings Mrs.

you if thing any you tell will She dear. my her, of out all it "Get
Clarke." Mrs. leave cannot I see You ask.

too, Elinor's and curiosity Jennings's Mrs. for however, lucky, was It
would nothing for asked; being WITHOUT thing any tell would she that
learnt. been have otherwise

by familiarly her taking Steele, Miss said you;" meet to glad so am "I
And world." the in things all of you see to wanted I arm--"for the
about all heard has Jennings Mrs. suppose "I voice, her lowering then
angry?" she Is it.

you." with believe, I all, at "Not

angry?" SHE is Middleton, Lady And thing. good a is "That

be." should she that possible it suppose cannot "I

of time a such had have I gracious! Good it. of glad monstrous am "I
first at vowed She life. my in rage a such in Lucy saw never I it!
me for else thing any do nor bonnet, new a up me trim never would she
are we and to, come quite is she now but lived; she as long so again,
put and hat, my to bow this me made she Look, ever. as friends good as
me at laugh to going are YOU now, There night. last feather the in
IS it if care not do I ribbons? pink wear I not should why But too.
never should I part, my for sure, am I colour. favourite Doctor's the
not had he if colour, other any than better it like DID he known have
declare I me! plaguing so been have cousins My so. say to happened
them." before look to way which know not do I sometimes

say, to nothing had Elinor which on subject a to away wandered had She
to again back way her find to expedient it judged soon therefore and
first. the

what say may "people triumphantly, speaking Dashwood," Miss but "Well,
it for Lucy, have not would he declaring Ferrars's Mr. about chuse they
such for shame a quite is it and you; tell can I thing such no is
think might Lucy Whatever abroad. spread be to reports ill-natured
set to people other of business no was it know, you herself, it about
certain." for down it

you," assure I before, at hinted kind the of thing any heard never "I
Elinor. said

than more by and well, very know, I said, WAS it But you? not did "Oh,
could senses their in nobody that Sparks, Miss told Godby Miss for one;
thirty with Morton, Miss like woman a up give to Ferrars Mr. expect
at nothing had that Steele Lucy for fortune, her to pounds thousand
cousin my that, besides And myself. Sparks Miss from it had I and all;
Mr. afraid was he point the to came it when that himself, said Richard
three for us near come not did Edward when and off; be would Ferrars
heart my in believe I and myself; think to what tell not could I days,
brother's your from away came we for lost; for all up it gave Lucy
and Friday, Thursday, all not him of nothing saw we and Wednesday,
thought Lucy Once him. of become was what know not did and Saturday,
this However that. against rose spirits her then but him, to write to
came all it then and church; from home came we as just came he morning
been and Street, Harley to Wednesday for sent been had he how out,
before declared had he how and them, of all and mother his by to talked
he would Lucy but nobody and Lucy, but nobody loved he that all them
as soon as that passed, what by worried so been had he how And have.
horse, his upon got had he house, mother's his from away went had he
stayed had he how and other; or where some country, the into rid and
better the get to purpose on Friday, and Thursday all inn an at about
it said, he again, over and over all it thinking after And it. of
it all, at nothing no and fortune, no had he now if, as him to seemed
must it because engagement, the to on her keep to unkind quite be would
no and pounds, thousand two but nothing had he for loss, her for be
some had he as orders, into go to was he if and else; thing any of hope
live to they was how and curacy, a but nothing get could he thoughts,
so and better, no doing her of think to bear not could that?--He upon
the to end an put to it, for mind least the had she if begged, he
all say him heard I himself. for shift him leave and directly, matter
sake, HER for entirely was it And be. possibly could as plain as this
upon not and off, being about word a said he that account, HER upon and
tired being of syllable a dropt never he oath my take will I own. his
But, it. like thing any or Morton, Miss marry to wishing of or her, of
she so talking; of kind such to ear give not would Lucy sure, be to
know, you love, and sweet about deal great a (with directly him told
you things of kind such repeat can't one la! that--Oh, all and
world the in mind least the not had she directly, him told know)--she
so little how and trifle, a upon him with live could she for off, be to
know, you all, it have to glad very be should she have, might he ever
talked and happy, monstrous was he then So kind. the of something or
take should he agreed they and do, should they what about time some on
living. a got he till married be to wait must they and directly, orders
from called cousin my for more, any hear not could I then just And
take would and coach, her in come was Richardson Mrs. me tell to below
room the into go to forced was I so Gardens; Kensington to us of one
did she but go, to like would she if Lucy ask to them, interrupt and
of pair a on put and stairs up run just I so Edward; leave to care not
Richardsons." the with off came and stockings silk

Elinor; said them," interrupting by mean you what understand not do "I
you?" not were together, room same the in all were "you

love make people think you do Dashwood, Miss La! us. not indeed, "No,
know must you sure be shame!--To for Oh, by? is else body any when
in up shut were they no; affectedly.)--No, (Laughing that. than better
the at listening by only was heard I all and together, drawing-room the
door."

only you what me to repeating been you "have Elinor; cried "How!"
it know not did I sorry am I door? the at listening by yourself learnt
me give to you suffered have not would certainly I for before;
known have to not ought you which conversation a of particulars
sister?" your by unfairly so behave you could How yourself.

heard and door, the at stood only I THAT. in nothing is there la! "Oh,
me; by same the just done have would Lucy sure am I And could. I what
secrets many so had I and Sharpe Martha when back, two or year a for
a behind or closet, a in hiding of bones any made never she together,
said." we what hear to purpose on chimney-board,

be not could Steele Miss but else; something of talk to tried Elinor
mind. her in uppermost was what from minutes, of couple a beyond kept

is he now "but she; said soon," Oxford to going of talks "Edward
is, mother his woman ill-natured an What Mall. Pall --, No. at lodging
I However, kind! very not were sister and brother your And she? an't
send did they sure be to and YOU; to them against anything say shan't
And for. looked I than more was which chariot, own their in home us
us ask should sister your fear for fright a in all was I part, my for
however, but, before; two or day a us gave had she huswifes the for
sight. of out mine keep to care took I and them, about said was nothing
there go must he so says; he Oxford, at business some got have Edward
he Bishop, a upon light can he as soon as THAT, after and time; a for
gracious! get!--Good will he curacy what wonder I ordained. be will
will cousins my what know I life my lay I'd spoke) she as (giggling
the to write should I me tell will They it. of hear they when say,
will; they know I living. new his of curacy the Edward get to Doctor,
I 'La!' world.-- the all for thing a such do not would I sure am I but
I thing? a such of think could you how wonder 'I directly, say shall
indeed!'" Doctor, the to write

worst. the against prepared be to comfort a is "it Elinor, said "Well,"
ready." answer your got have You

of approach the but subject, same the on reply to going was Steele Miss
necessary. more another made party own her

to say to more deal vast a had I Richardsons. the come here la! "Oh,
you assure I longer. any not them from away stay not must I but you,
and money, of deal monstrous a makes He people. genteel very are they
Jennings Mrs. to speak to time not have I coach. own their keep they
not is she hear to happy quite am I her tell pray but myself, it about
anything if and same; the Middleton Lady and us, against anger in
Jennings Mrs. and away, sister your and you take to happen should
stay and come to glad very be should we sure am I company, want should
Middleton Lady suppose I likes. she as time a long as for her with
was Marianne Miss sorry am I Good-by; bout. this more any us ask won't
your got not have you if La! her. to kindly me Remember here. not
torn." being its of afraid not was you wonder on!--I muslin spotted

pay to only time had she this, after for concern; parting her was Such
was company her before Jennings, Mrs. to compliments farewell her
of possession in left was Elinor and Richardson; Mrs. by claimed
though time, some reflection of powers her feed might which knowledge
and foreseen already been had what than more little very learnt had she
firmly as was Lucy with marriage Edward's mind. own her in foreplanned
absolutely as remained place taking its of time the and on, determined
depended, thing be;--every would it concluded had she as uncertain,
of preferment, that getting his on expectation, her after exactly
chance. smallest the not seemed there present, at which,

for eager was Jennings Mrs. carriage, the to returned they as soon As
possible as little as spread to wished Elinor as but information;
she obtained, unfairly so been place first the in had that intelligence
as particulars, simple such of repetition brief the to herself confined
would consequence, own her of sake the for Lucy, that assured felt she
the and engagement, their of continuance The known. have to choose
her all was end, its promoting for taken be to able were that means
following the Jennings Mrs. from produced this and communication;
remark. natural

will THAT how know all we living!--ay, a having his for "Wait
it, of comes good no finding and twelvemonth, a wait will end:--they
interest the with a-year, pounds fifty of curacy a upon down set will
Mr. and Steele Mr. matter little what and pounds, thousand two his of
Lord and year! every child a have will they her.--Then give can Pratt
them give can I what see must be!--I will they poor how 'em! help
I indeed!--as men, two and maids Two house. their furnishing towards
all of girl stout a get must they no, day.--No, t'other of talked
NOW." them for do never would sister Betty's works.--

from post two-penny the by letter a Elinor brought morning next The
follows: as was It herself. Lucy

March. Building, "Bartlett's

the excuse will Dashwood Miss dear my hope "I
your know I but her; to writing of take I liberty
such hear to pleased you make will me for friendship
after Edward, dear my and myself of account good a
lately, through went have we troubles the all
proceed but apologies, more no make will therefore
suffered have we though God! thank that, say to
happy as and now, well quite both are we dreadfully,
have We love. another's one in be always must we as
but persecutions, great and trials, great had
acknowledge gratefully time, same the at however,
them, among least the not yourself friends, many
thankfully always shall I kindness great whose
of told have I who too, Edward will as remember,
likewise as hear, to glad be will you sure am I it.
with hours happy two spent I Jennings, Mrs. dear
our of hear not would he afternoon, yesterday him
my thought I as I, did earnestly though parting,
sake, prudence for it to him urge required, duty
would spot, the on ever for parted have would and
be, never should it said he but it; to consent he
could he while anger, mother's his regard not did he
very not are prospects our affections; my have
for hope and wait, must we but sure, be to bright,
should and shortly; ordained be will he best; the
any to him recommend to power your in be ever it
you sure very am bestow, to living a has that body
too, Jennings Mrs. dear and us, forget not will
John, Sir to us for word good a speak will she trust
to able be may that friend any or Palmer, Mr. or
what for blame to much was Anne us.--Poor assist
say I so best, the for it did she but did, she
much too it think won't Jennings Mrs. hope nothing;
way this come she should call, a us give to trouble
my and kindness, great a be 'twould morning, any
reminds paper her.--My know to proud be would cousins
gratefully most be to begging and conclude; to me
John, Sir to and her, to remembered respectfully and
you when children, dear the and Middleton, Lady and
Marianne, Miss to love and them, see to chance

&c." am, "I

to concluded she what performed she it, finished had Elinor as soon As
Mrs. of hands the in it placing by design, real writer's its be
and satisfaction of comments many with aloud it read who Jennings,
praise.

quite was that writes!--aye, she prettily indeed!--how well "Very
Lucy.--Poor like just was That would. he if off be him let to proper
me calls heart.--She my all with living, a him get COULD I wish I soul!
ever as girl good-hearted a is She see. you Jennings, Mrs. dear
turned. prettily very is sentence That word. my upon well lived.--Very
to is, she attentive How enough. sure her, see and go will I yes, Yes,
as is It me. it shewing for dear, my you, body!--Thank every of think
great heart and head Lucy's does and saw, I ever as letter a pretty
credit."



39 CHAPTER


town, in months two than more rather been now had Dashwoods Miss The
sighed She day. every increased gone be to impatience Marianne's and
if that fancied and country; the of quiet the liberty, the air, the for
hardly was Elinor it. do must Barton ease, her give could place any
bent less much so only and removal, their for herself than anxious less
the of conscious was she that as immediately, effected being its on
brought be not could Marianne which journey, a long so of difficulties
thoughts her turn to seriously however, began, She acknowledge. to
to wishes their mentioned already had and accomplishment, its towards
her of eloquence the all with them resisted who hostess, kind their
from them detaining though which, suggested, was plan a when good-will,
more much altogether Elinor to appeared longer, weeks few a yet home
about Cleveland to remove to were Palmers The other. any than eligible
both with Jennings, Mrs. and holidays; Easter the for March, of end the
with go to Charlotte from invitation warm very a received friends, her
delicacy the for sufficient been have itself, in not, would This them.
by politeness real much so with inforced was it Dashwood;--but Miss of
his of amendment great very the to joined as, himself, Palmer Mr.
unhappy, be to known been had sister her since them towards manners
pleasure. with it accept to her induced

was reply first her however, done, had she what Marianne told she When
auspicious. very not

to go cannot I "No, agitation. great with cried, "Cleveland!"--she
Cleveland."--

it not...that is situation its "that gently, Elinor said forget," "You
of..." neighbourhood the in not is

Somersetshire.--There, into go cannot Somersetshire.--I in is it "But
to me expect cannot you Elinor, going...No, to forward looked I where
there." go

such overcoming of propriety the upon argue not would Elinor
on working by them counteract to endeavoured only feelings;--she
the fix would which measure a as therefore, it, others;--represented
to wished much so she whom mother, dear that to returning her of time
plan other any than manner, comfortable more eligible, more a in see,
which Cleveland, From delay. greater any without perhaps and do, could
not was Barton to distance the Bristol, of miles few a within was
servant mother's their and journey; day's long a though day, one beyond
no be could there as and down; them attend to there come easily might
be now might they Cleveland, at week a above staying their of occasion
affection Marianne's As time. weeks' three than more little in home at
difficulty, little with triumph must it sincere, was mother her for
started. had she evils imaginary the over

she that guests, her of weary being from far so was Jennings Mrs.
Cleveland. from again her with return to earnestly very them pressed
her alter not could it but attention, the for grateful was Elinor
every gained, readily being concurrence mother's their and design;
be;--and could it as far as arranged was return their to relative thing
that hours the of statement a up drawing in relief some found Marianne
Barton. from her divide to yet were

Miss the without do shall I and you what know not do I Colonel, "Ah!
on called first he when him to address Jennings's Mrs. Dashwoods;"--was
resolved quite are they settled--"for was her leaving their after her,
I when be, shall we forlorn how Palmers;--and the from home going upon
two as dull as another one at gape and sit shall we back!--Lord! come
cats."

their of sketch vigorous this by hopes, in was Jennings Mrs. Perhaps
give might which offer, that make to him provoke to ennui, future
good afterwards soon had she so, if it;--and from escape an himself
the to moving Elinor's on for, gained; object her think to reason
she which print, a of dimensions the expeditiously more take to window
of look a with it to her followed he friend, her for copy to going was
minutes. several for there her with conversed and meaning, particular
her escape not could too, lady the on discourse his of effect The
even had and listen, to honorable too was she though for observation,
by close one to hear, NOT might she that purpose on seat, her changed
keep not could she playing, was Marianne which on forte piano the
with attended colour, changed Elinor that seeing from herself
her pursue to said he what on intent too was and agitation,
the in hopes, her of confirmation in farther Still employment.--
words some another, to lesson one from turning Marianne's of interval
be to seemed he which in ear, her reached inevitably Colonel's the of
a beyond matter the set This house. his of badness the for apologising
so; do to necessary it thinking his at indeed, wondered, She doubt.
reply in said Elinor What etiquette. proper the be to it supposed but
that lips, her of motion the from judged but distinguish, not could she
Jennings Mrs. objection;--and material any THAT think not did she
on talked then They honest. so being for heart her in her commended
another when syllable, a catching her without longer minutes few a for
the in words these her brought performance Marianne's in stop lucky
voice,-- calm Colonel's

soon." very place take cannot it afraid am "I

almost was she speech, a unlover-like so at shocked and Astonished
her checking it?"--but hinder should what "Lord! out, cry to ready
ejaculation. silent this to herself confined desire,

older." be to wait not need he strange!--sure very is "This

or offend to seem not did however, side, Colonel's the on delay This
the up breaking their on for least, the in companion fair his mortify
Jennings Mrs. ways, different moving and afterwards, soon conference
to her shewed which voice a with and say, Elinor heard plainly very
said, she what feel

you." to obliged much very myself think always shall "I

that wondered only and gratitude, her with delighted was Jennings Mrs.
leave take to able be should Colonel the sentence, a such hearing after
away go and sang-froid, utmost the with did, immediately he as them, of
could friend old her thought not had reply!--She any her making without
suitor. a indifferent so made have

effect. this to was them between passed really had What

your injustice the "of compassion, great with he, said heard," have "I
understand I if for family; his from suffered has Ferrars Mr. friend
persevering for them by off cast entirely been has he right, matter the
been I Have woman.-- young deserving very a with engagement his in
so?--" it informed?--Is rightly

was. it that him told Elinor

great with replied, cruelty,"--he impolitic the cruelty, "The
long people young two divide, to attempting or dividing, feeling,--"of
what know not does Ferrars Mrs. terrible.-- is other, each to attached
Mr. seen have I to. son her drive may she doing--what be may she
with pleased much am and Street, Harley in times three or two Ferrars
acquainted intimately be can one whom with man young a not is He him.
his for well him wish to him of enough seen have I but time, short a in
understand I more. still it wish I yours, of friend a as and sake, own
him tell to as good so be you Will orders. take to intends he that
this by informed am I as vacant, just now Delaford, of living the that
THAT, acceptance--but his worth it think he if his, is post, day's
be may it now, is he as circumstanced unfortunately so perhaps,
It valuable.-- more were it wish only I doubt; to appear to nonsense
not did believe, I incumbent, late the one; small a but rectory, a is
of capable certainly is it though and annum, per L 200 than more make
very a him afford to as amount an such to not fear, I improvement,
presenting in pleasure my however, is, it as Such income. comfortable
it." of him assure Pray great. very be will him, to it

been have hardly could commission this at astonishment Elinor's
hand. his of offer an her making really been Colonel the had greater,
as considered had she before days two only which preferment, The
marry;--and to him enable to provided already was Edward, for hopeless
it!--Her bestow to on fixed was world, the in people all of SHE,
different very a to attributed had Jennings Mrs. as such was emotion
might pleasing, less pure, less feelings minor whatever cause;--but
benevolence, general the for esteem her emotion, that in share a have
together which friendship, particular the for gratitude her and
warmly and felt, strongly were act, this to Brandon Colonel prompted
of spoke heart, her all with it for him thanked She expressed.
knew she which praise that with disposition and principles Edward's
with commission the undertake to promised and deserve; to them
office an agreeable so off put to wish his really were it if pleasure,
no that thinking help not could she time, same the at But another. to
short, in office an was It himself. as it perform well so could one
an receiving of pain the Edward give to unwilling which, from
spared be to glad very been have would she HER, from obligation
declining delicacy, equal of motives on Brandon, Colonel but herself;--
her through given being its of desirous so seemed still likewise, it
opposition. farther make account any on not would she that means,
heard had she fortunately and town, in still was believed, she Edward,
inform to therefore undertake could She Steele. Miss from address his
settled, been had this After day. the of course the in it, of him
so securing in advantage own his of talk to began Brandon Colonel
he that was it THEN and neighbour, a agreeable and respectable
indifferent;--an and small was house the that regret, with mentioned
very made do, to her supposed had Jennings Mrs. as Elinor, which evil
size. its regarded as far as least at of, light

any imagine cannot "I she, said house," the of smallness "The
and family their to proportion in be will it for them, to inconvenience
income."

Mr. considering was SHE that find to surprised was Colonel the which By
for presentation; the of consequence certain the as marriage Ferrars's
such supply could living Delaford that possible it suppose not did he
settle to venture would life of style his in anybody as income, an
so. said he on--and

comfortable Ferrars Mr. make than more no do CAN rectory little "This
that say to sorry am I marry. to him enable cannot it bachelor; a as
extensive. more hardly is interest my and this; with ends patronage my
serve to power my in be should it chance unforeseen an by however, If,
do, now I what from him of differently very think must I farther, him
I wish sincerely I as then him to useful be to ready as not am I if
all, at nothing seems indeed, doing now am I What present. at be could
principal, his be must what towards little so him advance can it since
distant a be still must marriage His happiness. of object only his
soon.--" very place take cannot it afraid am I least, good;--at

the offended justly so misunderstood, when which, sentence the was Such
what of narration this after but Jennings; Mrs. of feelings delicate
at stood they while Elinor, and Brandon Colonel between passed really
may parting, their on latter the by expressed gratitude the window, the
less nor excited, reasonably less not general, in appear perhaps
marriage. of offer an from arisen had it if than worded properly



40 CHAPTER


soon as smiling, sagaciously Jennings, Mrs. said Dashwood," Miss "Well,
has Colonel the what you ask not do "I withdrawn, had gentleman the as
of out keep to TRIED I honour, my upon though, for you; to saying been
business. his understand to enough catching help not could I hearing,
you wish I and life, my in pleased better was never I you assure I And
heart." my all with it of joy

me; to joy great of matter a is "It Elinor. said ma'am," you, "Thank
are There sensibly. most Brandon Colonel of goodness the feel I and
so have who people Few done. has he as act would who men many not
life." my in astonished more was never I heart! a compassionate

it at astonished least the an't I modest. very are you dear, my "Lord!
more nothing was there late, of thought often have I for world, the in
happen." to likely

benevolence; general Colonel's the of knowledge your from judged "You
very so would opportunity the that foresee not could you least at but
occur." soon

has man a when that, to as Jennings--"Oh! Mrs. repeated "Opportunity!"
soon will he other or somehow thing, a such to mind his up made once
and again it of joy you wish I dear, my Well, opportunity. an find
I think I world, the in couple happy a was there ever if and again;
them." for look to where know soon shall

a with Elinor, said suppose," I them after Delaford to go to mean "You
smile. faint

one, bad a being house the to as And indeed. do, I that dear, my "Aye,
as one a good as is it for at, be would Colonel the what know not do I
saw." I ever

repair." of out being its of spoke "He

do should it?--who repair he don't why that? is fault whose and "Well,
himself?" but it

the announce to in coming servant's the by interrupted were They
to preparing immediately Jennings Mrs. and door; the at being carriage
said,-- go,

out. talk my half had have I before gone be must I dear, my "Well,
be shall we for evening; the in over all it have may we however, But,
mind your say dare I for me, with go to you ask not do I alone. quite
must you besides, and company; for care to matter the of full too is
it." about all sister your tell to long

began. conversation the before room the left had Marianne

mention not shall I but it; of Marianne tell shall I ma'am, "Certainly,
else." body any to present at it

you "Then disappointed. rather Jennings Mrs. said well," very "Oh!
as far as going of think I for Lucy, to it tell me have not would
to-day." Holborn

be not will delay day's One please. you if Lucy even not ma'am, "No,
ought it think I Ferrars, Mr. to written have I till and material; very
is It directly. THAT do shall I else. body any to mentioned be to not
of will he for him, with lost be should time no that importance of
ordination." his to relative do to much have course

Mr. Why exceedingly. Jennings Mrs. puzzled first at speech This
could she hurry, a such in it about to written been have to was Ferrars
however, reflection, moments' few A comprehend. immediately not
exclaimed;-- she and idea, happy very a produced

so Well, man. the be to is Ferrars Mr. you. understand ho!--I "Oh,
in ordained be must he sure, be to Ay, him. for better the much
between forward so are things find to glad very am I and readiness;
not Should character? of out rather this not is dear, my But, you.
person." proper the is he himself?--sure, write Colonel the

Jennings's Mrs. of beginning the understand quite not did Elinor
therefore and into; inquiring worth it think she did neither speech,
conclusion. its to replied only

to one any wished rather he that man, a delicate so is Brandon "Colonel
himself." than Ferrars Mr. to intentions his announce

delicacy! of kind odd an is THAT Well it. do to forced are YOU so "And
You write.) to preparing her (seeing you disturb not will I However,
of heard not have I dear. my goodby, So best. concerns own your know
bed." to brought was Charlotte since well so me please to thing any

moment, a in again returning but went; she away And

be should I dear. my sister, Betty's of thinking been just have "I
for do would she whether But mistress. a good so her get to glad very
housemaid, excellent an is She tell. can't I sure am I maid, lady's a
that all of think will you However, needle. her at well very works and
leisure." your at

said, she what of much hearing not Elinor, replied ma'am," "Certainly,
subject. the of mistress be to than alone, be to anxious more and

to note her in herself express should she begin--how should she How
between circumstances particular The concern. her all now was Edward,
have would person other any to which that of difficulty a made them
too say to feared equally she but world; the in thing easiest the been
pen the with paper, her over deliberating sat and little, too or much
himself. Edward of entrance the by on in broken till hand, her in

he as carriage, the to way her in door the at Jennings Mrs. met had He
not for apologising after she, and card; farewell his leave to came
Miss that saying by enter, to him obliged had herself, returning
particular very on him with speak to wanted and above, was Dashwood
business.

her of midst the in herself, congratulating been just had Elinor
herself express to be might it difficult however that perplexity,
the giving to preferable least at was it letter, by properly
her force to entered, visitor her when mouth, of word by information
confusion and astonishment Her all. of exertion greatest this upon
him seen not had She appearance. sudden so his on great very were
his since not therefore and public, became engagement his since before
of consciousness the with which, it; with acquainted be to her knowing
her made him, tell to had she what and of, thinking been had she what
much was too He minutes. some for uncomfortable particularly feel
of state promising most a in together down sat they and distressed;
on intrusion his for pardon her asked had he embarrassment.--Whether
to determining but recollect; not could he room, the into coming first
could he as soon as form in apology his made he side, safe the on be
chair. a taking after thing, any say

at me, with speak to wished you "that he, said me," told Jennings "Mrs.
on intruded have not should certainly I so--or her understood I least
been have should I time, same the at though manner; a such in you
sister; your and you seeing without London leave to sorry extremely
that probable not is time--it some be likely most will it as especially
Oxford to go I again. you meeting of pleasure the have soon should I
tomorrow."

herself, recovering Elinor, said however," gone, have not would "You
as soon as dreaded much so she what over get to determined and
been not had we if even wishes, good our receiving "without possible,
she what in right quite was Jennings Mrs. person. in them give to able
on was I which of, you inform to consequence of something have I said.
most a with charged am I paper. by communicating of point the
spoke.) she as usual than faster rather (breathing office agreeable
to me desired has ago, minutes ten only here was who Brandon, Colonel
pleasure great has he orders, take to mean you understanding that say,
wishes only and vacant, just now Delaford of living the you offering in
so having on you congratulate to me Allow valuable. more were it
the that wish his in join to and friend, a well-judging and respectable
considerable, more much a-year--were hundred two about is living--it
a than more be might to--as you enable better might as such and
establish might as short, in yourself--such, to accommodation temporary
happiness." of views your all

expected be cannot it himself, it say not could he as felt, Edward What
astonishment the all LOOKED He him. for say should else one any that
of fail not could information unthought-of such unexpected, such which
words, two these only said he but exciting;

Brandon!" "Colonel

the of some as resolution, more gathering Elinor, continued "Yes,"
concern his of testimony a as it means Brandon "Colonel over, was worst
the which in situation cruel the passed--for lately has what for
I which concern you--a placed has family your of conduct unjustifiable
and share; must friends, your all and myself, Marianne, sure am
and character, general your for esteem high his of proof a as likewise
occasion." present the on behaviour your of approbation particular his

possible?" be it living!--Can a ME give Brandon "Colonel

find to astonished you made has relations own your of unkindness "The
where." any friendship

YOU; in it find to "not consciousness, sudden with he, replied "No,"
it owe I goodness, your to you, to that ignorant be cannot I for
know, well you as could--but, I if it express would it--I feel all.--I
orator." no am I

entirely, it owe you that you assure do I mistaken. much very are "You
Brandon's Colonel and merit, own your to entirely, almost least at
know, even not did I it. in hand no had have I it. of discernment
it had nor vacant; was living the that design, his understood I till
gift. his in living a such had have might he that me to occurred ever
he know I perhaps--indeed may, he family, my of mine, of friend a As
owe you word, my upon but, it; bestowing in pleasure greater still HAS,
solicitation." my to nothing

but action, the in share small some acknowledge to her obliged Truth
of benefactress the as appear to unwilling so time same the at was she
probably which hesitation; with it acknowledged she that Edward,
recently had which mind his in suspicion that fix to contributed
had Elinor after thought, in deep sat he time short a For it. entered
said, he effort, an rather were it if as and last, speak;--at to ceased

have I respectability. and worth great of man a seems Brandon "Colonel
him esteems know I brother your and such, as of spoken him heard always
perfectly manners his in and man, sensible a undoubtedly is He highly.
gentleman." the

farther on him, find will you that believe "I Elinor, replied "Indeed,"
be will you as and be, to him heard have you that all acquaintance,
almost is parsonage the understand I (for neighbours near very such
he that important particularly is it mansion-house,) the to close
this." all be SHOULD

her gave head, her away turned had she when but answer; no made Edward
he that say, to seemed as uncheerful, so earnest, so serious, so look a
the and parsonage the between distance the wish hereafter might
greater. much mansion-house

soon he, said Street," James St. in lodges think, I Brandon, "Colonel
chair. his from rising afterwards,

house. the of number the him told Elinor

not will you which thanks those him give to then, away hurry must "I
very--an a me made has he that him assure to YOU; give to me allow
man." happy exceedingly

very a with parted, they and him; detain to offer not did Elinor
his for wishes good unceasing her of side HER on assurance earnest
HIS, on him; befall might that situation of change every in happiness
of power the than will, good same the return to attempt an rather with
it. expressing

him shut door the as herself, to Elinor said again," him see I "When
Lucy." of husband the him see shall "I out,

the reconsider to down sat she anticipation, pleasing this with And
of feelings the all comprehend to endeavour and words the recall past,
discontent. with own her on reflect to course, of and, Edward;

people seeing from returned she though home, came Jennings Mrs. When
a have must she therefore whom of and before, seen never had she whom
important the by occupied more much so was mind her say, to deal great
to reverted she that else, anything by than possession, her in secret
appeared. Elinor as soon as again it

I not Did man. young the up you sent "I cried, she dear," my "Well,
find not did difficulty--You great no had you suppose I right?--And do
proposal?" your accept to unwilling very him

likely." very not was THAT ma'am; "No,

upon depend to all seems it ready?--For be he will soon how and "Well,
that."

I that forms, of kind these of little so know "I Elinor, said "Really,"
preparation the or time, the to as conjecture even hardly can
his complete will months three or two suppose I but necessary;
ordination."

calmly how dear, my "Lord! Jennings; Mrs. cried months!" three or "Two
Lord months! three or two wait Colonel the can and it; of talk you
though patience!--And of out quite ME put would it sure am me!--I bless
think do I Ferrars, Mr. poor by kindness a do to glad very be would one
Sure him. for months three or two wait to while worth not is it
in is that somebody well; as do would that found be might else somebody
already." orders

Why, of?-- thinking be you can "what Elinor, said ma'am," dear "My
Ferrars." Mr. to use of be to is object only Brandon's Colonel

the that me persuade to mean not do you dear!--Sure my you, bless "Lord
Mr. to guineas ten giving of sake the for you marries only Colonel
Ferrars!"

explanation an and this; after continue not could deception The
for amusement considerable gained both which by place, took immediately
Mrs. for either, to happiness of loss material any without moment, the
still and another, for delight of form one exchanged only Jennings
first. the of expectation her forfeiting without

first the after she, said one," small a but is parsonage the aye, "Aye,
MAY likely very "and over, was satisfaction and surprise of ebullition
a for thought, I as apologising, man a hear to but repair; of out be
ground-floor, the on rooms sitting five has knowledge my to that house
to beds!--and fifteen up make could me told housekeeper the think I and
quite seems It cottage!-- Barton in live to used been had that too, you
some do to Colonel the up touch must we dear, my But, ridiculous.
Lucy before them, for comfortable it make and parsonage, the to thing
it." to goes

living's the of idea any have to seem not does Brandon Colonel "But
marry." to them allow to enough being

a-year thousand two has he because dear; my ninny, a is Colonel "The
word my Take less. on marry can else nobody that thinks he himself,
Delaford at visit a paying be shall I alive, am I if that, it, for
an't Lucy if go shan't I sure am I and Michaelmas; before Parsonage
there."

not their of probability the to as opinion, her of quite was Elinor
more. thing any for waiting



41 CHAPTER


with proceeded Brandon, Colonel to thanks his carried having Edward,
he time the by it of excess the was such and Lucy; to happiness his
Mrs. assure to able was she that Buildings, Bartlett's reached
her with day next the again her on called who Jennings,
in before spirits such in him seen never had she that congratulations,
life. her

and certain; very least at were spirits, own her and happiness, own Her
their of expectation her in heartily most Jennings Mrs. joined she
Michaelmas. before Parsonage Delaford in together comfortably all being
Elinor give to backwardness any from time, same the at she, was far So
her of spoke she that her, give WOULD Edward which credit that
to ready was warmth, grateful most the with both them for friendship
exertion no that declared openly and her, to obligation their all own
would future, or present either part, Dashwood's Miss on good their for
in thing any doing of capable her believed she for her, surprise ever
was she Brandon, Colonel for As valued. really she those for world the
truly moreover was but saint, a as him worship to ready only not
concerns; worldly all in one as treated be should he that anxious
scarcely and utmost; the to raised be should tithes his that anxious
could, possibly she as far as Delaford, at herself, avail to resolved
poultry. his and cows, his carriage, his servants, his of

Berkeley in called had Dashwood John since week a above now was It
his of them by taken been had notice no time that since as and Street,
feel to began Elinor enquiry, verbal one beyond indisposition, wife's
however, obligation, an was visit.--This a her pay to necessary it
the not had which but inclination, own her opposed only not which
not Marianne, companions. her from encouragement any of assistance
to urgent very was herself, go to refusing absolutely with contented
her though Jennings, Mrs. and all; at going sister's her prevent
Mrs. disliked much very so service, Elinor's at always was carriage
after looked she how see to curiosity her even not that Dashwood, John
taking by her affront to desire strong her nor discovery, late the
company her in be to unwillingness her overcome could part, Edward's
a pay to herself by out set Elinor that was, consequence The again.
run to and inclination, less have really could one no which for visit,
had others the of neither whom woman, a with tete-a-tete a of risk the
dislike. to reason much so

the from turn could carriage the before but denied; was Dashwood Mrs.
pleasure great expressed He out. came accidentally husband her house,
in call to going just been had he that her told Elinor, meeting in
see to glad very be would Fanny that her assuring and, Street, Berkeley
in. come to her invited her,

there. was drawing-room.--Nobody the to in stairs up walked They

her to go will he:--"I said suppose," I room, own her in is "Fanny
the in objection least the have not will she sure am I for presently,
there especially NOW indeed. it, from far Very YOU.-- seeing to world
great always were Marianne and you however, be--but cannot
come?"-- Marianne not would favourites.--Why

her. for could she excuse what made Elinor

deal good a have I "for replied, he alone," you see to sorry not am "I
true?--has be it Brandon's--can Colonel of living This you. to say to
was and chance, by yesterday it heard Edward?--I to it given really he
it." about farther enquire to purpose on you to coming

of living the given has Brandon true.--Colonel perfectly is "It
Edward." to Delaford

relationship!--no astonishing!--no very is this "Really!--Well,
a such fetch livings that now them!--and between connection
this?" of value the was price!--what

year." a hundred two "About

that of living a to presentation next the for well--and "Very
and sickly, and old been have to incumbent late the value--supposing
say--fourteen dare I got have might soon--he it vacate to likely
before matter that settled have to not he came how And pounds. hundred
a but it, sell to late too be would it indeed death?--NOW person's this
improvident so be should he wonder sense!--I Brandon's Colonel of man
convinced am I concern!--Well, natural, such common, such of point a in
human every almost in inconsistency of deal vast a is there that
may case the recollection--that however--on suppose, I character.
to person the till living the hold to only is Edward THIS. be probably
to enough old is presentation, the sold really has Colonel the whom
it." upon depend fact, the is that aye, it.--Aye, take

that relating by and positively; very however, it, contradicted Elinor
Colonel from offer the conveying in employed been herself had she
which on terms the understand must therefore, and, Edward, to Brandon
authority. her to submit to him obliged given, was it

she what hearing after cried, astonishing!"--he truly is "It
motive?" Colonel's the be could said--"what

Ferrars." Mr. to use of be one--to simple very "A

lucky very a is Edward be, may Brandon Colonel whatever well; "Well,
I though for however, Fanny, to matter the mention not will man.--You
like not will well,--she vastly it bears she and her, to it broke have
of." talked much it hear to

she that observing, from refrain to here difficulty some had Elinor
wealth of acquisition an composure, with borne have might Fanny thought
possibly be could child her nor she neither which by brother, her to
impoverished.

so becoming tone the to voice his lowering he, added Ferrars," "Mrs.
believe I and present, at it about nothing "knows subject, a important
may as long as her from concealed entirely it keep to best be will it
all." it of hear must she fear I place, takes marriage the When be.--

be to not is it used?--Though be precaution such should why "But
in satisfaction smallest the have can Ferrars Mrs. that supposed
be must THAT upon,--for live to enough money has son her that knowing
she is behaviour, late her upon why, yet question; the of out quite
off him cast she son, her with done has all?--She at feel to supposed
cast influence, any had she whom over those all made has and ever, for
imagined be cannot she so, doing after Surely, likewise. off him
cannot account--she his on joy of or sorrow of impression any to liable
weak so be not would She him.-- befalls that thing any in interested be
of anxiety the retain yet and child, a of comfort the away throw to as
parent!" a

is it but good, very is reasoning "your John, said Elinor," "Ah!
match unhappy Edward's When nature. human of ignorance on founded
had she if as much as feel will mother his it upon depend place, takes
may that circumstance every therefore and, him; discarded never
as much as her from concealed be must event, dreadful that accelerate
son." her is Edward that forget never can Ferrars Mrs. possible.

memory her escaped have nearly must it think should I me; surprise "You
time." THIS by

most the of one is Ferrars Mrs. exceedingly. her wrong "You
world." the in mothers affectionate

silent. was Elinor

ROBERT'S "of pause, short a after Dashwood, Mr. NOW,"--said think "We
Morton." Miss marrying

brother's her of importance decisive and grave the at smiling Elinor,
replied, calmly tone,

affair." the in choice no has suppose, I lady, "The

mean?" you do "Choice!--how

be must it speaking, of manner your from suppose, I that mean only "I
Robert." or Edward marry she whether Morton Miss to same the

all to now will Robert for difference; no be can there "Certainly,
any to as son;--and eldest the as considered be purposes and intents
that know not do I men: young agreeable very both are they else, thing
other." the to superior is one

silent.--His time short a for also was John and more, no said Elinor
thus. ended reflections

in speaking and hand, her taking kindly sister," dear my thing, ONE "Of
know I because it, do WILL I you;--and assure may whisper,--"I awful an
it have I think--indeed to reason good have I you. gratify must it
it otherwise for it, repeat not should I or authority, best the from
the from it have I it--but about thing any say to wrong very be would
say Ferrars Mrs. heard precisely ever I that authority--not best very
in her--That from it have I and DID, daughter her herself--but it
certain certain--a a against be might there objections whatever short,
to preferable far been have would me--it understand connection--you
I does. THIS that vexation the half her given have not would it her,
that in it considered Ferrars Mrs. that hear to pleased exceedingly was
would 'It all. us to know you circumstance gratifying very light--a
and two, the of evil least 'the said, she comparison,' beyond been have
all however, But worse.' nothing for NOW compound to glad be would she
or of thought be to question--not the of out quite is that
that be--all could never know--it you attachment any to mentioned--as
I because this, of you tell just would I thought I But by. gone is
to reason any have you that Not you. please must it much how knew
exceedingly doing your of doubt no is There Elinor. dear my regret,
Has considered. things all perhaps, better, or well, as well--quite
lately?" you with been Brandon Colonel

her raise and vanity, her gratify to not if enough, heard had Elinor
was she mind;--and her fill and nerves her agitate to self-importance,
reply in much saying of necessity the from spared be to glad therefore
her from more thing any hearing of danger the from and herself,
moments' few a After Ferrars. Robert Mr. of entrance the by brother,
her of uninformed yet was Fanny that recollecting Dashwood, John chat,
was Elinor and her; of quest in room the quitted there, being sister's
gay the by who, Robert, with acquaintance her improve to left
so enjoying while manner his of self-complacency happy the unconcern,
prejudice the to liberality, and love mother's his of division a unfair
of course dissipated own his by only earned brother, banished his of
most her confirming was integrity, brother's that and life,
heart. and head his of opinion unfavourable

to began he before themselves, by minutes two been scarcely had They
very was and living, the of heard had too, he, for Edward; of speak
as it, of particulars the repeated Elinor subject. the on inquisitive
very though Robert, on effect their and John; to them given had she
laughed He HIM. on been had it than striking less not was different,
living and clergyman, a being Edward's of idea The immoderately. most
to when measure;--and beyond him diverted parsonage-house, small a in
a in prayers reading Edward of imagery fanciful the added was that
Smith John between marriage of banns the publishing and surplice, white
ridiculous. more nothing conceive could he Brown, Mary and

the gravity, immovable and silence in waited she while Elinor,
fixed being from eyes her restrain not could folly, such of conclusion
a was It excited. it contempt the all spoke that look a with him on
feelings, own her relieved it for bestowed, well very however, look,
wisdom, to wit from recalled was He him. to intelligence no gave and
sensibility. own his by but hers, of reproof any by not

the from recovering last, at he, said joke," a as it treat may "We
gaiety genuine the out lengthened considerably had which laugh affected
Poor business. serious most a is it soul, my upon moment--"but, the of
I it--for for sorry extremely am I ever. for ruined is he Edward!
fellow a well-meaning as creature; good-hearted very a be to him know
Miss him, of judge not must You world. the in any as perhaps,
are manners Edward!--His acquaintance.--Poor slight YOUR from Dashwood,
you born, all not are we nature.--But in happiest the not certainly
see fellow!--to Poor address.-- same powers,--the same the with know,
enough!--but pitiable was it sure be strangers!--to of circle a in him
kingdom; the in any as heart a good as has he believe I soul, my upon
as life, my in shocked so was never I you to protest and declare I and
the was mother My it.-- believe not could I forth. burst all it when
act to on called myself feeling I, and it; of me told who person first
know not do I madam, dear 'My her, to said immediately resolution, with
must I myself, for as but occasion, the on do to intend may you what
him see will never I woman, young this marry does Edward if that say,
uncommonly most was I immediately.-- said I what was That again.'
himself for done has Edward!--he indeed!--Poor shocked,
as society!--but, decent all from ever for out himself completely--shut
it; at surprised least the in not am I mother, my to said directly I
poor My expected. be to always was it education, of style his from
frantic." half was mother

lady?" the seen ever you "Have

in drop to happened I house, this in staying was she while once, "Yes;
awkward merest The her. of enough quite saw I and minutes; ten for
beauty.-- without almost and elegance, or style, without girl, country
suppose should I girl of kind the Just perfectly. her remember I
my as soon as immediately, offered I Edward. poor captivate to likely
dissuade and myself, him to talk to me, to affair the related mother
thing, any do to found, I THEN, late too was it but match; the from him
it of nothing knew and first, at way the in not was I unluckily, for
you me, for not was it when place, taken had breach the after till
hours few a it of informed been I had But interfere. to know,
been have might something probable--that most is it think earlier--I
very a in Edward to it represented have should certainly I on. hit
you what 'consider said, have should I fellow,' dear 'My light. strong
a such and connection, disgraceful most a making are You doing. are
help cannot I disapproving.' in unanimous are family your as one
is it now But found. been have might means that short, in thinking,
certain; is know;--that you starved, be must He late. too all
starved." absolutely

entrance the when composure, great with point this settled just had He
never SHE though But subject. the to end an put Dashwood John Mrs. of
on influence its see could Elinor family, own her of out it of spoke
she which with countenance of confusion like something the in mind, her
She herself. to behaviour her in cordiality at attempt an and entered,
her and Elinor that find to concerned be to as far so proceeded even
of more see to hoped had she as town, leave to soon so were sister
the into her attended who husband, her which in exertion them;--an
every distinguish to seemed accents, her over enamoured hung and room,
graceful. and affectionate most was that thing



42 CHAPTER


her received Elinor which in Street, Harley in call short other One
Barton towards far so travelling their on congratulations brother's
to them follow to being Brandon's Colonel on and expense, any without
and brother the of intercourse the completed two, or day a in Cleveland
Norland to come to Fanny, from invitation faint a town;--and in sisters
was things all of which way, their in be to happen should it whenever
public, less though warm, more a with occur, to unlikely most the
should he which with promptitude the of Elinor, to John from assurance,
the in meeting any foretold that all was Delaford, at her see to come
country.

send to determined seemed friends her all that observe to her amused It
least now would she others, all of which, in place, Delaford;--a to her
as considered it was only not for reside; to wish or visit, to chuse
when Lucy, even but Jennings, Mrs. and brother her by home future her
there. her visit to invitation pressing a her gave parted, they

parties two the day, the in early tolerably and April, in early Very
respective their from out set Street Berkeley and Square Hanover from
of convenience the For road. the on appointment, by meet, to homes,
their on days two than more be to were they child, her and Charlotte
Colonel with expeditiously more travelling Palmer, Mr. and journey,
arrival. their after soon Cleveland at them join to was Brandon,

as eager and London, in comfort of hours her been had as few Marianne,
bid point, the to came it when not, could it, quit to been long had she
those enjoyed time last the for had she which in house the to adieu
extinguished now were which Willoughby, in confidence, that and hopes,
which in place the leave she could Nor pain. great without ever, for
which in schemes, new and engagements, new in busy remained, Willoughby
tears. many shedding without share, no have could SHE

positive. more was removal, of moment the at satisfaction, Elinor's
left she on, fix to thoughts lingering her for object such no had She
be to regret moment's a her give would it whom from behind, creature no
the from herself free be to pleased was she ever, for divided
her bringing for grateful was she friendship, Lucy's of persecution
looked she and marriage, his since Willoughby by unseen away sister
might Barton at tranquility of months few a what to hope with forward
own. her confirming and mind, of peace Marianne's restoring towards do

into them brought day second The performed. safely was journey Their
was such as for Somerset, of county prohibited, the or cherished, the
of forenoon the in and imagination; Marianne's in turns by on dwelt it
Cleveland. to up drove they third the

sloping a on situated house, modern-built spacious, a was Cleveland
tolerably were pleasure-grounds the but park, no had It lawn.
importance, of degree same the of place other every like and extensive;
smooth of road a walk, wood closer and shrubbery, open its had it
was lawn the front, the to led plantation, a round winding gravel
of guardianship the under was itself house the timber, with over dotted
them of screen thick a and acacia, the and mountain-ash, the fir, the
the out shut poplars, Lombardy tall with interspersed altogether,
offices.

the from emotion with swelling heart a with house the entered Marianne
thirty not and Barton, from miles eighty only being of consciousness
its within minutes five been had she before and Magna; Combe from
child her show to Charlotte helping busily were others the while walls,
the through away stealing again, it quitted she housekeeper, the to
a gain to beauty, in be to beginning just now shrubberies, winding
wandering eye, her temple, Grecian its from where, eminence; distant
on rest fondly could south-east, the to country of tract wide a over
their from that fancy and horizon, the in hills of ridge farthest the
seen. be might Magna Combe summits

tears in rejoiced she misery, invaluable precious, of moments such In
circuit different a by returned she as and Cleveland; at be to agony of
of liberty, country of privilege happy the all feeling house, the to
she solitude, luxurious and free in place to place from wandering
remained she while day every of hour every almost spend to resolved
rambles. solitary such of indulgence the in Palmers, the with

house, the quitted they as others the join to time in just returned She
of rest the and premises; immediate more its through excursion an on
kitchen the round lounging in away, whiled easily was morning the
the to listening and walls, its upon bloom the examining garden,
the through dawdling in blights, upon lamentations gardener's
exposed, unwarily plants, favourite her of loss the where green-house,
of laughter the raised frost, lingering the by nipped and
the in where, poultry-yard, her visiting in Charlotte,--and
or nests, their forsaking hens by dairy-maid, her of hopes disappointed
young promising a of decrease rapid the in or fox, a by stolen being
merriment. of sources fresh found she brood,

employment of plan her in Marianne, and dry, and fine was morning The
stay their during weather of change any for calculated not had abroad,
herself find she did therefore, surprise great With Cleveland. at
had She dinner. after again out going from rain settled a by prevented
over all perhaps and temple, Grecian the to walk twilight a on depended
deterred have not would damp or cold merely evening an and grounds, the
dry fancy not could SHE even rain settled and heavy a but it; from her
walking. for weather pleasant or

Palmer Mrs. away. quietly passed hours the and small, was party Their
the of talked they carpet-work; her Jennings Mrs. and child, her had
engagements, Middleton's Lady arranged behind, left had they friends
farther get would Brandon Colonel and Palmer Mr. whether wondered and
it, in concerned little however Elinor, night. that Reading than
finding of knack the had who Marianne, and discourse; their in joined
by avoided be might it however library, the to house every in way her
book. a herself procured soon general, in family the

friendly and constant that side Palmer's Mrs. on wanting was Nothing
The welcome. themselves feel them make to do, could humour good
of want that for atoned than more manner her of heartiness and openness
forms the in deficient often her made which elegance and recollection
was face, a pretty so by recommended kindness, her politeness; of
was it because disgusting, not was evident though folly, her engaging;
laugh. her but thing every forgiven have could Elinor and conceited; not

affording dinner, late very a to day next the arrived gentlemen two The
to variety welcome very a and party, the of enlargement pleasant a
had rain continued same the of morning long a which conversation, their
low. very reduced

so seen had little that in and Palmer, Mr. of little so seen had Elinor
knew she that herself, and sister her to address his in variety much
him, found She family. own his in him find to expect to what not
visitors, his all to behaviour his in gentleman the perfectly however,
him found she mother; her and wife his to rude occasionally only and
from prevented only and companion, pleasant a being of capable very
much as himself fancy to aptitude an great too by always, so being
Mrs. to be to himself feel must he as general, in people to superior
they habits, and character his of rest the For Charlotte. and Jennings
all at traits no with perceive, could Elinor as far as marked, were
eating, his in nice was He life. of time and sex his in unusual
slight to affecting though child, his of fond hours; his in uncertain
been have to ought which billiards, at mornings the away idled and it;
much whole, the upon however, him, liked She business. to devoted
she that sorry not was heart her in and expected, had she than better
of observation the by driven be to sorry more;--not no him like could
with rest to conceit, his and selfishness, his Epicurism, his
simple temper, generous Edward's of remembrance the on complacency
feelings. diffident and taste,

received now she concerns, his of some of least at or Edward, Of
Dorsetshire into been had who Brandon, Colonel from intelligence
of friend disinterested the as once at her treating who, and lately;
a her to talked himself, of confidante kind the and Ferrars, Mr.
deficiencies, its described Delaford, at parsonage the of deal great
them.--His removing towards himself do to meant he what her told and
his particular, other every in as well as this, in her to behaviour
his days, ten only of absence an after her meeting in pleasure open
opinion, her for deference his and her, with converse to readiness
attachment, his of persuasion Jennings's Mrs. justify well very might
the from as still, Elinor not had perhaps, enough, been have would and
it suspect her make to favourite, real his Marianne believed first,
her entered ever scarcely had notion a such was, it as But herself.
help not could she and suggestion; Jennings's Mrs. by except head,
his watched two;--she the of observer nicest the herself believing
his while behaviour;--and his of only thought Jennings Mrs. while eyes,
and head her in feeling, Marianne's on solicitude anxious of looks
words, by unexpressed because cold, heavy a of beginning the throat,
in discover could observation;--SHE lady's latter the escaped entirely
lover. a of alarm needless and feelings, quick the them

her of evenings fourth and third the on walks twilight delightful Two
all but shrubbery, the of gravel dry the on merely not there, being
them, of parts distant most the in especially and grounds, the over
the where rest, the in than wildness of more something was there where
wettest, and longest the was grass the and oldest, the were trees
wet her in sitting of imprudence greater still the by had--assisted
a for though as, violent so cold a Marianne stockings--given and shoes
increasing by itself force would denied, or with trifled two or day
herself. of notice the and body, every of concern the on ailments
all were usual, as and quarters, all from in poured Prescriptions
a and limbs, her in pain a with feverish, and heavy Though declined.
entirely; her cure to was rest night's good a throat, sore a and cough,
went she when her, on prevailed Elinor that difficulty with was it and
remedies. the of simplest the of two or one try to bed, to



43 CHAPTER


inquiry every to time; usual her at morning next the up got Marianne
engaging by so, herself prove to tried and better, was she that replied
shivering sitting in spent day a But employments. accustomary her in
or read, to unable was she which hand, her in book a with fire the over
of favour in much speak not did sofa, a on languid, and weary lying, in
more and more bed, to early went she last, at when, and amendment; her
sister's her at astonished only was Brandon Colonel indisposed,
against day, whole the her nursing and attending though who, composure,
night, at her on medicines proper forcing and inclination, Marianne's
and sleep, of efficacy and certainty the to Marianne, like trusted,
alarm. real no felt

the disappointed however, night, feverish and restless very A
rising, in persisting after Marianne, when and both; of expectation
her to voluntarily returned and up, sit to unable herself confessed
sending of advice, Jennings's Mrs. adopt to ready very was Elinor bed,
apothecary. Palmers' the for

to Dashwood Miss encouraging though and patient, his examined came, He
by yet, health, to sister her restore would days few very a that expect
the allowing and tendency, putrid a have to disorder her pronouncing
Palmer, Mrs. to alarm instant gave lips, his pass to "infection" word
the from inclined been had who Jennings, Mrs. account. baby's her on
now Elinor, than serious more complaint Marianne's think to first
Charlotte's confirming and report, Harris's Mr. on grave very looked
with removal immediate her of necessity the urged caution, and fears
as apprehensions their treating though Palmer, Mr. and infant; her
be to great too wife his of importunity and anxiety the found idle,
hour an within and on; fixed was therefore, departure, Her withstood.
his and boy little her with off, set she arrival, Harris's Mr. after
a lived who Palmer's, Mr. of relation near a of house the for nurse,
at promised, husband her whither Bath; of side other the on miles few
was she whither and two; or day a in her join to entreaty, earnest her
Jennings, Mrs. her. accompany to mother her with urgent equally almost
her, love really Elinor made which heart of kindness a with however,
as long as Cleveland from stirring not of resolution her declared
care, attentive own her by endeavouring, of and ill, remained Marianne
and from; her taken had she mother the of place the her to supply to
helpmate, active and willing most a occasion every on her found Elinor
better her by often and fatigues, her all in share to desirous
use. material of nursing, in experience

and malady, her of nature the from low and languid Marianne, Poor
tomorrow that hope longer no could ill, universally herself feeling
have would tomorrow what of idea the and recovered; her find would
for severe; ailment every made illness, unlucky this for but produced,
attended and, home; journey their begun have to were they day that on
their taken have to were Jennings, Mrs. of servant a by way whole the
was said she little The forenoon. following the on surprise by mother
to tried Elinor though delay; inevitable this of lamentation in all
believed really THEN she as believe, her make and spirits, her raise
one. short very a be would it that herself,

the of state the in alteration no or little produced day next The
no was there that except and, better, not was certainly she patient;
reduced; farther now was party Their worse. appear not did amendment,
humanity real from well as go to unwilling very though Palmer, Mr. for
away frightened be to appearing of dislike a from as good-nature, and
his perform to Brandon Colonel by last at persuaded was wife, his by
Colonel go, to preparing was he while and her; following of promise
going of talk to began exertion, greater much a with himself, Brandon
most interposed Jennings Mrs. of kindness the however, likewise.--Here,
much so in was love his while away Colonel the send to for acceptably;
she both, them deprive to be would account, sister's her on uneasiness
his that once at him telling therefore and comfort; every of thought,
to him want should she that herself, to necessary was Cleveland at stay
her with above was Dashwood Miss while evening, an of piquet at play
was who he, that remain, to strongly so him urged she &c. sister,
not could compliance, a by heart own his of wish first the gratifying
was entreaty Jennings's Mrs. as especially demur; to affect even long
himself, to relief a feel to seemed who Palmer, Mr. by seconded warmly
Miss advise or assist to able well so person a him behind leaving in
emergence. any in Dashwood

arrangements. these all of ignorance in kept course, of was, Marianne
of owners the sending of means the been had she that not knew She
It arrival. their of time the from days seven about in away, Cleveland
it as and Palmer; Mrs. of nothing saw she that surprise no her gave
name. her mentioned never she concern, no likewise her gave

her and departure, Palmer's Mr. of time the from away passed days Two
who Harris, Mr. same. the variation, little with continued, situation
and recovery, speedy a of boldly talked still day, every her attended
others the of expectation the but sanguine; equally was Dashwood Miss
early very determined had Jennings Mrs. cheerful. so means no by was
Colonel and it, over get never would Marianne that seizure the in
Jennings's Mrs. to listening in use of chiefly was who Brandon,
He influence. their resist to mind of state a in not was forebodings,
of judgment different the which fears, of out himself reason to tried
day each of hours many the but absurd; render to seemed apothecary the
the for favourable too but were alone, entirely left was he which in
his from expel not could he and idea, melancholy every of admission
more. no Marianne see should he that persuasion the mind

of anticipations gloomy the however, day third the of morning the On
declared he arrived, Harris Mr. when for away; done almost were both
every and stronger, much was pulse Her better. materially patient his
confirmed Elinor, visit. preceding the on than favourable more symptom
her in that rejoicing cheerfulness; all was hope, pleasant every in
her than rather judgment own her pursued had she mother, her to letters
them delayed which indisposition the of light very making in friend's,
able be would Marianne when time the on fixing almost and Cleveland; at
travel. to

the Towards began.-- it as auspiciously so close not did day the But
and restless, heavy, more growing again, ill became Marianne evening
was sanguine, still however, sister, Her before. than uncomfortable
of fatigue the than more nothing to change the attribute to willing
the administering carefully and made; bed her have to up sat having
a into last at sink satisfaction, with her, saw prescribed, cordials
Her effects. beneficial most the expected she which from slumber,
a lasted it, see to wished Elinor as quiet so not though sleep,
she herself, it of result the observe to anxious and time; considerable
Jennings, Mrs. it. of whole the during her with sit to resolved
to early unusually went patient, the in change any of nothing knowing
recreating was nurses, principal the of one was who maid, her bed;
with alone remained Elinor and room, housekeeper's the in herself
Marianne.

her and disturbed; more and more became latter the of repose The
of change continual her attention unremitting with watched, who sister,
complaint of sounds inarticulate but frequent the heard and posture,
painful so from her rouse to wishing almost was lips, her passed which
in noise accidental some by awakened suddenly Marianne, when slumber, a
out,-- cried wildness, feverish with and, up, hastily started house, the

coming?--" mama "Is

assisting and terror, her concealing other, the cried yet," "Not
is it before hope, I here, be will she "but again, down lie to Marianne
Barton." to hence from know, you way, great a is It long.

same the in Marianne, cried London," by round go not must she "But
London." by goes she if her, see never shall "I manner. hurried

while and, herself, quite not was she that alarm with perceived Elinor
and lower was It pulse. her felt eagerly her, soothe to attempting
her mama, of wildly talking still Marianne, and ever! than quicker
instantly sending on her determine to as rapidly, so increased alarm
mother. her for Barton to messenger a despatching and Harris, Mr. for
the effecting of means best the on Brandon Colonel with consult To
its of resolution the followed immediately which thought a was latter,
by place her take to maid the up rung had she soon as and performance;
he knew she where drawing-room, the to down hastened she sister, her
present. the than hour later much a at found be to generally was

were difficulties her and fears Her hesitation. for time no was It
to confidence no courage, no had he fears, Her him. before immediately
despondence;--but silent in them to listened of:--he removal the attempt
that readiness a with for obviated, instantly were difficulties her
mind, his in pre-arranged service the and occasion, the speak to seemed
Dashwood. Mrs. fetch should who messenger the as himself offered he
him thanked She overcome. easily not was that resistance no made Elinor
his off hurry to went he while and gratitude, fervent though brief, with
post-horses for order an and Harris, Mr. to message a with servant
mother. her to lines few a wrote she directly,

such Brandon--or Colonel as moment that at friend a such of comfort The
companion felt!--a it was gratefully mother,--how her for companion a
whose and relieve, must attendance whose guide, would judgment whose
summons a such of shock the as far her!--as soothe might friendship
assistance, his manners, his presence, his her, to lessened be COULD
it. lessen would

a of firmness the all with acted feel, might he whatever meanwhile, HE,
utmost the with arrangement necessary every made mind, collected
might she which in time the exactness with calculated and despatch,
The kind. any of delay in lost was moment a Not return. his for look
Brandon Colonel and expected, were they before even arrived, horses
spoken words few a and solemnity, of look a with hand her pressing only
about then was It carriage. the into hurried ear, her reach to low too
for wait to apartment sister's her to returned she and o'clock, twelve
the of rest the her by watch to and apothecary, the of arrival the
after Hour both. to suffering equal almost of night a was It night.
and side, Marianne's on delirium and pain sleepless in away passed hour
Her appeared. Harris Mr. before Elinor's, on anxiety cruel most the in
former her all for excess their by paid raised, once apprehensions
allow not would she for her, with up sat who servant the and security;
what of hints by more, her tortured only called, be to Jennings Mrs.
thought. always had mistress her

her on incoherently fixed intervals, at still, were ideas Marianne's
the to pang a gave it name, her mentioned she whenever and mother,
with trifled having for herself reproaching who, Elinor, poor of heart
relief, immediate some for wretched and illness, of days many so
had thing every that vain, in be soon might relief all that fancied
mother suffering her herself to pictured and long, too delayed been
rational. her see to or child, darling this see to late too arriving

could HE if or Harris, Mr. for again sending of point the on was She
after till not former--but the when advice, other some for come, not
amends little some made however, opinion, His o'clock--arrived. five
and unexpected very a acknowledging though for delay, his for
to danger the allow not would he patient, his in alteration unpleasant
treatment of mode fresh a which relief the of talked and material, be
was degree, lesser a in which, confidence a with procure, must
of course the in again call to promised He Elinor. to communicated
anxious her and patient the both left and hours, four or three
them. found had he than composed more attendant

to called being not for reproaches many with and concern, strong With
passed. had what of morning the in hear Jennings Mrs. did aid, their
no her left restored, reason greater with now apprehensions, former Her
her Elinor, to comfort speak to trying though and event; the of doubt
the offer to her allow not would danger sister's her of conviction
the decay, rapid The grieved. really was heart Her hope. of comfort
struck have must Marianne, as lovely so young, so girl a of death early
compassion Jennings's Mrs. On concern. with person interested less a
was companion, her months three for been had She claims. other had she
injured, greatly been have to known was she and care, her under still
a particularly too, sister her of distress The unhappy. long and
Jennings Mrs. when mother, their for as her;--and before was favourite,
to was Charlotte what HER to be probably might Marianne that considered
sincere. very was sufferings HER in sympathy her herself,

be to came he visit;--but second his in punctual was Harris Mr.
His produce. would last the what of hopes his in disappointed
more only Marianne and unabated; was fever failed;--the had medicines
catching Elinor, stupor. heavy a in herself--remained more quiet--not
in call to proposed moment, a in fears his all, than more and all,
something still had he unnecessary: it judged he But advice. further
as was he success whose of application, fresh more some try, to more
encouraging with concluded visit his and last, the as confident
Miss of heart the enter not could but ear, the reached which assurances
she but mother; her of thought she when except calm, was She Dashwood.
noon, till continued she state this in and hopeless; almost was
from wandering thoughts her bed, sister's her from stirring scarcely
spirits her and another, to friend suffering one grief, of image one
who Jennings, Mrs. of conversation the by utmost the to oppressed
the to attack this of danger and severity the attribute to not scrupled
disappointment Marianne's which indisposition previous of weeks many
it and idea, the of reasonableness the all felt Elinor on. brought had
reflections. her to misery fresh gave

of dread caution--a a with began--but she however, noon, About
her to even silent, her kept time some for which disappointment
her in amendment slight a perceive could she hope to fancy, friend--to
and again it examined and watched, waited, pulse;--she sister's
under bury to difficult more agitation an with last, at again;--and
to ventured distress, foregoing her all than calmness, exterior
examination, on forced, though Jennings, Mrs. hopes. her communicate
from friend young her keep to tried revival, temporary a acknowledge to
every over conning Elinor, continuance;--and its of thought a indulging
was it But hope. to not likewise herself told distrust, of injunction
anxious its all feeling and entered; already had Hope late. too
what. for knew hardly watch--she to sister her over bent she flutter,
her. blessed yet symptom favourable the and away, passed hour an Half
all lips, her skin, her breath, Her it. confirm to arose even Others
eyes her fixed Marianne and amendment; of signs with Elinor flattered
now hope and Anxiety gaze. languid, though rational, a with her on
tranquillity of moment no her left and degrees, equal in her oppressed
assurances, his o'clock;--when four at Harris Mr. of arrival the till
his surpassing even sister her in recovery a on felicitations his
joy. of tears and comfort, confidence, her gave expectation,

her declared he and better, materially respect every in was Marianne
the with satisfied perhaps Jennings, Mrs. danger. of out entirely
their in found been had which forebodings her of justification partial
admitted, and judgment, his in trust to herself allowed alarm, late
the cheerfulness, unequivocal with soon and joy, unfeigned with
recovery. entire an of probability

led and kind, different a of was joy Her cheerful. be not could Elinor
health, life, to restored Marianne gaiety. to than rather thing any to
with heart her fill to idea an was mother, doting her to and friends,
fervent in it expand and comfort, exquisite of sensations
words, no joy, of demonstrations outward no to led it gratitude;--but
and silent satisfaction, was breast Elinor's within All smiles. no
strong.

the intermission little with sister, her of side the by continued She
her of inquiry every satisfying fear, every calming afternoon, whole
every almost watching and succour, every supplying spirits, enfeebled
course, of would relapse a of possibility The breath. every and look
she when was--but anxiety what of her remind to occur moments, some in
of symptom every that examination, minute and frequent her on saw,
quiet, a into sink o'clock six at Marianne saw and continued, recovery
every silenced she sleep, comfortable, appearance all to and steady,
doubt.

expected be might Brandon Colonel when on, drawing now was time The
her later much not least at or trusted, she o'clock, ten At back.
must she which in suspense dreadful the from relieved be would mother
scarcely too!--perhaps Colonel, The them. towards travelling be now
which time of progress the was slow pity!--Oh!--how of object an less
ignorance! in them kept yet

joined she asleep, sweetly still Marianne leaving o'clock, seven At
been had she breakfast Of tea. to drawing-room the in Jennings Mrs.
eating from reverse, sudden their by dinner of and fears, her by kept
of feelings such with therefore, refreshment, present the much;--and
Jennings Mrs. welcome. particularly was it, to brought she as content
before rest some take to conclusion, its at her, persuaded have would
but Marianne; by place her take to HER allow and arrival, mother's her
moment that at sleep of capability no fatigue, of sense no had Elinor
an sister her from away kept be to not was she and her, about
stairs up her attending therefore Jennings Mrs. instant. unnecessary
right, continued all that herself satisfy to chamber, sick the into
her to retired and thoughts, her and charge her to again there her left
sleep. and letters write to room own

and house, the round roared wind The stormy. and cold was night The
within, happiness all Elinor, but windows; the against beat rain the
the and blast; every through slept Marianne not. it regarded
present every for store, in reward rich a had travellers--they
inconvenience.

been have would Elinor ten, been it Had eight. struck clock The
the to up driving carriage a heard she moment that at that convinced
the of spite in DID, she that persuasion the was strong so and house;
into moved she that come, already being their of impossibility ALMOST
be to shutter, window a opened and dressing-closet adjoining the
not had ears her that saw instantly She truth. the of satisfied
in immediately were carriage a of lamps flaring The her. deceived
be to it discern could she thought she light uncertain their By view.
poor her of excess the told it while this, and horses; four by drawn
rapidity. unexpected such to explanation some gave alarm, mother's

at as calm, be to difficult so it found Elinor had life her in Never
the as feeling be must mother her what of knowledge The moment. that
her dread--perhaps doubt--her her door--of the at stopt carriage
was it knowledge such tell!--with to had SHE what of despair!--and
speedy; be to was done be to remained that All calm. be to impossible
maid Jennings's Mrs. leave could she till only staying therefore and,
stairs. down hurried she sister, her with

lobby, inner an along passed she as vestibule, the in bustle The
the to rushed She house. the in already were they that her assured
Willoughby. only saw it,--and entered drawing-room,--she



44 CHAPTER


obeyed him, of sight the at horror of look a with back starting Elinor,
room, the quit to instantly turning in heart her of impulse first the
by suspended was action its when lock, the on already was hand her and
than command of rather voice a in saying, and advancing, hastily his
supplication,

to you entreat minutes--I ten hour--for an half for Dashwood, "Miss
stay."

business Your stay. NOT shall "I firmness, with replied she sir," "No,
that you tell to forgot suppose, I servants, The ME. with be cannot
house." the in not was Palmer Mr.

all and Palmer Mr. "that vehemence, with cried he me," told they "Had
the from me turned have not would it devil, the at were relations his
you." only and you, with is business My door.

you if quick--and sir,--be amazement--"well, utmost the me!"--in "With
violent." can--less

both." be will I and down, "Sit

Colonel of possibility The do. to what not knew she hesitated; She
had she But her. across came there, her finding and arriving Brandon's
was honor her than less no curiosity her and him, hear to promised
that concluding therefore, recollection, moment's a After engaged.
best would acquiescence her that and dispatch, required prudence
He down. sat and table, the towards silently walked she it, promote
by said was word a not minute a half for and chair, opposite the took
either.

to time no have impatiently;--"I Elinor, sir,"--said quick, be "Pray
spare."

to not seemed and meditation, deep of attitude an in sitting was He
her. hear

out afterwards--"is moment a abruptness, with he, said sister," "Your
it is praised!--But be God servant. the from it heard I danger. of
true?" really it is true?

greater yet with inquiry the repeated He speak. not would Elinor
eagerness.

not?" she is or danger, of out she is me, tell sake God's "For

is." she hope "We

room. the across walked and up, rose He

here,"--speaking AM I since ago--But hour an half much as known I "Had
it does seat--"what his to returned he as vivacity forced a with
time, last the be will Dashwood--it Miss once, signify?--For
for mood fine a in am together.--I cheerful be us perhaps--let
his overspreading glow deeper honestly"--a me Tell gaiety.--
fool?" a or knave a most me think you cheeks--"do

to began She ever. than astonishment greater with him at looked Elinor
and visit, a such of strangeness liquor;--the in be must he that think
this with and intelligible; otherwise no seemed manners, such of
saying, rose, immediately she impression

not am Combe--I to return to present at you advise I Willoughby, "Mr.
be may business your Whatever longer.-- you with remain to leisure at
to-morrow." explained and recollected better be will it me, with

voice a and smile, expressive an with replied, he you," understand "I
cold my with porter of pint A drunk.-- very am I "yes, calm; perfectly
me." over-set to enough was Marlborough at beef

understand to loss a at more and more Elinor, Marlborough!"--cried "At
at. be would he what

ten only the and o'clock, eight at morning this London left "Yes,--I
a me procured time that since chaise my of out spent have I minutes
Marlborough." at nuncheon

he as eye his of intelligence the and manner, his of steadiness The
might folly unpardonable other whatever that Elinor, convincing spoke,
she intoxication, by there brought not was he Cleveland, to him bring
recollection, moment's a after said,

what after DO--that certainly I and feel, to OUGHT you Willoughby, "Mr.
upon yourself forcing and manner, this in here coming passed--your has
you that it, is excuse.--What particular very a requires notice, my
it?"-- by mean

me hate you make to can, I energy--"if serious with he, mean,"--said "I
of kind some offer to mean I NOW. do you than less degree one
heart whole my open to past; the for apology, of kind some explanation,
a always been have I though that you, convincing by and you, to
like something obtain to rascal, a always been not have I blockhead,
sister." your Ma--from from forgiveness

coming?" your of reason real the this "Is

all brought which warmth a with answer, his is,"--was it soul my "Upon
made herself of spite in and remembrance, her to Willoughby former the
sincere. him think her

DOES--she Marianne already,--for satisfied be may you all, is that "If
you." forgiven LONG has

forgiven has she "Then tone.-- eager same the in cried, she?"--he "Has
again, me forgive shall she But it. done have to ought she before me
me?" to listen you will grounds.--NOW reasonable more on and

assent. her bowed Elinor

and side, her on expectation of pause a after he, said know," not do "I
my for accounted have may YOU own,--"how his on thoughtfulness
have may you motive diabolical what or sister, your to behaviour
is me,--it of better the think hardly will you Perhaps me.-- to imputed
first I When thing. every hear shall you and however, trial the worth
view other no intention, other no had I family, your in intimate became
obliged was I while pleasantly time my pass to than acquaintance the in
before. done ever had I than pleasantly more Devonshire, in remain to
but not could manners interesting and person lovely sister's Your
a of was first, the from almost me to behaviour her and me; please
SHE what and was, it what on reflect I when astonishing, is kind--It
must I first at But insensible! so been have should heart my that was,
happiness, her of Careless it. by elevated was only vanity my confess,
had I which feelings to way giving amusement, own my of only thinking
every by endeavoured, I indulging, of habit the in much too been always
design any without her, to pleasing myself make to power, my in means
affection." her returning of

most the with him on eyes her turning point, this at Dashwood, Miss
saying, by him, stopped contempt, angry

me for or relate, to you for Willoughby, Mr. while, worth hardly is "It
by followed be cannot this as beginning a Such longer. any listen to
the on more thing any hearing by pained be me let not Do thing.-- any
subject."

was fortune "My replied, he it," of whole the hearing you on insist "I
of habit the in always expensive, been always had I and large, never
since year Every myself. than income better of people with associating
and debts; my to added had believe, I before, even or age, of coming my
yet free; me set to was Smith, Mrs. cousin, old my of death the though
for been had it distant, far possibly and uncertain, being event that
a marrying by circumstances my re-establish to intention my time some
not was therefore, sister, your to myself attach To fortune. of woman
selfishness, meanness, a with of;--and thought be to thing a
Miss yours, of even look, contemptuous no indignant, no cruelty--which
manner, this in acting was much--I too reprobate ever can Dashwood,
it.--But returning of thought a without regard, her engage to trying
selfish of state horrid that in even me: for said be may thing one
I because meditated, I injury the of extent the know not did I vanity,
it?--Well known ever I have But love. to was it what know THEN not did
my sacrificed have I could loved, really I had for, doubted; be it may
have I could more, is what avarice?--or, to vanity, to feelings
poverty, comparative a avoid To it. done have I But hers?-- sacrificed
its all of deprived have would society her and affection her which
that thing every lost affluence, to myself raising by have, I horrors,
blessing." a it make could

at yourself "believe softened, little a Elinor, said then," did "You
her?" to attached time one

such withstood have to attractions, such resisted have "To
I it?--Yes, done have could who earth on man a there tenderness!--Is
the and her; of fond sincerely degrees, insensible by myself, found
my felt I when her with spent I what were life my of hours happiest
Even blameless. feelings my and honourable, strictly were intentions
I her, to addresses my paying on determined fully when however, THEN,
moment the day, to day from off, put to improperly most myself allowed
my while engagement an into enter to unwillingness an from it, doing of
here--nor reason not will I embarrassed. greatly so were circumstances
than worse the and absurdity, the on expatiate to YOU for stop I will
already was honour my where faith my engage to scrupling of absurdity,
with providing fool, cunning a was I that proved, has event The bound.
myself making of opportunity possible a for circumspection great
resolution my however, last, At ever. for wretched and contemptible
alone, her engage could I as soon as determined, had I and taken, was
openly and her, paid invariably so had I attentions the justify to
to pains such taken already had I which affection an of her assure
that hours few very the of interim the interim--in the in But display.
her with speaking of opportunity an have could I before pass, to were
ruin to circumstance, unlucky occurred--an circumstance private--a in
took discovery A comfort. my all it with and resolution, my all
or somehow had Smith down.--"Mrs. looked and hesitated he place,"--here
interest whose relation, distant some by imagine I informed, been other
I connection--but a affair, an of favour, her of me deprive to was it
an with her at looking added, he farther," myself explain not need
intimacy--you particular eye--"your enquiring an and colour heightened
ago." long story whole the heard probably have

heart her hardening and likewise, colouring Elinor, returned have," "I
you how And all. it heard have "I him, for compassion any against anew
I business, dreadful that in guilt your of part any away explain will
comprehension." my beyond is confess

account. the received you whom "from Willoughby, cried "Remember,"
her and situation her that acknowledge I one? impartial an be it Could
justify to mean not do I me. by respected been have to ought character
have I that suppose to you leave cannot time same the at but myself,
irreproachable, was she injured was she because urge--that to nothing
of violence the If saint. a be must SHE libertine, a was I because and
mean, not do understanding--I her of weakness the passions, her
better deserved me for affection Her myself. defend to however,
tenderness the recall self-reproach, great with often, I and treatment,
I return. any creating of power the had time, short very a for which,
than more injured have I But been. never had it wish heartily wish--I
say I me--(may for affection whose one, injured have I and herself;
how mind--Oh! whose and hers; than warm less scarcely was it?)
superior!"-- infinitely

say must girl--I unfortunate that towards however, indifference, "Your
well may subject a such of discussion the as me to unpleasant it,
Do her. of neglect cruel your for apology no is indifference be--your
of defect natural any weakness, any by excused yourself think not
yours. on evident so cruelty wanton the in side, her on understanding
in yourself enjoying were you while that known, have must You
was she happy, always gay, always schemes, fresh pursuing Devonshire
indigence." extremest the to reduced

not did "I replied; warmly he it," know NOT did I soul, my upon "But,
sense common and direction; my her give to omitted had I that recollect
out." it find to how her told have might

Smith?" Mrs. said what and sir, "Well,

be may confusion my and once, at offence the with me taxed "She
her notions, her of formality the life, her of purity The guessed.
itself matter The me. against was thing world--every the of ignorance
was She it. soften to endeavour every was vain and deny, not could I
in conduct my of morality the doubt to believe, I disposed, previously
attention, little very the with discontented moreover was and general,
my in her, on bestowed had I that time my of portion little very the
I measure one By breach. total a in ended it short, In visit. present
woman! good morality, her of height the In myself. saved have might
could That Eliza. marry would I if past, the forgive to offered she
house. her and favour her from dismissed formally was I be--and not
morning--was next the go to was affair--I this following night The
The be. should conduct future my what on deliberating in me by spent
Marianne, for affection My soon. too ended it great--but was struggle
insufficient all was me--it to attachment her of conviction thorough my
false those of better the get or poverty, of dread that outweigh to
to inclined naturally was I which riches, of necessity the of ideas
believe to reason had I increased. had society expensive and feel,
I and her, address to chose I if wife, present my of secure myself
remained prudence common in else nothing that think to myself persuaded
leave could I before me, awaited however scene heavy A do. to me for
some day; very that on you with dine to engaged was Devonshire;--I
But engagement. this breaking my for necessary therefore was apology
a was person, in it deliver or apology, this write should I whether
and dreadful, be would felt, I Marianne, see To debate. long of point
my to keep and again, her see could I whether doubted even I
magnanimity, own my undervalued I however, point, that In resolution.
miserable, her saw and her, saw I went, I for declared; event the as
again." her see to never hoping her left miserable--and her left and

note "a reproachfully; Elinor, said Willoughby?" Mr. call, you did "Why
call?" to necessary it was Why purpose.-- every answered have would

the leave to bear not could I pride. own my to necessary was "It
the of rest the or you, lead might that manner a in country
between passed really had what of part any suspect to neighbourhood,
the at calling on therefore resolved I myself--and and Smith Mrs.
however, sister, dear your of sight The Honiton. to way my in cottage,
alone. her found I matter, the heighten to and, dreadful; really was
evening the only her left had I where. know not do I gone all were You
A right! doing on self my within resolved firmly so fully, so before,
how remember I and ever; for me to her engaged have to were hours few
to cottage the from walked I as spirits, my were gay how happy,
in But body! every with delighted myself, with satisfied Allenham,
sense a with her approached I friendship, of interview last our this,
Her dissembling. of power the me from took almost that guilt of
was I that her told I when regret, deep her disappointment, her sorrow,
forget shall never immediately--I so Devonshire leave to obliged
me!--Oh, in confidence such reliance, such with too it--united
was!" I rascal hard-hearted a God!--what

spoke. first Elinor moments. few a for silent both were They

return?" soon should you that her tell you "Did

than "less impatiently; replied, he her," told I what know not do "I
more much likelihood all in and doubt, a beyond past, the to due was
won't it.--It of think cannot I future. the by justified was than
her all with farther, me torture to mother dear your came do.--Then
was I me. torture DID it Heaven! Thank confidence. and kindness
it comfort the of idea an have cannot you Dashwood, Miss miserable.
myself to grudge a such owe I misery. own my on back look to me gives
past my all that heart, own my of folly rascally stupid, the for
I Well, now. me to exultation and triumph only are it under sufferings
was I best, at whom, to those to went and loved, I that all left went,
horses, own my with town--travelling to journey My indifferent. only
reflections own to--my speak to creature tediously--no so therefore and
I inviting!--when so thing every forward looked I cheerful--when so
blessed a was it soothing!--oh, so picture the Barton, at back looked
journey!"

stopped. He

for impatient grew him, pitying though who, Elinor, said sir," "Well,
all?" is this "and departure, his

infamous That town?-- in passed what forgot you "Ah!--no,--have
you?" it shew she letter--Did

passed." that note every saw I "Yes,

in was I for did, immediately it (as me reached hers of first the "When
be to not phrase, common the is--in felt I what time,) whole the town
any raise to simple too one--perhaps simple more a in expressed;
word every line, painful.--Every very very, were feelings emotion--my
here, she were writer, dear their which metaphor hackneyed the was--in
town in was Marianne that know To heart. my to dagger forbid--a would
and thunderbolt.--Thunderbolts language--a same the was--in
her taste, me!--her given have she would reproof a daggers!--what
am I own,--and my than me to known better are they believe opinions--I
dearer." are they sure

this of course the in changes many undergone had which heart, Elinor's
it felt she again;--yet softened now was conversation, extraordinary
last. the as companion her in ideas such check to duty her

married. are you that Willoughby.--Remember Mr. right, not is "This
hear." to me for necessary think you conscience your in what only Relate

in as her to dear as still was I that me assuring by note, "Marianne's
been had we weeks many many, the of spite in that days, former
of full as and feelings, own her in constant as was she separated,
say I remorse. my all awakened ever, as mine of constancy the in faith
in had dissipation, and business London, and time because awakened,
hardened fine a growing been had I and it, quieted measure some
that fancy to chusing and her, to indifferent myself fancying villain,
our of myself to talking me; to indifferent become have must too she
my up shrugging business, trifling idle, mere a as attachment past
reproach, every silencing and so, being its of proof in shoulders
be shall 'I then, and now saying secretly by scruple, every overcoming
me made note this But married.'-- well is she hear to glad heartily
than me to dearer infinitely was she that felt I better. myself know
But infamously. her using was I that and world, the in woman other any
retreat To me. and Grey Miss between settled just then was thing every
sent I both. you avoid to was do, to had I that All impossible. was
her from myself preserve to that by intending Marianne, to answer no
in call to not determined even was I time some for and notice; farther
a of air the affect to wiser it judging last, at Street;--but Berkeley
safely all you watched I else, anything than acquaintance common cool,
name." my left and morning, one house the of out

house!" the of out us "Watched

how you, watched I often how hear to surprised be would You so. "Even
a many entered have I you. with in falling of point the on was I often
did I as Lodging by. drove carriage the as sight, your avoid to shop
a catch not did I which in day a hardly was there Street, Bond in
constant most the but nothing and you; of other or one of glimpse
keep to desire prevailing invariably most a side, my on watchfulness
the avoided I long. so us separated have could sight, your of out
was who else everybody as well as possible, as much as Middletons
in being their of aware Not common. in acquaintance an prove to likely
his of day first the believe, I John, Sir on blundered I however, town,
me asked He Jennings's. Mrs. at called had I after day the and coming,
as me told NOT he evening.--Had the in house his at dance a party, a to
have should I there, be to were sister your and you that inducement an
next The him. near myself trust to thing, a certain too it felt
affectionate, Marianne--still from note short another brought morning
most conduct MY make could that confiding--everything artless, open,
a frame not could tried--but I it. answer not could I hateful.
day. the of moment every believe, I her, of thought I But sentence.
THEN. was it as situation my pity Dashwood, Miss me, pity CAN you If
the play to forced was I sister, your of full heart and head my With
worse were weeks four or three woman!--Those another to lover happy
on forced were you you, tell not need I as last, at Well, all. than
was!-- it agony of evening an cut!--what I figure sweet a what and me;
in Willoughby me calling side, one on angel an as beautiful Marianne,
an for me asking me, to hand her out God!--holding tone!--Oh, a such
speaking such in fixed eyes bewitching those with explanation,
other the on devil the as jealous Sophia, face!--and my on solicitude
over is it signify; not does it was--Well, that all looking hand,
could; I as soon as all you from away ran evening!--I an Such now.--
as white as face sweet Marianne's seen had I before not but
last her;--the of had ever I look last last, the was death.--THAT
I when sight!--yet horrid a was It me. to appeared she which in manner
me to comfort of kind a was it dying, really as to-day her of thought
saw who those, to appear would she how exactly knew I that imagine to
I as me, before constantly me, before was She world. this in last her
hue." and look same the in travelled,

first Willoughby succeeded. thoughtfulness mutual of pause short A
thus: it broke himself, rousing

better, certainly is sister Your gone. be and haste make me let "Well,
danger?" of out certainly

it." of assured are "We

Marianne." on too!--doting mother, poor "Your

to thing any you have letter; own your Willoughby, Mr. letter, the "But
that?" about say

you again, me to wrote sister Your particular. in THAT yes, "Yes,
was I said. she what saw You morning. next very the know,
was others, some with letter, her Ellisons,--and the at breakfasting
Sophia's catch to happened It lodgings. my from there me to brought
the paper, the of elegance the size, its mine--and caught it before eye
vague Some suspicion. a her gave immediately altogether, hand-writing
in lady young some to attachment my of before her reached had report
preceding the observation her within passed had what and Devonshire,
jealous more her made and was, lady young the who marked had evening
is which therefore, playfulness, of air that Affecting ever. than
directly, letter the opened she loves, one woman a in delightful
impudence. her for paid well was She contents. its read and
have could I wretchedness Her wretched. her made what read She
appeased. be must it events all malice--At passion--her her but borne,
of style wife's my of think you do short--what in And,
not?" it feminine--was letter-writing?--delicate--tender--truly

hand-writing." own your in was letter wife!--The "Your

as sentences such copying servilely of credit the only had I but "Yes,
own own--her her all was original The to. name my put to ashamed was I
were do!--we I could what But diction. gentle and thoughts happy
am I fixed--But almost day the preparation, in thing every engaged,
money her words, honest Preparation!--day!--In fool. a like talking
be to was thing any mine, like situation a in and me, to necessary was
my to signify it did what all, after And rupture. a prevent to done
language what in friends, her and Marianne of opinion the in character
business My end. one to only been have must couched?--It was answer my
a or bow a with it did I whether and scoundrel, a myself declare to was
their in ever for ruined am 'I importance.-- little of was bluster
their from ever for out shut am myself--'I to I said opinion--'
will letter this fellow, unprincipled an me think already they society,
as, reasonings, my were Such one.' blackguard a me think them make only
and words, wife's my copied I carelessness, desperate of sort a in
notes--unluckily three Her Marianne. of relics last the with parted
their denied have should I or pocketbook, my in all were they
and up, them put to forced was ever--I for them hoarded and existence,
always had I too hair--that of lock the And them. kiss even not could
by searched now was which pocket-book, same the in me about carried
every lock--all, dear virulence,--the ingratiating most the with Madam
me." from torn was memento

while Elinor, said blamable," very Willoughby, Mr. wrong, very are "You
emotion; compassionate her betrayed herself, of spite in voice, her
my or Willoughby Mrs. of either way, this in speak to not ought "you
Your you. on forced not was It choice. own your made had You sister.
She least. at respect, your to politeness, your to claim a has wife
treat To you. married have not would she or you, to attached be must
to atonement no is slightingly her of speak to unkindness, with her
conscience." own your to relief a it suppose I can Marianne--nor

does "She sigh.-- heavy a with he said wife," my of me to talk not "Do
we when her for regard no had I knew compassion.--She your deserve not
be to Magna Combe to down came and were, we married married.--Well,
pity you do now gay.--And be to town to returned afterwards and happy,
I--be Am purpose?-- no to this all said I have Dashwood?--or Miss me,
was I than opinion your in guilty less I degree--am one only it
away explained I Have wrong. always not were intentions before?--My
guilt?" my of part any

proved have You little.-- something--a removed certainly have you "Yes,
have You you. believed had I than faulty less whole, the on yourself,
hardly I But wicked. less much wicked, less heart your proved
have could what know hardly inflicted--I have you that misery know--the
worse." it made

been have I what recovered, is she when sister your to repeat you "Will
well as opinion her in too lightened little a be me you?--Let telling
be me Let already. me forgiven has she that me tell You yours. in as
present my of and heart, my of knowledge better a that fancy to able
more natural, more spontaneous, more a her from draw will feelings,
my and misery my of her Tell forgiveness. dignified, less gentle,
if and her, to inconstant never was heart my that her penitence--tell
ever." than me to dearer is she moment this at that will, you

be comparatively may what to necessary is that all her tell will "I
the me to explained not have you But justification. your called,
illness." her of heard you how nor now, coming your of reason particular

and Middleton, John Sir against ran I lobby, Lane Drury in night, "Last
to spoke months--he two these time first the was--for I who saw he when
without seen had I marriage, my since ever me cut had he me.--That
stupid honest, good-natured, his however, Now, resentment. or surprise
sister, your for concern and me, against indignation of full soul,
ought knew he what me telling of temptation the resist not could
As horridly. me WOULD--vex it think not did he probably to--though
Marianne that me told he therefore, it, speak could he as bluntly
that letter Cleveland--a at fever putrid a of dying was Dashwood
most danger her declared Jennings Mrs. from received morning
much too was &c.--I fright, a in off gone all are Palmers imminent--the
the to even insensible as off myself pass to able be to shocked
suffer; mine seeing in softened was heart His John. Sir undiscerning
he parted, we when that away, done was ill-will his of much so and
promise old an of me reminded he while hand the by me shook almost
was sister your that hearing on felt I What puppy. pointer a about
earth, upon villain greatest the me believing too, dying dying--and
what tell I could how moments--for latest her in me hating scorning,
sure was I person ONE imputed? been have not might projects horrid
was felt I What thing-- any of capable as me represent would
this o'clock eight at and made, soon was resolution dreadful!--My
all." know you Now carriage. my in was I morning

the on fixed silently were thoughts Her answer. no made Elinor
consequent its and independence an early too which injury irreparable
the mind, the in made had luxury, and dissipation, idleness, of habits
person of advantage every to who, man a of happiness, the character,
a and honest, and open naturally disposition a united talents, and
and extravagant him made had world The temper. affectionate feeling,
selfish. and cold-hearted him made had vanity and vain--Extravagance
another, of expense the at triumph guilty own its seeking while Vanity,
least at or extravagance, which attachment, real a in him involved had
faulty Each sacrificed. be to required had necessity, offspring, its
punishment. to likewise him led had evil, to him leading in propensity
against feeling, against honour, against which from attachment, The
no when now, himself, torn outwardly had he interest better every
the for connection, the and thought; every governed allowable, longer
misery, to sister her left scruple, little with had, he which of sake
more far a of himself to unhappiness of source a prove to likely was
the at recalled was she kind this of reverie a From nature. incurable
reverie a from himself rousing who, Willoughby, by minutes some of end
and going, for preparation in up started painful, equally least at
said--

off." be must I here; staying in use no is "There

town?" to back going you "Are

a in town to thence from there; business have I Magna. Combe "No--to
bye." Good two. or day

hers;--he him give to refuse not could She hand. his out held He
affection. with it pressed

he, did?"--said you than me of better something think DO you "And
forgetting if as mantel-piece the against leaning and fall, it letting
go. to was he

him wished pitied, forgave, she did;--that she that him assured Elinor
gentle some added happiness--and his in interested even well--was
was answer His it. promote to likely most behaviour the to as counsel
encouraging. very not

can. I as well as world the through rub must "I he, said that," to "As
allowed am I however, If, question. the of out is happiness Domestic
it actions, and fate my in interest an feel yours and you that think to
be may it least, guard--at my on me put may means--it the be may
ever. for me to lost is sure be to Marianne for. live to something
again--" liberty at chance blessed any by even I Were

reproof. a with him stopped Elinor

live and away go now shall I bye. good more replied--"once "Well,"--he
event." one of dread in

mean?" you do "What

marriage." sister's "Your

is she than you to lost more be never can She wrong. very are "You
now."

should one some that if And else. one some by gained be will she "But
not will I bear--but least could I others, all of whom, he very the be
that shewing by goodwill, compassionate your all of myself rob to stay
bless bye,--God Good forgive. least can I injured most have I where
you!"

room. the of out ran almost he words, these with And



45 CHAPTER


the after even time some for her, left he after time some for Elinor,
a by oppressed much too remained away, died had carriage his of sound
sadness which of but themselves, in differing widely ideas, of crowd
sister. her of even think to result, general the was

most the as abhorred had she ago hour an half only whom he, Willoughby,
a excited faults, his all of spite in Willoughby, men, of worthless
made which them, by produced sufferings the for commiseration of degree
a with family, her from ever for separated now as him of think her
acknowledged soon she as proportion, in rather regret, a tenderness,
his that felt She merits. his to than wishes his herself--to within
not ought which circumstances by heightened was mind her over influence
that attraction, uncommon of person that by weight; have to reason in
possess; to merit no was it which manner lively and affectionate, open,
even not was it which Marianne, for love ardent still that by and
before long long, so, was it that felt she But indulge. to innocent
less. influence his feel could she

her found she Marianne, unconscious the to returned she last at When
of extent the to sleep a sweet and long so by refreshed awaking, just
the present, the past, The full. was heart Elinor's hopes. her
mother's her and safety, Marianne's visit, Willoughby's future,
spirits of agitation an into altogether her threw arrival, expected
fearful only her made and fatigue, of indication every off kept which
in however, time, the was Short sister. her to herself betraying of
after hour an half within for her, affect could fear that which
the by stairs down called again was she house, the leaving Willoughby's
every from mother her save to carriage.--Eager another of sound
the into immediately ran she suspense, horrible moment's unnecessary
support and receive to time in just door outward the reached and hall,
it. entered she as her

produced had house the near drew they as terror whose Dashwood, Mrs.
to voice no had more, no being Marianne's of conviction the almost
neither waiting SHE, but Elinor; for even voice no her, after inquire
her relief;--and joyful the gave instantly inquiry, nor salutation for
much as moment a in was warmth, usual her all with it catching mother,
She fears. her by before been had she as happiness, her by overcome
her and daughter her between drawing-room the into supported was
to unable still though joy, of tears shedding there, friend;--and
intervals at her from turning again, and again Elinor embraced speak,
her once at spoke which look a with hand, Brandon's Colonel press to
bliss the in herself with sharing his of conviction her and gratitude,
than greater even silence a in however, it, shared He moment. the of
own. her

her was Marianne see to herself, recovered had Dashwood Mrs. as soon As
child, beloved her with was she minutes two in and desire; first
danger. and unhappiness, absence, by ever than her to dearer rendered
only was meeting, the in felt each what saw she as delight, Elinor's
farther of Marianne robbing its of apprehension an by checked
when prudent, even be could calm, be could Dashwood Mrs. sleep;--but
knowing in satisfied Marianne, and stake, at was child a of life the
for weak too being of conscious and her, near was mother her
by prescribed quiet and silence the to readily submitted conversation,
night; all her with up sit WOULD Dashwood Mrs. her. around nurse every
But bed. to went entreaty, mother's her with compliance in Elinor, and
the of hours many and sleepless, entirely night one which rest, the
by off kept was requisite, make to seemed anxiety wearing most
now she as Willoughby," "poor Willoughby, spirits. of irritation
would she thoughts; her in constantly was him, call to herself allowed
now blamed, now and world, the for vindication his heard have but not
her But before. harshly so him judged having for herself acquitted
She painful. invariably was sister her to it relating of promise
Marianne on effect its what dreaded it, of performance the dreaded
be ever could she explanation an such after whether doubted be; might
widower. a Willoughby wished moment a for and another; with happy
HIS to that felt herself, reproved Brandon, Colonel remembering Then,
reward the rival's, his to than more far constancy his and sufferings
Mrs. than rather thing any wished and due, was sister her of
death. Willoughby's

softened much been had Barton at errand Brandon's Colonel of shock The
her was great so for alarm; previous own her by Dashwood Mrs. to
out set to determined already had she that Marianne, about uneasiness
further any for waiting without day, very that on Cleveland for
arrival, his before journey her settled far so had and intelligence,
away, Margaret fetch to moment every expected then were Careys the that
infection. be might there where her take to unwilling was mother her as

of cheerfulness brilliant the and day, every mend to continued Marianne
repeatedly she as be, to her proved spirits and looks Dashwood's Mrs.
could Elinor world. the in women happiest the of one herself, declared
sometimes without proofs its witness nor declaration, the hear not
Mrs. But Edward. recollected ever mother her whether wondering
disappointment own her of account temperate the to trusting Dashwood,
to joy her of exuberance the by away led was her, sent had Elinor which
her to restored was Marianne it. increase would what of only think
mistaken own her feel, to began now she as which, in danger a from
had Willoughby, to attachment unfortunate the encouraging in judgment
another yet had she recovery her in her;--and place to contributed
as her, to imparted thus was It Elinor. by of unthought joy of source
occurred. them between conference private of opportunity any as soon

my all know yet not do you Elinor, My alone. are we last "At
himself." so me told has He Marianne. loves Brandon Colonel happiness.

and surprised pained, and pleased both turns by feeling daughter, Her
attention. silent all was surprised, not

your at wonder should I or Elinor, dear me, like never are "You
my to good possible any for wish to down sat I Had now. composure
as you of one marrying Brandon's Colonel on fixed have should I family,
most the be will Marianne believe I And desirable. most object the
two." the of him with happy

because so, thinking for reason her ask to inclined half was Elinor
age, their of consideration impartial an on founded none that satisfied
be always must mother her given;--but be could feelings, or characters,
and subject, interesting any on imagination her by away carried
smile. a with off it passed she inquiry, an of instead therefore

came It travelled. we as yesterday me to heart whole his opened "He
could believe, well may you I, undesignedly. quite unawares, quite out
saw I distress; his conceal not could child;--he my but nothing of talk
friendship, mere that thinking perhaps, he and own, my equalled it that
rather, sympathy--or a warm so justify not would goes, now world the as
feelings, irresistible to way suppose--giving I all, at thinking not
for affection constant, tender, earnest, his with acquainted me made
of moment first the since ever Elinor, my her, loved has He Marianne.
her." seeing

professions the not language, the perceived,--not Elinor however, Here,
mother's her of embellishments natural the but Brandon, Colonel of
chose. it as her to delightful thing every fashioned which fancy, active

Willoughby that anything surpassing infinitely her, for regard "His
or sincere more as warm, more much as feigned, or felt ever
the all through subsisted it--has call to are we ever constant--which
worthless that for prepossession unhappy Marianne's dear of knowledge
hope!--could a encouraging selfishness--without without man!--and young
openness, mind!--such noble a another--Such with happy her seen have he
HIM." in deceived be can one sincerity!--no such

is man, excellent an "as Elinor, said character," Brandon's "Colonel
established." well

warning, a such after "or seriously, mother her is,"--replied it know "I
pleased be to even or affection, such encourage to last the be should I
ready such active, such with did, he as me for coming his But it. by
men." of worthiest the of one him prove to enough is friendship,

of act ONE on rest not "does Elinor, answered however," character, "His
the of out humanity were Marianne, for affection his which to kindness,
he Middletons, the to Jennings, Mrs. To him. prompted have would case,
him; respect and love equally they known; intimately and long been has
very is acquired, lately though him, of knowledge own my even and
Marianne if that him, esteem and value I do highly so and considerable;
our think to yourself as ready as be shall I him, with happy be can
did answer What world. the in us to blessing greatest the connection
hope?" to him allow you him?--Did give you

myself. to or him to hope of talk then not could I love, my "Oh!
or hope for ask not did he But dying. be moment that at might Marianne
irrepressible an confidence, involuntary an was His encouragement.
Yet parent. a to application an friend--not soothing a to effusion
she if overcome--that quite was I first at for say, DID I time a after
in lie would happiness greatest my might, she trusted I as lived,
delightful our since arrival, our since and marriage; their promoting
every him given have fully, more him to it repeated have I security,
will him, tell I time, little very a Time, power. my in encouragement
a such on ever for wasted be to not is heart everything;--Marianne's do
it." secure soon must merits own His Willoughby.-- as man

made yet not have you however, spirits, Colonel's the from judge "To
sanguine." equally him

change any for rooted deeply too affection Marianne's thinks "No.--He
again heart her supposing even and time, of length great a under it in
a such with that believe, to himself of diffident too is free,
There, her. attach ever could he disposition and age of difference
as hers beyond much so only is age His mistaken. quite is he however,
fixed;--and principles and character his make to as advantage, an be to
make to one very the exactly is convinced, well am I disposition, his
his in all are too, manners his person, his And happy. sister your
so not is certainly he me; blind not does partiality My favour.
much something is there time, same the at Willoughby--but as handsome
something,--if a always was There countenance.-- his in pleasing more
like." not did I which times, at eyes Willoughby's remember,--in you

her for waiting without mother, her it;--but remember NOT could Elinor
continued, assent,

to pleasing more only not are manners Colonel's the manners, his "And
to know well I kind a of are they but were, ever Willoughby's than me
genuine their gentleness, Their Marianne. to attaching solidly more be
much is simplicity unstudied manly their and people, other to attention
liveliness--often the than disposition, real her with accordant more
myself, sure very am I other. the of ill-timed often and artificial,
proved has he as amiable, really as out turned Willoughby had that
with happy so been have never yet would Marianne contrary, the himself
Brandon." Colonel with be will she as HIM,

her but her, with agree quite not could daughter paused.--Her She
offence. no gave therefore and heard, not was dissent

Mrs. added me," of distance easy an within be will she Delaford, "At
I probability,--for all in and Barton; at remain I if "even Dashwood,
small some be MUST certainly there village,--indeed large a is it hear
our as well as quite us suit would that by, close cottage or house
situation." present

Delaford!--but to her getting for scheme new a was Elinor!--here Poor
stubborn. was spirit her

cares everybody know, you life of time my at too!--for fortune "His
it what know, to desire nor know neither I though THAT;--and about
one." good a be must it sure am I is, really

and person, third a of entrance the by interrupted were they Here
her to success wish to private, in over all it think to withdrew Elinor
Willoughby. for pang a feel to it, wishing in yet and friend,



46 CHAPTER


long been not had kind, its in weakening though illness, Marianne's
and strength, natural youth, with and slow; recovery her make to enough
her enable to as smoothly so proceeded it aid, in presence mother's her
Mrs. into latter, the of arrival the after days four within remove, to
for request, particular own her at there, When dressing-room. Palmer's
her fetching for him to thanks her forth pour to impatient was she
her. visit to invited was Brandon Colonel mother,

in and looks, altered her seeing in room, the entering on emotion His
was him, to out held immediately she which hand pale the receiving
than more something from arise must conjecture, Elinor's in as, such,
to known being its of consciousness the or Marianne, for affection his
varying and eye melancholy his in discovered soon she and others;
many of recurrence probable the sister, her at looked he as complexion
resemblance that by back brought mind, his to misery of scenes past
strengthened now and acknowledged, already Eliza and Marianne between
weakness, reclining of posture the skin, sickly the eye, hollow the by
obligation. peculiar of acknowledgment warm the and

but daughter, her than passed what of watchful less not Dashwood, Mrs.
very to watching therefore and influenced, differently very mind a with
arose what but behaviour Colonel's the in nothing saw effect, different
actions the in while sensations, self-evident and simple most the from
something that think to herself persuaded she Marianne of words and
dawned. already gratitude than more

stronger visibly growing Marianne two, or day another of end the At
her and own her by equally urged Dashwood, Mrs. hours, twelve every
HER On Barton. to removing of talk to began wishes, daughter's
not could Jennings Mrs. friends; two her of those depended measures
soon was Brandon Colonel and stay; Dashwoods' the during Cleveland quit
as there abode own his consider to request, united their by brought,
Mrs. and his At indispensable. equally not if determinate, equally
to on prevailed was Dashwood Mrs. return, in request united Jennings's
better the for back, journey her on carriage his of use the accept
joint the at Colonel, the and child; sick her of accommodation
good-nature active whose Jennings, Mrs. and Dashwood Mrs. of invitation
herself, as well as people other for hospitable and friendly her made
the in cottage, the at visit a by it redeem to pleasure with engaged
weeks. few a of course

taking after Marianne, and arrived; departure and separation of day The
earnestly so one Jennings, Mrs. of leave a lengthened and particular so
own her to due seemed as wishes kind and respect of full so grateful,
bidding and inattention, past of acknowledgment secret a from heart
carefully was friend, a of cordiality a with farewell Brandon Colonel
she that anxious seemed he which of carriage, the into him by assisted
followed, then Elinor and Dashwood Mrs. half. least at engross should
and travellers, the of talk to themselves, by left were others the and
chaise her to summoned was Jennings Mrs. till dullness, own their feel
young two her of loss the for maid her of gossip the in comfort take to
his took afterwards immediately Brandon Colonel and companions;
Delaford. to way solitary

journey her bore Marianne and road, the on days two were Dashwoods The
zealous most the that thing Every fatigue. essential without both, on
comfortable, her render to do could care solicitous most the affection,
reward their found each and companion, watchful each of office the was
the Elinor, To spirits. of calmness her and ease, bodily her in
seen had who She, grateful. particularly was latter the of observation
of anguish by oppressed suffering, constantly so week after week her
to fortitude nor of, speak to courage neither had she which heart
an share, equally could other no which joy, a with saw now conceal,
trusted she as result the being in which, mind, of composure apparent
and contentment to her lead eventually must reflection, serious of
cheerfulness.

every which of scenes on entered and indeed, Barton, approached they As
recollection, painful some peculiar, some brought tree every and field
their from face her away turning and thoughtful, and silent grew she
Elinor here, But window. the through gazing earnestly sat notice,
assisted she as saw, she when and blame; nor wonder neither could
an only saw she crying, been had she that carriage, the from Marianne
pity, than tender less thing any raise to itself in natural too emotion
her of whole the In praise. to entitled unobtrusiveness its in and
to awakened mind a of direction the traced she manner, subsequent
common their entered they had sooner no for exertion; reasonable
of look a with it around eyes her turned Marianne than sitting-room,
the to herself accustom to once at determined if as firmness, resolute
be could Willoughby of remembrance the which with object every of sight
cheerfulness, at aimed sentence every but little, said connected.--She
without away passed never it her, escaped sometimes sigh a though and
piano-forte. her try would she dinner After smile. a of atonement the
an was rested first eye her which on music the but it; to went She
their of some containing Willoughby, by her for procured opera,
his in name own her leaf outward its on bearing and duets, favourite
music the put head, her shook do.--She not would hand-writing.--That
of complained minute, a for keys the over running after and aside,
declaring again; instrument the closed and fingers, her in feebleness
practice future in should she that so, did she as firmness with however
much.

the On symptoms. happy these in abatement no produced morning next The
looked she rest, by strengthened alike body and mind a with contrary,
of pleasure the anticipating spirit, genuine more with spoke and
would which party family dear the of talking and return, Margaret's
the as society, cheerful and pursuits mutual their of restored, be then
wish. a worth happiness only

said strength," my recovered have I and settled, is weather the "When
the to walk will We day. every together walks long take will "we she,
will we on; go children the how see and down, the of edge the at farm
Abbeyland; the and Cross, Barton at plantations new John's Sir to walk
its trace to try and Priory, the of ruins old the to go often will we and
shall we know I reached. once they told are we as far as foundations
to never mean I away. happily pass will summer the know I happy. be
shall I dinner till time that from and six, than rising in later be
plan, my formed have I reading. and music between moment every divide
own Our study. serious of course a on enter to determined am and
beyond thing any for to resorted be to me, to known well too is library
the at reading worth well works many are there But amusement. mere
can I know I which production modern more of others are there and Park;
shall I a-day, hours six only reading By Brandon. Colonel of borrow
which instruction of deal great a twelve-month a of course the in gain
want." to myself feel now I

this; as nobly so originated which plan a for her honoured Elinor
her leading been had which fancy eager same the see to smiling though
work at now repining, selfish and indolence languid of extreme the to
and employment rational such of scheme a into excess introducing in
she when sigh a to changed however smile Her self-control. virtuous
feared and unfulfilled, yet was Willoughby to promise that remembered
of mind the unsettle again might which communicate to that had she
busy of prospect fair this time a for least at ruin and Marianne,
resolved she hour, evil the delay to therefore Willing tranquillity.
appointed she before secure, more were health sister's her till wait to
broken. be to only made was resolution the But it.

was weather the before home, at days three or two been had Marianne
a last at But out. venture to herself like invalid an for enough fine
daughter's the tempt might as such appeared; morning genial soft,
Elinor's on leaning Marianne, and confidence; mother's the and wishes
in fatigue, without could she as long as walk to authorised was arm,
house. the before lane the

an in Marianne of feebleness the as slow pace, a at out set sisters The
had they required;--and illness her since untried hitherto exercise
the of view full a admit to as house the beyond far so only advanced
turned eyes her with pausing when behind, hill important the hill,
said, calmly Marianne it, towards

projecting that "on hand, one with there,"--pointing exactly "There,
Willoughby." saw first I there and fell; I mound,--there

added, she reviving presently but word, the with sunk voice Her

the on pain little so with look can I that find to thankful am "I
it Elinor?"--hesitatingly subject, that on talk ever we spot!--shall
I as hope, I now, it of talk can wrong?--I be it will said.--"Or was
do."-- to ought

open. be to her invited tenderly Elinor

is HE as far as that, with done have "I Marianne, said regret," for "As
been have feelings my what of you to talk to mean not do I concerned.
on satisfied be could I if present, NOW.--At are they what but him, for
acting ALWAYS not was he that think to allowed be could I if point, one
assured be could I if all, above me;--but deceiving ALWAYS not part, a
fancied sometimes have fears my as wicked VERY so was never he that
girl"-- unfortunate that of story the since him,

answered, she as words her treasured joyfully Elinor stopt. She

easy." be should you think you that, of assured be could you "If

it is only not it;--for in involved doubly is mind of peace My "Yes.
of ME, to been has HE what been has who person, a suspect to horrible
a in myself?--What to appear me make it must what designs,--but such
could affection unguarded shamefully most a but mine, like situation
to"-- me expose

behaviour?" his for account you "would sister, her asked then," "How

fickle, only him, suppose I would gladly how him,--Oh, suppose would "I
fickle." very very,

the on herself within debating was She more. no said Elinor
till it postponing or directly, story her beginning of eligibility
minutes few a for on crept they health;--and stronger in were Marianne
silence. in

a with last at Marianne said good," much too him wishing not am "I
unpleasant more no be may reflections secret his wish I "when sigh,
them." in enough suffer will He own. my than

his?" with conduct your compare you "Do

with it compare I been; have to ought it what with it compare I "No.
yours."

resemblance." little borne have situations "Our

let Elinor, dearest my not, conduct.--Do our than more borne have "They
My censure. must judgment your know I what defend kindness your
for calmness and leisure me given has It think-- me made has illness
I talk, to recovered enough was I before Long recollection. serious
own my in saw I past: the considered I reflect. to able perfectly was
last him with acquaintance our of beginning the since behaviour,
of want and myself, towards imprudence of series a but nothing autumn,
my prepared had feelings own my that saw I others. to kindness
me led almost had them under fortitude of want my that and sufferings,
by on brought entirely been had knew, well I illness, My grave. the to
the at even felt had I as health, own my of negligence such by myself
I self-destruction. been have would died,--it I Had wrong. be to time
such with but removed; was danger the till danger my know not did
recovery,--wonder my at wonder I me, gave reflections these as feelings
for time have to live, to desire my of eagerness very the that
I Had once. at me kill not did all, you to and God, my to atonement
my nurse, my you, left have I should misery peculiar what died,--in
my of selfishness fretful the all seen had who sister!--You, my friend,
should heart!--How my of murmurings the all known had who days; latter
have you could How too! mother remembrance!--My YOUR in lived have I
Whenever myself. of abhorrence own my express cannot her!--I consoled
failing some or neglected, duty some saw I past, the towards looked I
the kindness, The me. by injured seemed body Every indulged.
ungrateful with repaid had I Jennings, Mrs. of kindness unceasing
every to Steeles, the Palmers, the to Middletons, the To contempt.
heart a with unjust; and insolent been had I even, acquaintance common
very their by irritated temper a and merits, their against hardened
they as little them, to even Fanny,--yes, to John, attention.--To
all, above you,--you But due. their than less given had I deserve,
your knew I, only and I, me. by wronged been had mother, my above
any to me?--not influence it did what to yet sorrows; its and heart
before was example myself.--Your or you benefit could that compassion
comfort? your and you of considerate more I avail?--Was what to but me;
taking by restraints, your lessen or forbearance, your imitate I Did
particular or complaisance general of offices those in part any
discharge to left been hitherto had you which gratitude
had I when than unhappy, be to you knew I when less alone?--No;--not
or duty of exertion every from away turn I did ease, at you believed
regretting me, with but exist to sorrow allowing scarcely friendship;
for you, leaving and me, wronged and deserted had which heart THAT only
sake." my for miserable be to affection, unbounded an professed I whom

Elinor, and spirit; self-reproving her of flow rapid the ceased Here
instantly her gave flatter, to honest too though soothe, to impatient
well so contrition her and frankness her which support and praise that
replied, and hand her pressed Marianne deserved.

my down laid have I proof. my be must future good.--The very are "You
be shall feelings it--my to adhering of capable am I if and plan,
others, worry longer no shall They improved. temper my and governed
my You, family. my for solely live now shall I myself. torture nor
will you me; to world the all be henceforth must Margaret, and mother,
I home, my from you, From you. between entirely affections my share
mix do I if and move; to incitement smallest the have again never shall
my humbled, is spirit my that shew to only be will it society, other in
lesser the civilities, the practise can I that and amended, heart
Willoughby--to for As forbearance. and gentleness with life, of duties
idle. be would him, forget ever shall I that or soon shall I that say
or circumstances of change no by overcome be can remembrance His
religion, by checked be shall it regulated, be shall it But opinions.
employment." constant by reason, by

heart, HIS know but could I "If voice, low a in added paused--and She
easy." become would everything

or propriety the on reflecting time some for been now had who Elinor,
all at feeling without narration, her hazarding speedily of impropriety
as that perceiving and this; heard first, at than decision nearer
herself found soon all, do must resolution nothing, did reflection
fact. the to leading

her prepared address; with hoped, she as recital, the managed She
chief the honestly and simply related caution; with listener anxious
his to justice did apology; his grounded Willoughby which on points
regard. present of protestations his only softened and repentance,
the on fixed were eyes her trembled, word.--She a not said Marianne
A them. left had sickness even than whiter became lips her and ground,
urge not dared she but heart, her from up sprung inquiries thousand
hand, her eagerness; panting with syllable every caught She one.
covered tears and sister's, her pressed closely herself, to unknowingly
cheeks. her

they till and home; towards her led tired, being her dreading Elinor,
curiosity her what conjecturing easily cottage, the of door the reached
nothing of talked it, speak to suffered was question no though be must
carefully was and together; conversation their and Willoughby, but
could minuteness where look, and speech of particular every in minute
a with Marianne house, the entered they as soon As indulged. safely be
her through articulate just words two these and gratitude of kiss
up slowly walked and sister her from withdrew mama," "Tell tears,
reasonable so solitude a disturb to attempt not would Elinor stairs.
its pre-arranging anxiously mind a with and sought; now she what as
Marianne should again, subject the reviving of resolution a and result,
parting her fulfill to parlour the into turned she it, do to fail
injunction.



47 CHAPTER


former her of vindication the unmoved hear not did Dashwood Mrs.
his of part some from cleared being his in rejoiced She favourite.
the But happy. him wished him;--she for sorry was guilt;--she imputed
him restore could recalled.--Nothing be not could past the of feelings
Nothing Marianne. to unblemished, character unbroken--a faith a with
his through suffered had latter the what of knowledge the away do could
Nothing Eliza. towards conduct his of guilt the remove nor means,
the injure nor esteem, former her in therefore, him, replace could
Brandon. Colonel of interests

from story Willoughby's heard daughter, her like Dashwood, Mrs. Had
influence the under been and distress, his witnessed she himself--had
compassion her that probable is it manner, his and countenance his of
in nor power, Elinor's in neither was it But greater. been have would
retailed her by another, in feelings such rouse to wish, her
Reflection herself. in forth called been first at had as explanation,
of opinion own her sobered and judgment, her to calmness given had
the only declare to therefore, wished, deserts;--she Willoughby's
his to due really were as facts such open lay and truth, simple
fancy the lead to tenderness of embellishment any without character,
astray.

began Marianne together, three all were they when evening, the In
an without not was it that again;--but him of speak to voluntarily
for been had she which in thoughtfulness unquiet restless, the effort,
her spoke,--and she as colour, rising sitting--her previously time some
shewed. plainly voice, unsteady

you thing--as every see I "that she, said both," you assure to wish "I
do." to me desire can

soothing with instantly her interrupted have would Dashwood Mrs.
sister's her hear to wished really who Elinor, not had tenderness,
Marianne silence. her engaged sign, eager an by opinion, unbiased
continued-- slowly

have morning--I this me told Elinor me--what to relief great a is "It
voice her moments some hear."--For to wished I what exactly heard now
calmness greater with and added, she herself, recovering but lost; was
I change. no for wish I satisfied, perfectly now am before--"I than
later or sooner as knowing, after him, with happy been have could never
no confidence, no had have should this.--I all known, have must I
feelings." my to away it done have could Nothing esteem.

of man a with "Happy mother. her cried it," know it--I know "I
dearest the of peace the injured so who one practices!--With libertine
heart a not has Marianne men!--No--my of best the and friends, our of
sensitive her conscience, man!--Her a such with happy made be to
husband her of conscience the that all felt have would conscience,
felt." have to ought

change." no for wish "I repeated, and sighed, Marianne

a and mind good a as "exactly Elinor, said matter," the consider "You
as perceive, you say dare I and it; consider must understanding sound
circumstances, other many in but this, in only not myself, as well
you involved have must marriage your that convinced be to enough reason
have would you which in disappointments, and troubles certain many in
certain. less much side, his on affection, an by supported poorly been
is expensiveness His poor. always been have must you married, you Had
that declares conduct whole his and himself, by even acknowledged
your and demands His him. by understood hardly word a is self-denial
brought have must income, small very small, a on together, inexperience
having from you, to grievous LESS the be not would which distresses on
honour of sense YOUR before. of unthought and unknown entirely been
situation, your of aware when know, I you, led have would honesty and
and, possible: you to appear would that economy the all attempt to
comfort, own your on only retrenched frugality your as long as perhaps,
how that--and beyond but it, practice to suffered been have might you
ruin the stop to do management single your of utmost the could little
you had THAT, Beyond marriage?-- your before begun had which
not it is enjoyments, HIS abridge to reasonably, however endeavoured,
to selfish so feelings on prevailing of instead that feared, be to
heart, his on influence own your lessened have would you it, to consent
such in him involved had which connection the regret him made and
difficulties?"

a in "Selfish?" word the repeated she and quivered, lips Marianne's
selfish?" him think really you implied--"do that tone

to beginning the "from Elinor, replied behaviour," his of whole "The
was It selfishness. on grounded been has affair, the of end the
which affections; your with sport him made first which selfishness
of confession the delay him made engaged, were own his when afterwards,
or enjoyment, own His Barton. from him carried finally which and it,
principle." ruling his particular, every in was, ease, own his

object." his was never happiness MY true. very is "It

why And done. has he what regrets "he Elinor, continued present," "At
towards answered not has it finds he it?--Because regret he does
now are circumstances His happy. him made not has It himself.
only thinks he and kind; that of evil no from suffers unembarrassed--he
yourself. than temper amiable less a of woman a married has he that
been have would he you, married he had that follow it does But
then would He different. been have would inconveniences happy?--The
are they because which, distresses pecuniary the under suffered have
whose of wife a had have would He nothing. as reckons now he removed,
always been have would he but complaint, no make could he temper
rank to learned have soon would probably and poor; necessitous--always
far of as income good and estate clear a of comforts innumerable the
a of temper mere the than happiness, domestic to even importance, more
wife."

to nothing have I "and Marianne; said it," of doubt a not have "I
folly." own my but regret--nothing

Dashwood; Mrs. said child," my imprudence, mother's your say "Rather
answerable." be must "SHE

each that satisfied Elinor, proceed;--and her let not would Marianne
might that past the of survey any avoid to wished error, own their felt
first the pursuing therefore, she, spirits; sister's her weaken
continued, immediately subject,

the of whole the from drawn fairly be think, I may, observation "One
first the from arisen have difficulties Willoughby's all story--that
crime That Williams. Eliza to behaviour his in virtue, against offence
present his all of and one, lesser every of origin the been has
discontents."

led was mother her and remark; the to feelingly most assented Marianne
warm merits, and injuries Brandon's Colonel of enumeration an to it by
not did daughter Her dictate. unitedly could design and friendship as
her. by heard were it of much if as however, look,

following three or two the on saw expectation, her to according Elinor,
done; had she as strength gain to continue not did Marianne that days,
appear to tried still she and unsubdued, was resolution her while but
time of effect the to trust safely could sister her easy, and cheerful
health. her upon

each to restored all again were family the and returned, Margaret
their pursuing not if and cottage; the at settled quietly again other,
to came first they when as vigour much so quite with studies usual
future. in them of prosecution vigorous a planning least at Barton,

heard had She Edward. of tidings some for impatient grew Elinor
plans, his of new nothing London, leaving her since him of nothing
passed had letters Some abode. present his of even certain nothing
and illness; Marianne's of consequence in brother, her and her between
know "We sentence:-- this been had there John's, of first the in
so on enquiries no make can and Edward, unfortunate our of nothing
which Oxford;" at still be to him conclude but subject, a prohibited
correspondence, the by her afforded Edward of intelligence the all was
letters. succeeding the of any in mentioned even not was name his for
measures. his of ignorance in long be to however, doomed, not was She

and business; on Exeter to morning one sent been had man-servant Their
his of inquiries the satisfied had he table, at waited he as when,
voluntary his was this errand, his of event the to as mistress
communication--

married." is Ferrars Mr. that ma'am, know, you suppose "I

her saw Elinor, upon eyes her fixed start, violent a gave Marianne
Dashwood, Mrs. hysterics. in chair her in back fell and pale, turning
intuitively had inquiry, servant's the answered she as eyes, whose
Elinor's by perceive to shocked was direction, same the taken
afterwards, moment a and suffered, really she much how countenance
to child which on not knew situation, Marianne's by distressed alike
attention. principal her bestow

sense had ill, taken was Marianne Miss that only saw who servant, The
assistance, Dashwood's Mrs. with who, maids, the of one call to enough
rather was Marianne time, that By room. other the into her supported
the and Margaret of care the to her leaving mother her and better,
far so had disordered, much still though who, Elinor, to returned maid,
an beginning just be to as voice and reason her of use the recovered
Dashwood Mrs. intelligence. his of source the to as Thomas, of inquiry
the had Elinor and herself; on trouble that all took immediately
it. seeking of exertion the without information the of benefit

Thomas?" married, was Ferrars Mr. that you told "Who

lady his and Exeter, in morning this ma'am, myself, Ferrars Mr. see "I
of door the at chaise a in stopping was They was. as Steele Miss too,
the at Sally from message a with there went I as Inn, London New the
up look to happened I post-boys. the of one is who brother, her to Park
Miss youngest the was it directly see I so and chaise, the by went I as
and me, to called and me knew she and hat, my off took I so Steele;
Miss especially ladies, young the and ma'am, you, after inquired
Ferrars's, Mr. and compliments her give should I me bid and Marianne,
not had they was they sorry how and service, and compliments best their
go to hurry great a in was they but you, see and on come to time
but while, little a for down further going was they for forwards,
you." see and come to sure make they'd back, come they when howsever,

Thomas?" married, was she you tell she did "But

since name her changed had she how said and smiled, She ma'am. "Yes,
free-spoken and affable very a always was She parts. these in was she
joy." her wish to free made I So, behaved. civil very and lady, young

her?" with carriage the in Ferrars Mr. "Was

look not did he but it, in back leaning him see just I ma'am, "Yes,
talking." for much gentleman a was never up;--he

himself putting not his for account easily could heart Elinor's
explanation. same the found probably Dashwood Mrs. and forward;

carriage?" the in else one no there "Was

two." they only ma'am, "No,

from?" came they where know you "Do

me." told Ferrars Lucy--Mrs. Miss as town, from straight come "They

westward?" farther going they are "And

and again, back be soon will They long. bide to not ma'am--but "Yes,
here." call and sure be they'd then

than better knew Elinor but daughter; her at looked now Dashwood Mrs.
and message, the in Lucy of whole the recognised She them. expect to
She them. near come never would Edward that confident very was
going probably were they that mother, her to voice, low a in observed
Plymouth. near Pratt's, Mr. to down

to wished she if as looked Elinor over. seemed intelligence Thomas's
more. hear

away?" came you before off, them see you "Did

any bide not could I but out, coming just were horses ma'am--the "No,
late." being of afraid was I longer;

well?" look Ferrars Mrs. "Did

was she mind my to and well; very was she how said she ma'am, "Yes,
contented." vastly seemed she lady--and young handsome very a always

the and Thomas and question, other no of think could Dashwood Mrs.
dismissed. afterwards soon were needless, alike now tablecloth,
more. nothing eat should she that say, to sent already had Marianne
Margaret and lost, equally were appetites Elinor's and Dashwood's Mrs.
both as uneasiness much so with that off, well very herself think might
often had they as reason much so experienced, lately had sisters her
go to obliged been never had she meals, their of careless be to had
before. dinner her without

and Dashwood Mrs. and arranged, were wine the and dessert the When
a in together long remained they themselves, by left were Elinor
to feared Dashwood Mrs. silence. and thoughtfulness of similarity
now She consolation. offer to not ventured and remark, any hazard
of representation Elinor's on relying in erred had she that found
expressly been had thing every that concluded justly and herself;
unhappiness, of increase an from her spare to time, the at softened
she that found She Marianne. for suffered had then she as suffering
her of attention considerate the careful, the by misled been had
well so had she once which attachment, the think to daughter,
to wont been had she than reality, in slighter much understood,
this under that feared She be. to proved now was it than or believe,
her to unkind, almost nay, inattentive, unjust, been had she persuasion
more acknowledged, more because affliction, Marianne's Elinor;--that
led and tenderness, her engrossed much too had her, before immediately
suffering daughter a have might she Elinor in that forget to away her
greater and self-provocation, less with certainly much, as almost
fortitude.



48 CHAPTER


an of expectation the between difference the found now Elinor
it, consider to told be may mind the certain however event, unpleasant
had she herself, of spite in that found, now She itself. certainty and
something that single, remained Edward while hope, a admitted always
his of resolution some that Lucy; marrying his prevent to occur would
of opportunity eligible more some or friends, of mediation some own,
all. of happiness the assist to arise would lady, the for establishment
lurking the for heart her condemned she and married; now was he But
intelligence. the of pain the heightened much so which flattery,

in be could he imagined) she (as before soon, married be should he That
the of possession in be could he before consequently and orders,
likely how saw soon she But first. at little a her surprised living,
secure to haste her in care, self-provident her in Lucy, that was it
were They delay. of risk the but thing every overlook should him,
What uncle's. her to down hastening now and town, in married married,
her seeing on Barton, from miles four within being on felt Edward had
message! Lucy's hearing on servant, mother's

Delaford.--Delaford,--that at settled be supposed, she soon, would They
she which interest; an her give to conspired much so which in place
them saw She avoid. to desired yet and with, acquainted be to wished
active, the Lucy, in saw parsonage-house; their in instant an in
with appearance smart of desire a once at uniting manager, contriving
her half of suspected be to ashamed and frugality, utmost the
thought, every in interest own her practices;--pursuing economical
every of and Jennings, Mrs. of Brandon, Colonel of favour the courting
she what nor saw, she what not knew Edward--she In friend. wealthy
away turned she her; pleased unhappy,--nothing or see;--happy to wished
him. of sketch every from head her

London in connections their of one some that herself flattered Elinor
farther give and event, the announce to them to write would
no letter, no brought and off, passed day after day particulars,--but
fault found she blame, to were one any that uncertain Though tidings.
indolent. or thoughtless all were They friend. absent every with

which inquiry an was ma'am?" Brandon, Colonel to write you do "When
on. going something have to mind her of impatience the from sprung

to than see, to expect rather and week, last love, my him, to wrote "I
should and us, to coming his pressed earnestly I again. him from hear
day." any or tomorrow, or today in walk him see to surprised be not

Colonel to. forward look to something something, gaining was This
give. to information some have must Brandon

on man a of figure the when it, determined so she had Scarcely
was It gate. their at stopt He window. the to eyes her drew horseback
more; hear could she Now himself. Brandon Colonel was it gentleman, a
Colonel NOT was But--it it. of expectation in trembled she and
must she possible, it Were height. his air--nor his Brandon--neither
dismounted;--she just had He again. looked She Edward. be must it say
down. sat and away moved She Edward. WAS mistaken,--it be not could
WILL I calm; be WILL I us. see to purposely Pratt's Mr. from comes "He
myself." of mistress be

the of aware likewise were others the that perceived she moment a In
look them saw colour; change Marianne and mother her saw She mistake.
have would She other. each to sentences few a whisper and herself, at
that understand them make to speak--and to able be to world the given
to behaviour their in appear would slight, no coolness, no hoped she
their to all leave to obliged was and utterance, no had she him;--but
discretion. own

the for silence in waited all They aloud. passed syllable a Not
gravel the along heard were footsteps His visitor. their of appearance
before was he another in and passage, the in was he moment a in path;
them.

for even happy, too not was room, the entered he as countenance, His
if as looked he and agitation, with white was complexion His Elinor.
one. kind no merited he that conscious and reception, his of fearful
of wishes the to trusted, she as conforming, however, Dashwood, Mrs.
be to heart her of warmth the in meant then she whom by daughter, that
him gave complacency, forced of look a with met thing, every in guided
joy. him wished and hand, her

lips Elinor's reply. unintelligible an out stammered and coloured, He
over, was action of moment the when and, mother's, her with moved had
too then was it But too. him with hands shaken had she that wished she
and again down sat she open, be to meaning countenance a with and late,
weather. the of talked

her conceal to sight, of out possible as much as retreated had Marianne
of whole the not but part, some understanding Margaret, and distress;
therefore and dignified, be to her on incumbent it thought case, the
strict a maintained and could, she as him from far as seat a took
silence.

very a season, the of dryness the in rejoice to ceased had Elinor When
who Dashwood, Mrs. by to end an put was It place. took pause awful
a In well. very Ferrars Mrs. left had he that hope to obliged felt
affirmative. the in replied he manner, hurried

pause. Another

own her of sound the fearing though herself, exert to resolving Elinor
said, now voice,

Longstaple?" at Ferrars Mrs. "Is

mother my "No, surprise.-- of air an with replied, he Longstaple!" "At
town." in is

inquire "to table, the from work some up taking Elinor, said meant," "I
Ferrars." EDWARD Mrs. for

their turned both Marianne and mother her up;--but look not dared She
and, doubtingly, looked perplexed, seemed coloured, He him. on eyes
said,-- hesitation, some after

Ferrars." ROBERT Mrs.--Mrs. mean brother--you mean--my you "Perhaps

an in mother her and Marianne by repeated Ferrars!"--was Robert "Mrs.
speak, not could Elinor though amazement;--and utmost the of accent
He wonder. impatient same the with him on fixed were eyes HER even
not from apparently window, the to walked and seat, his from rose
and there, lay that scissors of pair a up took do; to what knowing
to latter the cutting by sheath their and them both spoiling while
voice, hurried a in said, spoke, he as pieces

is brother my that heard have not may know--you not do you "Perhaps
Steele." Lucy Miss youngest--to the to--to married lately

Elinor, but all by astonishment unspeakable with echoed were words His
such of state a in work, her over leaning head her with sat who
was. she where know hardly her made as agitation

Dawlish." at now are and week, last married were "they he, said "Yes,"

as and room, the of out ran almost She longer. no it sit could Elinor
first at which joy, of tears into burst closed, was door the as soon
any looked then till had who Edward, cease. never would thought she
even saw--or perhaps and away, hurry her saw her, at than rather where,
reverie, a into fell he afterwards immediately for emotion; her heard,
Mrs. of address affectionate no inquiries, no remarks, no which
quitted word, a saying without last, at and penetrate, could Dashwood
the in others the village--leaving the towards out walked and room, the
so situation, his in change a on perplexity and astonishment greatest
of means no had they which perplexity sudden;--a so and wonderful
conjectures. own their by but lessening



49 CHAPTER


might release his of circumstances the as however, Unaccountable,
to and free; was Edward that certain was it family, whole the to appear
pre-determined easily was employed be would freedom that purpose what
imprudent ONE of blessings the experiencing after all;--for by
already had he as consent, mother's his without contracted engagement,
in him of expected be could less nothing years, four than more for done
another. of contraction immediate the than THAT, of failure the

ask to only was It one. simple a was fact, in Barton, at errand His
altogether not was he that considering him;--and marry to Elinor
should he that strange be might it question, a such in inexperienced
in much so did, really he as case present the in uncomfortable so feel
air. fresh and encouragement of need

how however, resolution, proper the into himself walked had he soon How
he manner what in occurred, it exercising of opportunity an soon
particularly be not need received, was he how and himself, expressed
at table to down sat all they when said;--that be need only This told.
his secured had he arrival, his after hours three about o'clock, four
rapturous the in only not was and consent, mother's her engaged lady,
one truth, and reason of reality the in but, lover, the of profession
commonly than more was indeed situation His men. of happiest the of
to love accepted of triumph ordinary the than more had He joyful.
any without released was He spirits. his raise and heart, his swell
his formed long had which entanglement an from himself, to reproach
at elevated love;--and to ceased long had he whom woman a from misery,
of thought have must he which another, with security that to once
with it consider to learnt had he as soon as despair, with almost
to misery from but suspense, or doubt from not brought, was He desire.
genuine, a such in spoken openly was change the happiness;--and
in witnessed never had friends his as cheerfulness, grateful flowing,
before. him

errors its all weaknesses, its all Elinor, to open now was heart His
the all with treated Lucy to attachment boyish first his and confessed,
twenty-four. of dignity philosophic

"the he, said side," my on inclination idle foolish, a was "It
my Had employment. of want world--and the of ignorance of consequence
eighteen at removed was I when profession active some me given mother
never would it sure, am I think--nay, I Pratt, Mr. of care the from
the at thought, I what with Longstaple left I though for happened; have
had then I had yet niece, his for preference unconquerable most a time,
distance a at me keep and time my engage to object any pursuit, any
fancied the outgrown have soon very should I months, few a for her from
I case such in as world, the with more mixing by especially attachment,
of instead do, to thing any having of instead But done. have must
any chuse to allowed being or me, for chosen profession any having
first the for and idle; completely be to home returned I myself,
which employment, nominal the even not had I afterwards twelvemonth
entered not was I for me; given have would university the to belonging
to world the in nothing therefore had I nineteen. was I till Oxford at
home my make not did mother my as and love; in myself fancy to but do,
my in companion no friend, no had I as comfortable, respect every in
to me for unnatural not was it acquaintance, new disliked and brother,
and home, at myself felt always I where Longstaple, at often very be
part greatest the spent I accordingly and welcome; a of sure always was
everything appeared Lucy nineteen: to eighteen from there time my of
thought I least too--at pretty was She obliging. and amiable was that
no make could I that women, other of little so seen had I and THEN; so
I therefore, everything, Considering defects. no see and comparisons,
every in since has it as foolish was, engagement our as foolish hope,
inexcusable an or unnatural an time the at not was it proved, been way
folly." of piece

happiness the and minds the in wrought had hours few a which change The
the all, them promised great--as such--so was Dashwoods, the of
be to happy too Dashwood, Mrs. night. sleepless a of satisfaction
how enough, Elinor praise nor Edward, love to how not knew comfortable,
delicacy, his wounding without release his for thankful enough be to
conversation unrestrained for leisure them give to once at how nor
both. of society and sight the wished, she as enjoy, yet and together,

would Comparisons tears. by only happiness HER speak could Marianne
love her as sincere though joy, her arise;--and would occur--regrets
language. nor spirits neither her give to kind a of was sister, her for

of moment the described?--From be to feelings HER are Elinor--how But
the to free, was Edward that another, to married was Lucy that learning
she followed, instantly so had which hopes the justifying his of moment
had moment second the when But tranquil. but turns by thing every was
compared removed, solicitude every doubt, every found she when passed,
honourably him been,--saw had it lately so what with situation her
the by profiting instantly him saw engagement, former his from released
as tender, as affection an declare and herself address to release,
was she oppressed, was be,--she to it supposed ever had she as constant
human the is as disposed happily felicity;--and own her by overcome
it better, the for change any with familiarized easily be to mind
degree any or spirits, her to sedateness give to hours several required
heart. her to tranquillity of

whatever week;--for a for least at cottage the at fixed now was Edward
a than less that impossible was it him, on made be might claims other
or company, Elinor's of enjoyment the to up given be should week
and present, the past, the of said be to was that half say to suffice
of labor hard the in spent hours few very a though future;--for the
in be really can than subjects more despatch will talking incessant
is it lovers with yet creatures, rational two any between common
is communication no finished, is subject no THEM Between different.
over. times twenty least at made been has it till made, even

all, them among wonder reasonable and unceasing the marriage, Lucy's
lovers;--and the of discussions earliest the of one course of formed
in her to appear it made party each of knowledge particular Elinor's
unaccountable and extraordinary most the of one as view, every
together, thrown be could they How heard. ever had she circumstances
of girl, a marry to on drawn be could Robert attraction what by and
admiration,--a any without speak him heard herself had she beauty whose
that account whose on and brother, his to engaged already too girl
her beyond was family--it his by off thrown been had brother
delightful a was it heart own her To out. make to comprehension
her to but one, ridiculous a even was it imagination her to affair,
puzzle. a completely was it judgment, her reason,

perhaps, that, supposing, by explanation an attempt only could Edward
worked so been had one the of vanity the meeting, accidentally first at
rest. the all to degrees by lead to as other, the of flattery the by on
his of Street, Harley in her told had Robert what remembered Elinor
have might affairs brother's his in mediation own his what of opinion
Edward. to it repeated She time. in to applied if done,

observation.--"And immediate his Robert,"--was like exactly was "THAT
the when head HIS in be perhaps "might added, presently he THAT,"
might first at perhaps Lucy And began. first them between acquaintance
designs Other favour. my in offices good his procuring of only think
arise." afterward might

equally was he however, them, between on carrying been had it long How
had he where Oxford, at for out; make to herself with loss a at
means no had had he London, quitting his since ever choice for remained
last very the to letters her and herself, from but her of hearing of
the Not usual. than affectionate less nor frequent, less neither were
for him prepare to occurred ever had therefore, suspicion, smallest
Lucy from letter a in him on burst it last at when followed;--and what
between stupified half believed, he time, some for been had he herself,
the put He deliverance. a such of joy the and horror, the wonder, the
hands. Elinor's into letter

SIR, "DEAR

affections, your lost long have I sure very "Being
own my bestow to liberty at myself thought have I
with happy as being of doubt no have and another, on
you; with be might I think to used once I as him
was heart the while hand a accept to scorn I but
choice, your in happy you wish Sincerely another's.
always not are we if fault my be not shall it and
makes now relationship near our as friends, good
ill-will, no you owe I say safely can I proper.
any us do to generous too be will you sure am and
affections my gained has brother Your offices. ill
one without live not could we as and entirely,
and altar, the from returned just are we another,
which weeks, few a for Dawlish to way our on now are
see, to curiosity great has brother dear your place
these with you trouble first would I thought but
remain, always shall and lines, few

sister, and friend, well-wisher, sincere "Your
FERRARS. "LUCY

return will and letters, your all burnt have "I
destroy to Please opportunity. first the picture your
very are you hair my with ring the scrawls--but my
keep." to welcome

comment. any without it returned and read Elinor

said composition," a as it of opinion your ask not will "I
YOU by seen hers of letter a had have I not would worlds Edward.--"For
I wife!--how a in but enough, bad is it sister a days.--In former in
say may I believe I writing!--and her of pages the over blushed have
the is foolish--business--this our of year half first the since that
me made substance the which of her, from received ever I letter only
style." the of defect the for amends any

pause,--"they a after Elinor, said about," come have may it "However
most a herself on brought has mother your And married. certainly are
Robert, on settled she independence The punishment. appropriate
own his make to power his in it put has you, against resentment through
thousand a with son one bribing been actually has she and choice;
for other the disinherited she which deed very the do to a-year,
Robert's by suppose, I hurt, less be hardly will She do. to intending
her." marrying your by been have would she than Lucy, marrying

favourite.--She her was always Robert for it, by hurt more be will "She
him forgive will principle same the on and it, by hurt more be will
sooner." much

knew Edward them, between present at stood affair the state what In
attempted been yet had family his of any with communication no for not,
after hours twenty and four within Oxford quitted had He him. by
nearest the him, before object one only with and arrived, letter Lucy's
with conduct, of scheme any form to leisure no had had Barton, to road
do could He connection. intimate most the hold not did road that which
his by and Dashwood; Miss with fate his of assured were he till nothing
the of spite in supposed, be to is it fate, THAT seeking in rapidity
of spite in Brandon, Colonel of thought once had he which with jealousy
politeness the and deserts, own his rated he which with modesty the
expect whole, the upon not, did he doubts, his of talked he which with
he that say to however, business, his was It reception. cruel very a
a subject the on say might he What prettily. very it said he and DID,
and husbands of imagination the to referred be must after, twelvemonth
wives.

of flourish a with off go to deceive, to meant certainly had Lucy That
to clear perfectly was Thomas, by message her in him against malice
her on enlightened thoroughly now himself, Edward and Elinor;
utmost the of capable her believing in scruple no had character,
opened, long been had eyes his Though ill-nature. wanton of meanness
a and ignorance her to began, Elinor with acquaintance his before even
equally been had opinions--they her of some in liberality of want
letter last her till and education; of want her to him, by imputed,
well-disposed, a be to her believed always had he him, reached
but Nothing himself. to attached thoroughly and girl, good-hearted
an to end an putting his prevented have could persuasion a such
his to open him laid it of discovery the before long which, engagement,
to regret and disquiet of source continual a been had anger, mother's
him.

give to feelings, my of "independent he, said duty," my it thought "I
was I when not, or engagement the continuing of option the her
in friend a without appearance all to stood and mother, my by renounced
there where that, as situation a such In me. assist to world the
living any of vanity the or avarice the tempt to nothing seemed
warmly so earnestly, so she when suppose, I could how creature,
but thing any that be, might it whatever fate, my sharing on insisted
I now, even And inducement? her was affection disinterested most the
advantage fancied what or acted, she motive what on comprehend cannot
the not had she whom for man a to fettered be to her, to be could it
world. the in pounds thousand two only had who and regard, smallest
living." a me give would Brandon Colonel that foresee not could She

favour; your in occur would something that suppose might she but "No;
lost she rate, any at And relent. time in might family own your that
it that proved has she for engagement, the continuing by nothing
was connection The actions. her nor inclination her neither fettered
consideration her gained probably and one, respectable a certainly
would it occurred, advantageous more nothing if and, friends; her among
single." be than YOU marry to her for better be

have could nothing that convinced immediately course, of was, Edward
the than self-evident more nor conduct, Lucy's than natural more been
it. of motive

which imprudence the scold always ladies as harshly him, scolded Elinor
at them with time much so spent having for themselves, compliments
inconstancy. own his felt have must he when Norland,

say "because--to she; said wrong," very certainly was behaviour "Your
to it by away led all were relations our conviction, own my of nothing
be." never could situated, THEN were you as WHAT, expect and fancy

mistaken a and heart, own his of ignorance an plead only could He
engagement. his of force the in confidence

to plighted was FAITH my because that think, to enough simple was "I
the that and you; with being my in danger no be could there another,
sacred and safe as heart my keep to was engagement my of consciousness
only was it myself told I but you, admired I that felt I honour. my as
and yourself between comparisons make to began I till and friendship;
WAS I suppose, I that, After got. was I far how know not did I Lucy,
I which with arguments the and Sussex, in much so remaining in wrong
than better no were it, of expediency the to myself reconciled
but anybody to injury no doing am I own; my is danger these:--The
myself."

head. her shook and smiled, Elinor

the at expected being Brandon's Colonel of pleasure with heard Edward
him, with acquainted better be to only not wished really he as Cottage,
resented longer no he that him convincing of opportunity an have to but
he, said present," at Delaford--"Which, of living the him giving his
occasion, the on were mine as delivered ungraciously so thanks "after
offering." for him forgiven never have I think must he

place. the to been yet never had he that himself astonished felt he NOW
his all owed he that matter, the in taken he had interest little so But
parish, the of extent glebe, and garden, house, the of knowledge
who herself, Elinor to tithes, the of rate and land, the of condition
much so with it heard and Brandon, Colonel from it of much so heard had
subject. the of mistress entirely be to as attention,

one them, between undecided, remained only this after question One
by together brought were They overcome. be to was only difficulty
friends; real their of approbation warmest the with affection, mutual
happiness their make to seemed other each of knowledge intimate their
two had Edward upon. live to something wanted only they certain--and
all was living, Delaford with which, one, Elinor and pounds, thousand
Mrs. that impossible was it for own; their call could they that
quite them of neither were they and anything; advance should Dashwood
a-year pounds fifty and hundred three that think to love in enough
life. of comforts the with them supply would

his in change favourable some of hopes without entirely not was Edward
their of residue the for rested he THAT on and him; towards mother
would Edward since for dependence; such no had Elinor But income.
been had herself chusing his and Morton, Miss marry to unable be still
evil lesser a only as language flattering Ferrars's Mrs. in of spoken
would offence Robert's that feared she Steele, Lucy chusing his than
Fanny. enrich to than purpose other no serve

to appeared, Brandon Colonel arrival Edward's after days four About
of dignity the her give to and satisfaction, Dashwood's Mrs. complete
company more Barton, at living her since time first the for having,
the retain to allowed was Edward hold. would house her than her with
every walked therefore Brandon Colonel and comer, first of privilege
returned usually he whence from Park; the at quarters old his to night
tete-a-tete first lovers' the interrupt to enough early morning, the in
breakfast. before

at hours evening his in where, Delaford, at residence weeks' three A
between disproportion the calculate to but do to little had he least,
mind of temper a in Barton to him brought seventeen, and thirty-six
kindness the all looks, Marianne's in improvement the all needed which
to language, mother's her of encouragement the all and welcome, her of
he flattery, such and however, friends, such Among cheerful. it make
knew him:--he reached yet had marriage Lucy's of rumour No revive. did
were visit his of hours first the and passed; had what of nothing
was thing Every wondering. in and hearing in spent consequently
rejoice to reason fresh found he and Dashwood, Mrs. by him to explained
the promoted it eventually since Ferrars, Mr. for done had he what in
Elinor. of interest

good the in advanced gentlemen the that say, to needless be would It
acquaintance, other's each in advanced they as other, each of opinion
principles good in resemblance Their otherwise. be not could it for
probably would thinking, of manner and disposition in sense, good and
other any without friendship, in them unite to sufficient been have
sisters two and sisters, two with love in being their but attraction;
immediate, and inevitable regard mutual that made other, each of fond
judgment. and time of effect the waited have otherwise might which

every made have would before days few a which town, from letters The
read be to arrived now transport, with thrill body Elinor's in nerve
the tell to wrote Jennings Mrs. mirth. than emotion less with
jilting the against indignation honest her vent to tale, wonderful
she who, Edward, Mr. poor towards compassion her forth pour and girl,
all by now, was and hussy, worthless the upon doted quite had sure, was
she think," do "I Oxford.-- at broken-hearted, almost accounts,
days two but was it for sly; so on carried ever was "nothing continued,
soul a Not me. with hours of couple a sat and called Lucy before
came soul! poor who, Nancy, even not matter, the of anything suspected
Ferrars, Mrs. of fear for fright great a in after, day the me to crying
seems it Lucy for Plymouth; to get to how knowing not as well as
we purpose on married, be to off went she before money her all borrowed
in shillings seven not had Nancy poor and with, show a make to suppose
her take to guineas five her give to glad very was I world;--so the
with weeks four or three staying of thinks she where Exeter, to down
Doctor the with in fall to her, tell I as hopes, in Burgess, Mrs.
along them take to not crossness Lucy's that say must I And again.
cannot I Edward! Mr. Poor all. than worse is chaise the in them with
Miss and Barton, to him for send must you but head, my of out him get
him." comfort to try must Marianne

most the was Ferrars Mrs. solemn. more were strains Dashwood's Mr.
of agonies suffered had Fanny women--poor of unfortunate
a such under each, of existence the considered he sensibility--and
but unpardonable, was offence Robert's wonder. grateful with blow,
be to again ever were them of Neither worse. infinitely was Lucy's
induced be hereafter might she if even, and Ferrars; Mrs. to mentioned
her as acknowledged be never should wife his son, her forgive to
with secrecy The presence. her in appear to permitted be nor daughter,
rationally was them, between on carried been had everything which
suspicion any had because, crime, the heightening enormously as treated
to taken been have would measures proper others, the to occurred it of
in him with join to Elinor on called he and marriage; the prevent
been rather not had Edward with engagement Lucy's that regretting
misery spreading of means the be thus should she that than fulfilled,
continued: thus He family.-- the in farther

not does which name, Edward's mentioned yet never has Ferrars "Mrs.
been has line a not astonishment, great our to but, us; surprise
silent kept is he however, Perhaps, occasion. the on him from received
a by hint, a him give therefore, shall, I and offending, of fear his by
proper of letter a think both I and sister his that Oxford, to line
to shewn her by and Fanny, to perhaps addressed him, from submission
of tenderness the know all we for amiss; taken be not might mother, her
be to as much so nothing for wishes she that and heart, Ferrars's Mrs.
children." her with terms good on

of conduct and prospects the to importance some of was paragraph This
not though reconciliation, a attempt to him determined It Edward.
sister. and brother their by out pointed manner the in exactly

beg me have they "would he; repeated submission!" proper of letter "A
of breach and HER, to ingratitude Robert's for pardon mother's my
nor humble neither grown am submission--I no make can ME?--I to honour
not would that but happy; very grown am passed.--I has what by penitent
make." to me for proper IS that submission no of know interest.--I

have you "because Elinor, said forgiven," be to ask certainly may "You
to as far so venture NOW might you think should I offended;--and
drew which engagement the formed ever having for concern some profess
anger." mother's your you on

might. he that agreed He

be may humility little a perhaps you, forgiven has she when "And
imprudent as almost engagement, second a acknowledging while convenient
first." the as eyes HER in

a of idea the resisted still but it, against urge to nothing had He
him, to easier it make to therefore, and submission; proper of letter
by concessions mean make to willingness greater much a declared he as
writing of instead that, resolved was it paper, on than mouth of word
good her intreat personally and London, to go should he Fanny, to
themselves," interest DO really they if "And favour.-- his in offices
a about bringing "in candour, of character new her in Marianne, said
entirely not are Fanny and John even that think shall I reconciliation,
merit." without

the days, four or three only of side Brandon's Colonel on visit a After
to immediately go to were They together.-- Barton quitted gentlemen two
future his of knowledge personal some have might Edward that Delaford,
improvements what on deciding in friend and patron his assist and home,
of couple a there staying after thence, from and it; to needed were
town. to journey his on proceed to was he nights,



50 CHAPTER


violent so just Ferrars, Mrs. of part the on resistance proper a After
always she which reproach that from her preserve to as steady so and
Edward amiable, too being of reproach the incurring, of fearful seemed
son. her again be to pronounced and presence, her to admitted was

of years many For fluctuating. exceedingly been late of had family Her
Edward of annihilation and crime the but sons; two had had she life her
of annihilation similar the one; of her robbed had ago, weeks few a
the by now, and any; without fortnight a for her left had Robert
again. one had she Edward, of resuscitation

not did he however, live, to more once allowed being his of spite In
his revealed had he till secure, existence his of continuance the feel
he circumstance, that of publication the for engagement; present
off him carry and constitution, his to turn sudden a give might feared,
was it therefore caution apprehensive With before. as rapidly as
Mrs. calmness. unexpected with to listened was he and revealed,
marrying from him dissuade to endeavoured reasonably first at Ferrars
Miss in that him, power;--told her in argument every by Dashwood, Miss
fortune;--and larger and rank higher of woman a have would he Morton
daughter the was Morton Miss that observing by assertion, the enforced
only was Dashwood Miss while pounds, thousand thirty with nobleman a of
when but THREE; than more no with gentleman private a of daughter the
her of truth the admitting perfectly though that, found she
she it, by guided be to inclined means no by was he representation,
submit--and to past, the of experience the from wisest, it judged
own her to owed she as delay ungracious an such after therefore,
she good-will, of suspicion every prevent to served as and dignity,
Elinor. and Edward of marriage the to consent of decree her issued

to next was income their augmenting towards do to engage would she What
now was Edward though that appeared, plainly it here and considered; be
was Robert while for eldest; her means no by was he son, only her
smallest the not a-year, pounds thousand a with endowed inevitably
two of sake the for orders taking Edward's against made was objection
for either promised anything was nor utmost; the at fifty and hundred
had which pounds, thousand ten the beyond future, in or present the
Fanny. with given been

by expected, was than more and desired, was as however, much, as was It
excuses, shuffling her by herself, Ferrars Mrs. and Elinor; and Edward
more. giving not her at surprised person only the seemed

them, to secured thus wants their to sufficient quite income an With
the of possession in was Edward after for wait to nothing had they
with Brandon, Colonel which to house, the of readiness the but living,
making was Elinor, of accommodation the for desire eager an
their for time some waiting after and improvements; considerable
disappointments thousand a usual, as experiencing, after completion,
Elinor, workmen, the of dilatoriness unaccountable the from delays and
marrying not of resolution positive first the through broke usual, as
Barton in place took ceremony the and ready, was thing every till
autumn. the in early church

the at friend their with spent was marriage their after month first The
the of progress the superintend could they whence from Mansion-house;
spot;--could the on liked they as thing every direct and Parsonage,
Jennings's Mrs. sweep. a invent and shrubberies, project papers, chuse
for fulfilled; chiefly were together, jumbled rather though prophecies,
by Parsonage their in wife his and Edward visit to able was she
really she as husband, her and Elinor in found she and Michaelmas,
fact in had They world. the in couples happiest the of one believed,
Marianne, and Brandon Colonel of marriage the but for, wish to nothing
cows. their for pasturage better rather and

relations their all almost by settling first their on visited were They
was she which happiness the inspect to came Ferrars Mrs. friends. and
the at were Dashwoods the even and authorised; having of ashamed almost
honour. them do to Sussex from journey a of expense

as John, said sister," dear my disappointed, am I that say not will "I
Delaford of gates the before morning one together walking were they
one been have you certainly for much, too saying be would "THAT House,
I But, is. it as world, the in women young fortunate most the of
Brandon Colonel call to pleasure great me give would it confess,
in is thing every house, his place, his here, property His brother.
not have woods!--I his condition!--and excellent and respectable such
in standing now is there as Dorsetshire, in where any timber such seen
exactly seem not may Marianne perhaps, though, Hanger!--And Delaford
advisable be altogether would it think I him--yet attract to person the
Colonel as for you, with staying frequently now them have to you for
may what tell can nobody home, at deal great a seems Brandon
of little see and together, thrown much are people when happen--for,
to off her set to power your in be always will it else--and anybody
a her give well as may you short, forth;--in so and advantage,
me."-- understand chance--You

them treated always and them, see to come DID Ferrars Mrs. though But
by insulted never were they affection, decent of make-believe the with
Robert, of folly the to due was THAT preference. and favour real her
many before them by earned was it and wife; his of cunning the and
had which latter, the of sagacity selfish The away. passed had months
of instrument principal the was scrape, the into Robert drawn first at
assiduous humility, respectful her for it; from deliverance his
was opening smallest the as soon as flatteries, endless and attentions,
and choice, his to Ferrars Mrs. reconciled exercise, their for given
favour. her in completely him re-established

which prosperity the and affair, the in behaviour Lucy's of whole The
instance encouraging most a as forth held be may therefore, it, crowned
however self-interest, to attention unceasing an earnest, an what of
every securing in do will obstructed, apparently be may progress its
and time of that than sacrifice other no with fortune, of advantage
privately and acquaintance, her sought first Robert When conscience.
imputed view the with only was it Buildings, Bartlett's in her visited
the up give to her persuade to meant merely He brother. his by him to
affection the but overcome to nothing be could there as and engagement;
settle would interviews two or one that expected naturally he both, of
erred;--for he only, that and however, point, that In matter. the
her convince would eloquence his that hopes him gave soon Lucy though
to wanted always was conversation, another visit, another TIME, in
when mind her in lingered always doubts Some conviction. this produce
hour's half another by removed be only could which parted, they
and secured, means this by was attendance His himself. with discourse
came they Edward, of talking of Instead course. in followed rest the
always had he which on subject Robert,--a of only talk to gradually
an betrayed soon she which in and other, any on than say to more
speedily became it short, in and own; his to equal even interest
was He brother. his supplanted entirely had he that both, to evident
of proud very and Edward, tricking of proud conquest, his of proud
immediately What consent. mother's his without privately marrying
at happiness great in months some passed They known. is followed
cut--and to acquaintances old and relations many had she for Dawlish;
thence from cottages;--and magnificent for plans several drew he
the by Ferrars, Mrs. of forgiveness the procured town, to returning
was instigation, Lucy's at which, it, asking of expedient simple
reasonable, was as indeed, first, at forgiveness, The adopted.
and duty no mother his owed had who Lucy, and Robert; only comprehended
weeks some remained still none, transgressed have could therefore
and conduct of humility in perseverance But unpardoned. longer
for gratitude and offence, Robert's for self-condemnation in messages,
haughty the time in her procured with, treated was she unkindness the
afterwards, soon led and graciousness, its by her overcame which notice
influence. and affection of state highest the to degrees, rapid by
Fanny; or Robert either as Ferrars, Mrs. to necessary as became Lucy
intended once having for forgiven cordially never was Edward while and
birth, and fortune in her to superior though Elinor, and her, marry to
and considered, thing every in was SHE intruder, an as of spoken was
in settled They child. favourite a be to acknowledged, openly always
the on were Ferrars, Mrs. from assistance liberal very received town,
the aside setting and Dashwoods; the with imaginable terms best
Lucy, and Fanny between subsisting continually ill-will and jealousies
frequent the as well as part, a took course of husbands their which in
nothing themselves, Lucy and Robert between disagreements domestic
together. lived all they which in harmony the exceed could

have might son, eldest of right the forfeit to done had Edward What
to succeed to done had Robert what and out; find to people many puzzled
arrangement, an was It more. still them puzzled have might it,
nothing for cause; its in not if effects, its in justified however,
a give to talking of or living of style Robert's in appeared ever
leaving either as income, his of extent the regretting his of suspicion
Edward if much;--and too himself bringing or little, too brother his
every in duties his of discharge ready the from judged be might
and home, his and wife his to attachment increasing an from particular,
no supposed be might he spirits, his of cheerfulness regular the from
an of wish every from free less no lot, his with contented less
exchange.

well could as family her from little as her divided marriage Elinor's
useless, entirely Barton at cottage the rendering without contrived, be
with time their half than more much spent sisters and mother her for
pleasure as well as policy of motives on acting was Dashwood Mrs. her.
bringing of wish her for Delaford; at visits her of frequency the in
though earnest, less hardly was together Brandon Colonel and Marianne
her now was It expressed. had John what than liberal more rather
her, to daughter her of company the was as Precious object. darling
her to enjoyment constant its up give to as much so nothing desired she
was mansion-house the at settled Marianne see to and friend; valued
and sorrows, his felt each They Elinor. and Edward of wish the equally
the be to was consent, general by Marianne, and obligations, own their
all. of reward

of intimate so knowledge a her--with against confederacy a such With
herself, to attachment fond his of conviction a goodness--with his
everybody to observable was it after long though last, at which
do? she could her--what on else--burst

to born was She fate. extraordinary an to born was Dashwood Marianne
her by counteract, to and opinions, own her of falsehood the discover
an overcome to born was She maxims. favourite most her conduct,
sentiment no with and seventeen, at as life in late so formed affection
give to voluntarily friendship, lively and esteem strong to superior
less no suffered had who man a other, THAT another!--and to hand her
years two whom, attachment, former a of event the under herself than
sought still who married,--and be to old too considered had she before,
waistcoat! flannel a of safeguard constitutional the

irresistible an to sacrifice a falling of Instead was. it so But
expecting,--instead with herself flattered fondly had she once as passion,
only her finding and mother, her with ever for even remaining of
and calm more her in afterwards as study, and retirement in pleasures
nineteen, at herself found on,--she determined had she judgment sober
new a in placed duties, new on entering attachments, new to submitting
village. a of patroness the and family, a of mistress the wife, a home,

him, loved best who those all as happy, as now was Brandon Colonel
past every for consoled was he Marianne be;--in to deserved he believed
animation, to mind his restored society her and regard affliction;--her
own her found Marianne that and cheerfulness; to spirits his and
of delight and persuasion the equally was his, forming in happiness
her and halves; by love never could Marianne friend. observing each
had it as husband, her to devoted much as time, in became, heart whole
Willoughby. to been once

his and pang; a without marriage her of hear not could Willoughby
of forgiveness voluntary the in complete afterwards soon was punishment
as character, of woman a with marriage his stating by who, Smith, Mrs.
he had that believing for reason him gave clemency, her of source the
happy been have once at might he Marianne, towards honour with behaved
its brought thus which misconduct, of repentance his That rich. and
long he that doubted;--nor be not need sincere, was punishment, own
But regret. with Marianne of and envy, with Brandon Colonel of thought
or society, from fled he that inconsolable, ever for was he that
must heart, broken a of died or temper, of gloom habitual an contracted
and exert, to lived He neither. did he on--for depended be not
humour, of out always not was wife His himself. enjoy to frequently
dogs, and horses of breed his in and uncomfortable; always home his nor
of degree inconsiderable no found he kind, every of sporting in and
felicity. domestic

her surviving in incivility his of spite however--in Marianne, For
in him interested which regard decided that retained always loss--he
of standard secret his her made and her, befell that thing every
him by slighted be would beauty rising a many woman;--and in perfection
Brandon. Mrs. with comparison no bearing as after-days in

without cottage, the at remain to enough prudent was Dashwood Mrs.
Mrs. and John Sir for fortunately and Delaford; to removal a attempting
an reached had Margaret them, from taken was Marianne when Jennings,
being for ineligible very not and dancing, for suitable highly age
lover. a have to supposed

communication constant that was there Delaford, and Barton Between
the among dictate;--and naturally would affection family strong which
ranked be not it let Marianne, and Elinor of happiness the and merits
almost living and sisters, though that considerable, least the as
disagreement without live could they other, each of sight within
husbands. their between coolness producing or themselves, between



END THE