
I day, eventful that since me to occurred has that all to back Looking
were They adventures. my of reality the in believe to able scarcely am
them. of think I when bewildered am I now even that wonderful so truly

an sister, mother's my married having German, a was uncle My
he nephew, fatherless his to attached much very Being Englishwoman.
home This fatherland. the in home his in him under study to me invited
chemistry, philosophy, of professor a uncle my and town, large a in was
ologies. other many and mineralogy, geology,

being uncle laboratory--my the in hours some passing after day, One
the renovating of necessity the felt suddenly time--I the at absent
French old our up rouse to about was and hungry, was I tissues--<i>i.e.</i>,
street the opened suddenly Hardwigg, Von Professor uncle, my when cook,
upstairs. rushing came and door,

of sort bad a means no by is uncle, worthy my Hardwigg, Professor Now
to means him with bear To original. and choleric however, is, he man;
joint our within resounded feet heavy his had scarcely and obey;
him. upon attend to me for shouted he than domicile

"Harry--Harry--Harry--"

three jumping room, his reach could I before but obey, to hastened I
landing. the upon foot right his stamping was he time, a at steps

up?" coming you "are tone, frantic a in cried, he "Harry!"

the in interested more far was I moment that at truth, the tell to Now
of problem any in than dinner our constitute to was what to as question
more omelette an soda, than interesting more was soup me to science;
than value more times ten of artichoke an and arithmetic, than tempting
asbestos. of amount any

therefore adjourning so waiting; kept be to man a not was uncle my But
him. before myself presented I questions, minor all

supply category this in persons most Now man. learned very a was He
benefit the for goods, with do peddlers as information, with themselves
the for abroad them diffuse to order in stores up lay and others, of
Professor uncle, excellent my so Not general. in society of benefit
heavy over pored he oil, midnight the consumed he studied, he Hardwigg;
the keep to order in folios and quartos huge digested and tomes,
himself. to acquired knowledge

uncle my why one, good a as regarded be may it and reason, a was There
he necessary: absolutely was than more learning his display to objected
heavens, the of phenomena the explaining upon intent when and stammered;
sun, to way vague a such in allude and fault, at himself find to apt was
tell To meaning. his comprehend to able were few that stars and moon,
generally was it come, not would word right the when truth, honest the
adjective. powerful very a by replaced

unpronounceable almost many are there sciences the with connection In
uncle my and villages; Welsh of those resembling much very names--names
thereby not was stammering of habit his them, using of fond very being
would he when discourse his in periods were there fact, In improved.
water. of glass a discomfiture--in his swallow and up give finally

I and man; learned very a was Hardwigg, Professor uncle, my said, I As
of ties double the by him to bound was I relative. kind most a add now
and doings, his all in interest deep took I interest. and affection
for thing rare a was It myself. learned as almost be to day some hoped
to mineralogy preferred I him, Like lectures. his from absent be to me
the of <i>knowledge real gain to was anxiety My sciences. other the all
and life, of objects sole the us to were mineralogy and Geology earth</i>.
chalk, stone, of specimen fair a many studies these with connection in
hammers. our with break we did metal or

were acids various of bottles and pipes, glass loadstones, rods, Steel
to known once was Hardwigg uncle My meals. our than us before oftener
weight, their by specimens geological different hundred six classify
smell. and taste, sound, fusibility, hardness,

the of men scientific and learned, great, the all with corresponded He
the events all at with, communication constant in therefore, was, I age.
men. great other and Franklin, Captain Davy, Humphry Sir of, letters

with confer to wished uncle my which on subject the state I before But
readers my Alas! appearance. personal his about word a say must I me,
has he after time, future a at him of portrait different very a see will
related. be to yet adventures fearful the through gone

spectacles Large wiry. and thin, tall, old; years fifty was uncle My
his while eyes, goggle and round, vast, his extent, certain a to hid,
it did indeed much So file. thin a to compared irreverently was nose
to presence his in said was compass a that article, useful that resemble
deviation. (Nasal) N considerable made have

my to attracted really article only the however, told, being truth The
tobacco. was nose uncle's

time, a at yard a stepped always he that was, his of peculiarity Another
one in when was, and you, hit to going were he if as fists his clenched
companion. pleasant a from far very humors, peculiar his of

house, nice very a in lived he that observe to necessary further is It
in lying Though Hamburg. at Konigstrasse the street, nice very that in
wood, aspect--half its in rural perfectly was it town, a of centre the
spared houses old few the of gables--one old-fashioned with bricks, half
1842. of fire great the by

and tottering, house--old, handsome a mean I house, nice a say I When
the off little a house a notions: English to comfortable exactly not
exactly canal; neighboring the into fall to inclined and perpendicular
could you that more the all depict; to artist wandering a for house the
the over grew which tree old magnificent a and ivy for it see scarcely
door.

a had he while property, own his was house his rich; was uncle My
his of part best the notion my To income. private considerable
young the cook, old the And Gretchen. god-daughter, his was possessions
inhabitants. sole the were I and Professor the lady,

like nothing was there me To geology. loved I mineralogy, loved I
should we fury, a of less little a in been had uncle my if pebbles--and
Hardwigg's excellent the prove To families. of happiest the been have
drawing-room the in flowers the when that declare solemnly I impatience,
them make to o'clock four at morning every rose he grow, to began pots
leaves! the pulling by quicker grow

interview. our of account an give now will I uncle, my described Having

natural every containing museum, perfect a study; his in me received He
predominating. however, imagined--minerals, be well can that curiosity
My hand. own my by catalogued been having me, to familiar was one Every
his to me summoned had he that fact the of oblivious apparently uncle,
early of fond particularly was He book. a in absorbed was presence,
works. unique and copies, tall editions,

"Wonderful--wonderful!" forehead. his tapping cried, he "Wonderful!"

stalls, on found rarely now volumes yellow-leaved those of one was It
however, uncle, My value. little but possess to appeared it me to and
raptures. in was

with ease the characters, its of clearness the binding, its admired He
times, dozen a half aloud, repeated and hand, his in opened it which
old. very very, was it that

my not was it but nothing, about fuss great a making was he fancy my To
interest considerable professed I contrary, the On so. say to province
about. was it what him asked and subject, the in

celebrated "the said, he Tarleson," Snorre of Heims-Kringla the is "It
correct and true a is century--it twelfth the of author Icelandic
Iceland." in reigned who princes Norwegian the of account

I written. was it which in language the to related question next My
was uncle My German. into translated was it events all at hoped
for penny a give wouldn't he declared and thought, very the at indignant
the in work original the found have to was delight His translation. a
magnificent most the of one be to declared he which tongue, Icelandic
its time same the at world--while the in idioms simple yet and
students. to known varied most the were combinations grammatical

remark. insidious my was German?" as easy as "About

shoulders. his shrugged uncle My

of difficult rather "are said, I events," all at letters "The
comprehension."

of population original the of language the manuscript, Runic a is "It
my at angry uncle, my cried himself," Odin by invented Iceland,
ignorance.

a when subject, the on joke misplaced some upon venture to about was I
man hungry a Like leaves. the of out fell parchment of scrap small
about was It it. seized Professor the bread of morsel a at snatching
extraordinary most the in over scrawled was and three by inches five
fashion.

the on written was what of facsimile exact an are here shown lines The
they as importance, wonderful have parchment--and of piece venerable
adventures of series wonderful most the undertake to uncle my induced
beings. human of lot the to fell ever which

then and moments some for document the at keenly looked uncle My
the in those to similar were letters The Runic. was it that declared
to wanted I what exactly was This mean? they did what then but book,
know.

dialect and alphabet Runic the that conviction strong a had I as Now
delighted was I nature, human poor mystify to invention an simply were
was did--which I as matter the about much as knew uncle my that find to
think me made fingers his of motion tremulous the events all At nothing.
so.

of sure am I Icelandic, old is "it himself, to muttered he yet," "And
it."

polyglot perfect a was he for known, have to ought uncle my And
learned certain a like pretend, not did He himself. in dictionary
idioms thousand four and languages thousand two the speak to pundit,
the all know did he but globe, the of parts different in of use made
ones. important more

my measures violent what to now, me to doubt great of matter a is It
two, struck clock the not had him, led have might impetuosity uncle's
the on was dinner that know us let to out called cook French old our and
table.

uncle. my cried dinner!" the "Bother

up took I where room, dining the to forth sallied I hungry, was I as But
sign no but minutes, three waited I politeness of Out quarters. usual my
blind so usually not was He surprised. was I Professor. the uncle, my of
German of acme the was It dinner. good a of pleasure the to
of oyster an trimmings, sorrel with omelette ham a soup, luxury--parsley
the For Moselle. sparkling and fruit, delicious prunes, with stewed veal
forbore uncle my parchment, of piece old musty this over poring of sake
both. for ate I conscience, my satisfy To meal. our share to

so taking After mind. her of out nearly was housekeeper and cook old The
sad a her to was dinner at appear not master her find to trouble, much
was I havoc the watched occasionally she as disappointment--which,
to come to were uncle my If alarm. also became viands, the on making
all? after table

glass last the drunk and apple last the consumed had I as just Suddenly,
my was It distance. great no at heard was voice terrible a wine, of
of leap one nearly very made I him. to come to me for roaring uncle
tone. his was fierce so loud, it--so




2 CHAPTER

PARCHMENT MYSTERIOUS THE


Glyphs] Runic [Illustration:

fist, his with fiercely table the striking uncle, my cried Declare," "I
which secret, wonderful some contains Runic--and is it you to declare "I
price." any at at, get must I

me. stopped he when reply to about was I

dictation." my to write "and fiercely, quite said, he down," "Sit

obeyed. I

the of that for alphabet our of letter "a said, he substitute," will "I
no make and begin Now, produce. will that what see then will we Runic:
mistakes."

result: incomprehensible following the with commenced dictation The


from document the snatched uncle my finish, to time me giving Scarcely
attention. deep and rapt most the with it examined and hands my

period. long a after said, he means," it what know to like should "I

to--his me expect he did nor him, tell not could certainly I
himself. by answered uniformly being conversation

"unless, cried, he cryptograph," a of mind in me puts it declare "I
yet and meaning; real any without written been have letters the indeed,
some of verge the on be may I but knows Who trouble? much so take why
discovery?" great

kept I opinion this But rubbish! all was it that was opinion candid My
All bear. to pleasant not was choler uncle's my as myself, to carefully
parchment. the with book the comparing was he time this

different in written are document smaller the and volume manuscript "The
book; the than date later much of is cryptograph "the said, he hands,"
[An surmise. my of correctness the of proof undoubted an is there
M, double a is letter first The be.] to it took I proof irrefragable
twelfth the in language Icelandic the to added only was which
the to posterior years hundred two parchment the makes century--this
volume."

was it but logical, very and probable very appeared circumstances The
me. to surmise all

owner some by written was sentence this that probable appears it me "To
question. important next the is owner, the was who Now book. the of
volume." the in somewhere written be may it luck good great by Perhaps

taking and, spectacles, his off took Hardwigg Professor words these With
carefully. book the examined glass, magnifying powerful a

on but ink, of blot a be to appeared what was leaf fly the On
This time. by effaced almost writing of line a be to proved examination
these out made he time, considerable some after and, sought; he what was
letters:

Glyphs] Runic [Illustration:

is "that tone, triumphant and joyous a in cried he Saknussemm!" "Arne
sixteenth the of professor learned a of but name, Icelandic an only not
alchemist." celebrated a century,

respect. of sign a as bowed I

Paracelsus, Lully, Bacon, "Avicenna, continued, he alchemists," "These
surprising made They day. the of men learned only the true, the were
this on hidden have mine, nephew Saknussemm, this not May discoveries.
to cryptograph the believe I invention? astounding some parchment of bit
out." make must I meaning--which profound a have

almost excitement of state a in room the about walked uncle My
describe. to impossible

from it conceal why "but observed, timidly I sir," so, be may "It
discovery?" worthy a useful, a be it if posterity,

his of secret a make Galileo not Did know? I should "Why--how
I Until see. shall we But Saturn? with connection in discoveries
sleep." nor eat neither will I sentence this of meaning the discover

began. I uncle--" dear "My

added. he neither," you "Nor

day. that allowance double taken had I lucky was It

the to clue a be must "there continued, he place," first the "In
enough." easy be would rest the that, find could we If meaning.

and food without going of prospect The reflect. to seriously began I
solve to best my do to determined I so one, promising a not was sleep
soliloquy. his with on went meanwhile, uncle, My mystery. the

one are there document this In enough. easy is it discover to way "The
to consonants seventy-nine giving letters, thirty-two and hundred
southern most in found proportion the about is This vowels. fifty-three
consonants. in rich more much being north the of idioms the languages,
a with deal to have we that therefore, predict, confidently may We
dialect." southern

logical. more be could Nothing

language." particular the trace "to Hardwigg, Professor said "Now,"

satirical rather my was question,"' the is 'that says, Shakespeare "As
reply.

he as now man: learned very a "was continued, he Saknussemm," man "This
most like probably, he birthplace, his of language the in write not did
I however, If, Latin. in wrote century, sixteenth the of men learned
Greek, Italian, French, Spanish, try must we guess, this in wrong prove
of favor in decidedly is though, opinion, own My Hebrew. even and
Latin."

seemed it and study, favorite my was Latin me. startled proposition This
Virgil. of country the to belong to gibberish this believe to sacrilege

still "but uncle, my continued probability," all in Latin, "Barbarous
Latin."

him. contradict to not replied, I probably," "Very

have we see you "here uncle; my continued matter," the into see us "Let
thrown apparently letters, thirty-two and hundred one of series a
words are There organization. or method without paper, upon pell-mell
others <i>mm.rnlls</i>, as such consonants, of wholly composed are which
unteief, is which instance, for fifth, the vowels, all nearly are which
combination. extraordinary an appears This oseibo. last the of one and
some to according arranged is phrase the that find shall we Probably
and out written been has sentence certain a doubt No plan. mathematical
Harry, Now, clue. the is figure some which to plan up--some jumbled then
figure?" that is wit--what English your show to

was he While away. far indeed were thoughts My hint. no him give could I
and Gretchen, cousin my of portrait the of sight caught had I speaking
return. would she when wondering was

uncle, my But sincerely. very another one loved and affianced, were We
this. of nothing knew matters, sublunary such of even thought never who
the reading began Professor the abstraction, my noticing Without
his of theory some to according ways, of sorts all cryptograph puzzling
precious one dictated he attention, wandering my rousing Presently, own.
me. to attempt

follows: as read It him. to over it handed mildly I


<i>mmessunkaSenrA.icefdoK.segnittamurtn
ecertserrette,rotaivsadua,ednecsedsadne
lacartniiilrJsiratracSarbmutabiledmek
meretarcsilucoYsleffenSnI.</i>


contrary, the on uncle, my while laughing, from keep scarcely could I
of out darted fist, his with table the struck passion, towering a in got
presently was heels his to taking then and house, the of out room, the
sight. to lost




3 CHAPTER

DISCOVERY ASTOUNDING AN


will "when room; the entering cook, the cried matter?" the is "What
dinner?" his have master

"Never."

supper?" his "And,

uncle My I. shall neither more, no eat will he says He know. don't "I
this out makes he until fast me make and fast to determined has
replied. I inscription," abominable

said. she death," to starved be will "You

her sent so, say to liking not but opinion, same the of much very was I
I as try But classification. of work usual my of some began and away,
stupid the of alternately thinking from me keep could nothing might,
Gretchen. pretty the of and manuscript

angry been have would uncle my but out, going of thought I times Several
to How done. was task allotted my hour, an of end the At absence. my at
I students, other all Like pipe. my lighting by began I time? the pass
began I armchair, great the in myself seating and, tobacco; in delighted
think. to

some along tearing him imagine easily could I uncle? my was Where
with air the cutting himself, to talking gesticulating, road, solitary
Would hieroglyphics. of bit absurd the of thinking still and cane, his
these While humor? better in home come he Would clue? some upon hit he
the up took mechanically I brain, my through passing were thoughts
letters. the grouping of way imaginable every tried and puzzle execrable
vain. fives--in and fours, threes, by twos, by together them put I
fifteenth, fourteenth, the that except out, came intelligible Nothing
eighty-fifth, eighty-fourth, the English; in <i>ice</i> made sixteenth and
the find to seemed I last at then <i>sir</i>; word the eighty-sixth, and
atra</i>. nec, ira, mutabile, <i>rota, words Latin

I. thought notion," uncle's my in truth some be to seems there "Ha!

wood. sacred means which <i>luco</i>, word the find to seemed I again Then
perfect a <i>labiled</i>, out make to appeared I line third the in Then
were which mer, are, mere, syllables the last the at and word, Hebrew
French.

absurd this in idioms different Four mad. one drive to enough was It
cruel, anger, sir, ice, between be there could connection What phrase.
last the and first The sea? and are, mother, changing, wood, sacred
what But ice. of sea mean Iceland, with connected sentence a in might,
cryptograph? monstrous this of rest the of

brain my difficulty; insurmountable an against fighting fact, in was, I
parchment; the at staring with strained were eyes my fire; on almost was
my before dance to appeared letters of collection absurd whole the
with possessed was mind My groups. little black of number a in vision
I Mechanically air. wanted I stifling. was hallucination--I temporary
then and back the saw I now which of document, the with myself fanned
front. the

puzzle, wearisome the of back the at glancing when surprise my Imagine
among and words, Latin out made clearly I through, gone having ink the
terrestre. and craterem others

secret! the discovered had I

you All clue. the got had I lightning. of flash a like me upon came It
the All backwards. it read to was document the understand to do to had
it dictated had he realized; were Professor the of ideas ingenious
much so he what discovered had I accident mere a by me; to rightly
desired.

I and dazzled were eyes my imagined, be may emotion my delight, My
however, look, One it. of nothing make could I first at that so trembled
know. to wished I all me tell would

breath. long a drawing after myself, to said I read," me "Let

letter, each over finger my passed I table, the on me before it spread I
out. it read I excitement my in through; it spelled I

a like was I soul. my of possession took stupefaction and horror What
really I that possible it Was blow. knock-down a received had who man
had man A accomplished! been really had it and secret, terrible the read
do--what? to dared

know. ever should being living No

the of aware made be uncle my shall "Never up. jumping I, cried "Never!"
terrible the undertaking of capable quite be would He secret. dread
would he Worse, him. stop nothing him, check would Nothing journey.
such no; But forever. lost be should we and him, accompany to me compel
allowed." be cannot madness and folly

fury. and rage with myself beside almost was I

would "This aloud. cried I mad," nearly already is uncle worthy "My
case, which in discovery; the make may he accident some By him. finish
bury forever flames the secret--let fearful the Perish lost. both are we
oblivion." in it

the into them cast to about was and parchment, and book up snatched I
entered. uncle my and opened door the when fire,

uncle my before documents wretched the down put to time scarcely had I
evidently were thoughts His absorbed. profoundly was He side. my by was
struck probably had combination new Some parchment. terrible the on bent
walk. his taking while him

an make to began pen a with and armchair, his in himself seated He
flesh My eyes. anxious with him watched I calculation. algebraical
secret. the discover would he that probable became it as crawled

one the discovered having I useless, were now knew I combinations His
word, a speaking without continued he hours mortal three For clue. only
and over calculating rewriting, scratching, head, his raising without
The phrase. right the upon hit must he time in that knew I again. over
combinations. of number certain a only have alphabet every of letters
correct the at arrive would he before elapse might years then But
solution.

ceased--and streets the in sounds the came, night on; went time Still
she when cook worthy our answering even not on, went uncle my still
supper. to us called

asleep fell last at and away, her waved so him, leave to dare not did I
sofa. the on

pallid his eyes, red His work. at still was uncle my awoke I When
flushed hectically his hands, feverish his hair, matted his countenance,
impossible, the with struggle his been had terrible how showed cheeks,
sleepless long that during undergone had he fatigue fearful what and
severe rather was he Though him. at look to ill quite me made It night.
so was He sufferings. his at ached heart my and him, loved I me, with
his All passion! a in get even not could he that idea one by overcome
one speaking by that knew I And point. one on focused were energies
it. speak not could I cease. would suffering this all word little

I did then, Why, him. towards inclining nevertheless, was, heart My
himself. uncle my of interest the In silent? remain

in follow to want will "He muttered. I speak," me make shall "Nothing
a is imagination His well. him know I other! the of footsteps the
he geology of interests the in discoveries make to and volcano, perfect
keep strictly and silent be therefore will I life. his sacrifice would
would He suicidal. be would it reveal To discovered. have I secret the
him." with me drag but destruction, to himself, rush, only not

to never smoked--resolved and way another looked arms, my crossed I
speak.

she errand, other any on or market, to out go to wanted cook our When
done this Was away. taken key the and locked door front the found
woman old the intend not did Hardwigg Professor Surely not? or purposely
be to we Were will. obstinate his to martyrs become to myself and
had we Once mind. my to came recollection frightful A death? to starved
It curiosities. some sorted he while week a for scraps and bits on fed
it! of think to even cramp the me gave

my Still it. getting of way no saw I and breakfast, my wanted I
cook the But yield. than rather starve would I good. held resolution
not could She done? be to was What task. to seriously me take to began
not. dared I and out; go

have to seemed imagination his writing; and counting continued uncle My
drinking. nor eating of thought neither He skies. the to him translated
was there and hungry, was I round. came o'clock twelve way this In
This bread. of bit last the eaten had cook The house. the in nothing
were sensations my when two, until however, did, It on. go not could
Perhaps absurd. very document the think to began I all, After terrible.
be surely would means some Besides, hoax. gigantic a be only might it
expedition. absurd such any attempting from back uncle my keep to found
not should I quixotic, so anything attempt did he if hand, other the On
partially reasoning of line Another him. accompany to compelled be
I when himself discovery the make would he likely Very me. decided
of influence the Under nothing. for starvation suffered have should
all. tell to determined I admirable. appeared reasoning this hunger

dwelling still was I done. be to was it how to as arose now question The
hat. his on put and rose he when thought, the on

Never! in? us lock and out go What!

began. I "Uncle,"

me. hear to even appear not did He

cried. I Hardwigg," "Professor

speak?" you "did retorted, he "What,"

key?" the about "How

door?" the of key key--the "What

hieroglyphics?" horrible these "No--of

odd the at started and spectacles, his under from me at looked He
and arm the by me clutched he forward, Rushing face. my of expression
interrogation. an was look very His countenance. my examined keenly

nodded. simply I

heel. his upon turned he shoulders, the of shrug incredulous an With
mad. gone had I thought he Undoubtedly

discovery." important very a made have "I

menacing a in lifted was hand His excitement. with flashed eyes His
was which say to hard is It spoke. us of neither moment a For attitude.
excited. most

the of meaning the of idea any have you that say to mean don't "You
scrawl?"

by dictated as sentence the at "Look reply. desperate my was do," "I
you."

answer. angry the was nothing," means it but "Well,

to right from if mark, but right, to left from read you if "Nothing
left--"

cunning most "Oh amazement. wild in uncle, my cried "Backwards!"
blockhead!" a such be to I and Saknussemm;

it read and eye, haggard with it at gazed document, the up snatched He
done. had I as out

follows: as read It


delibat kem craterem Yoculis Sneffels <i>In
descende, calendas intra Julii Scartaris umbra
attinges. centrum terrestre et viator, audas
Saknussemm</i> Arne feci. Kod


follows: as reads translated, being Latin dog Which


of shade the which Sneffels, of Yocul of crater the into Descend
traveler, audacious July, of kalends the before caresses, Scartaris
it. did I earth. the of centre the reach will you and

SAKNUSSEMM ARNE


radiant looked He joy. with ground the from feet three leaped uncle My
and delight with wild room the about rushed He handsome. and
books his threw He chairs. and tables over knocked He satisfaction.
armchair. his into fell he exhausted, utterly last, at until about

asked. he o'clock?" "What's

three." "About

"Let observed. he good," much me done have to seem not does dinner "My
portmanteau my Get once. at start then can We eat. to something have me
ready."

for?" "What

once." at start "We continued. he own," your "And

fear. no show to however resolved I conceived. be may horror My
Now, uncle. my influence to likely ones only the were reasons Scientific
going of idea very The journey. terrible this against many were there
determined I absurd. simply was earth the of centre the to down
dinner. after point the argue to therefore

dinner no having for cook the against directed now was rage uncle's My
key, the gotten having and him, satisfied however explanation My ready.
appetites. voracious our satisfy to sufficient get to contrived soon she

some made He otherwise. than gay rather was uncle my repast the During
As learned. the to exclusively belong which jokes peculiar those of
each We study. his to me called he over, was dessert as however, soon,
table. the of sides opposite on chair a took

believed always have "I voice; winning and soft a in said, he "Henry,"
forgotten. be to never service a me rendered have you and ingenious, you
been have never would discovery wondrous this great, this you, Without
glory." the sharing your on insist to therefore, duty, my is It made.

opinion my know him let soon "I'll I; thought humor," good a in is "He
glory." of

a affair whole the keep must "you continued, he place," first the "In
scientific than men of race envious more no is There secret. profound
we events, all At journey. same the on start would Many discoverers.
field." the in first the be will

reply. my was competitors," many having your doubt "I

chance. the at delighted be would acquirements scientific real of man "A
Arne of traces the on pilgrims of stream perfect a find should We
public." made once were document this if Saknussemm,

urged. I hoax?" a be to likely very paper this not is sir, dear my "But,

authenticity," its of proof sufficient is it find we which in book "The
replied. he

but lines, the wrote Professor celebrated the that allow thoroughly "I
answer. my was mystification," of kind a as believe, I only,

uttered had I sorry was I when mouth, my of out words the were Scarcely
to began I and scowl, gloomy and dark a with me at looked uncle My them.
changed, soon mood His conversation. our of results the for alarmed be
frown. a of place the took smile a and however,

emphasis. decisive with remarked, he see," shall "We

this and Sneffels, and Yocul, about this all is what see, "But
them." about anything heard never have I Scartaris?

friend my from received lately I coming. am I which to point very "The
the from atlas third the down Take map. a Leipzig, of Peterman, Augustus
4." plate Z, series shelf, second

volume the with returned presently and shelf, the to went rose, I
indicated.

it believe I Iceland. of maps best the of one "is uncle, my said "This,"
objections." and difficulties doubts, your all settle will

map. the over stooped I contrary, the to hope grim a With




4 CHAPTER

JOURNEY THE ON START WE


the said volcanoes," of composed is island whole the see, "You
Yocul. of name the bear all they that carefully remark "and Professor,
lofty the of most In glacier. a means and Icelandic, is word The
icebound from forth come eruptions volcanic the region that of mountains
extraordinary this on volcano every to applied name the Hence caverns.
island."

mean?" Sneffels word this does what "But

mistaken. was I answer. rational no expected I question this To

see you there Iceland, of coast western the to finger my "Follow
innumerable its of one of direction the Follow capital. its Reykjavik,
sixty-fifth the below see you do what and sea, the of arms or fjords
latitude?" of degree

shape." in thighbone a like peninsula--very "A

it--?" of centre the in "And

mountain." "A

Sneffels." that's "Well,

say. to nothing had I

of one height, in feet thousand five about mountain Sneffels--a is "That
the be to doomed certainly and island, whole the in remarkable most the
the reach shall we crater its through for world, the in celebrated most
earth." the of centre

thought. the at shocked and startled I, cried "Impossible!"

tones. severest his in Hardwigg Professor said impossible?" "Why

infinite rocks--by burning by lava, with choked is crater its "Because
dangers."

extinct?" be it if "But

difference." a make would "That

the on volcanoes hundred three about are There would. it course "Of
these Of extinct. are number greater the globe--but the of surface whole
has it fact 1219--in since occurred has eruption No one. is Sneffels
all." at volcano a be to ceased

objection. another of thought Yes,--I say? I could more what this After

July--?" of kalends the and Scartaris about this all is what "But

his of result the forth gave he Presently deeply. reflected uncle My
me to you, to obscure appears "What tone. sententious a in reflections
his in is Saknussemm particular how shows phrase very This light. is
careful is He craters. many has mountain Sneffels The directions.
Interior the into highway the is which one exact the point to therefore
of end the about that purpose, this for know, us lets He Earth. the of
one the upon falls Scartaris Mount of shadow the June, of month the
matter." the about doubt no be can There crater.

everything. for answer an had uncle My

He right. is Saknussemm "and said, I explanations" your all accept "I
indicated has he earth, the of bowels the to entrance the out found
is discovery the up followed ever else anyone or he that but correctly,
suppose." to madness

man?" young so, "Why

be to it shows practical, and theoretical teaching, scientific "All
impossible."

uncle. my retorted theories," for nothing care "I

every for degree one increases heat that well-known not it is "But
the of idea fine a gives Which earth? the into descend you feet seventy
of state a in are globe the compose which matters the All heat. central
state a in are rocks hardest the and platinum, gold, even incandescence;
us?" of become would What fusion. of

boy." my heat, the at alarmed be "Don't

so?" "How

the of state real the about anything know else anybody nor you "Neither
older the explode to tend experiments modern All interior. earth's
earth the of crust upper the exist, to heat such any Were theories.
end." an at be would world the and atoms, to shattered be would

ended which followed, discussion uninteresting not and learned long, A
wise: this in

seem Henry, you, which difficulties and dangers the in believe not do "I
go to Saknussemm, Arne like is learn, to way only the and multiply; to
see." and

can we how Though see. and go us "let last, at overcome I, cried "Well,"
mystery." another is dark the in that do

difficulties. other many and these, overcome shall We nothing. "Fear
luminous--" it find to expect I centre, the approach we as Besides,

impossible." is "Nothing

to word a not understanding, thorough a to come have we that now "And
dispatch." and secrecy on depends success Our soul. living any

me. in fever perfect a roused which conference, memorable our ended Thus
of banks the Reaching possessed. one like forth went I uncle, my Leaving
truly and really heard had I all Was think. to began I Elbe, the
of interior the could and senses, sober his in uncle my Was possible?
a he was or madman, a of victim the I Was reached? be earth the
conception? of grandeur and courage rare of discoverer

enthusiasm my afraid was I off. be to anxious was I extent certain a To
hour, an of end the At once. at up pack to determined I cool. would
changed. much very had feelings my that found I home, way my on however,

it." dreamed have must nightmare--I a "'tis cried; I abroad," all "I'm

warmly I whom Gretchen, with face to face came I moment this At
embraced.

is what But you. of good "how said; she me," meet to come have you "So
matter?" the

listened She all. her told I matter, the mincing use no was it Well,
speak. not could she minutes some for and awe, with

anxiously. rather said, last at I "Well?"

of worthy journey A man! a only were I If journey. magnificent a "What
to honor an as it upon look should I Hardwigg. Professor of nephew the
him." accompany

against out cry to first the be would you thought I Gretchen, dear "My
enterprise." mad this

splendid--an magnificent, is It it. in glory I contrary, the on "No;
you." envy I Lawson, Henry father. my of worthy idea

all. of blow final The conclusive. were, it as was, This

and workmen by surrounded uncle my found we house the entered we When
bell. a at hauling and pulling was He up. packing were who porters,

not is portmanteau Your time? your wasting been you have "Where
brought not has tailor precious order--the in not are papers packed--my
gone!" is bag carpet my of key gaiters--the my nor clothes, my

bell. the at away tugged he still And stupefied. him at looked I

said. I then?" off, really are "We

boy!" unfortunate stroll, a for out go you yet and course, "Yes--of

go?" we do when "And

daybreak." at tomorrow, after day "The

locked and bedchamber little my to off darted but more; no heard I
at hard been had uncle My now. it about doubt no was There in. myself
ladders, rope ropes, of full was garden The afternoon. the all work
and alpenstocks, crowbars, clamps, iron gourds, torches,
men. ten load to pickaxes--enough

that learn to day next the early called was I night. terrible a passed I
found also I irrevocable. and unchanged was uncle my of resolution the
father. her was as subject the on warm as wife affianced and cousin my

the at was chaise post the morning, the in o'clock five at day, Next
and, house; the of keys the received cook old the and Gretchen door.
adventurous our on started we good-by, anyone wish to pausing scarcely
earth. the of centre the into journey




5 CHAPTER

Climbing in Lessons First


Kiel the of Station Chief the is Hamburg, of suburb a Altona, At
twenty In Belt. the of shores the to us take to was which railway,
our and Holstein, in were we departure our of moment the from minutes
weighed, out, taken was luggage heavy Our station. the entered carriage
exactly and tickets, our took then We van. huge a in placed and labeled,
railway firstclass a in other each opposite seated were o'clock seven at
carriage.

which among papers, his examining busy too was He nothing. said uncle My
introduction of letters some and parchment, famous the was course of
to introduction an to way the pave to were which consul Danish the from
the of out looking was amusement only My Iceland. of Governor the
this country, fertile though flat a through passed we as But window.
and Kiel, reached we hours three In monotonous. slightly was occupation
steamer. the to transferred once at was baggage our

put fact Which hours. ten about of delay a us, before day a now had We
about walk to but do to nothing had We passion. towering a in uncle my
at and board, on went we however, length, At bay. and town pretty the
night, dark a was It Belt. Great the down steaming were ten past half
the but visible being nothing sea, rough a and breeze strong a with
in seven At lighthouse. a there and here with shore, on fires occasional
of side western the on town little a Korsor, left we morning the
Seeland.

the to us brought hours three in which railway, another took we Here
my refreshment, for time taking scarcely where, Copenhagen, capital,
was It introduction. of letters his of one present to out hurried uncle
informed been having who, Antiquities, of Museum the of director the to
us. assist to could he all did Iceland, for bound tourists were we that
such for bound was vessel no Perhaps now. me sustained hope wretched One
parts. distant

the on sail to was <i>Valkyrie</i>, the schooner, Danish little a Alas!
and board, on was Bjarne, M. captain, The Reykjavik. for June of second
future his which with cordiality and energy the at surprised rather was
a merely was Iceland to voyage a him To hand. the by him shook passenger
of event the considered hand, other the on uncle, My course. of matter
Professor's the of advantage took sailor honest The importance. sublime
fare. the double to enthusiasm

Bjarne, M. said board," on be o'clock seven at morning Tuesday "On
receipts. our us handing

a to down sat we as uncle my remarked Glorious!" Capital! "Excellent!
run a take will we and boy, my yourself, "refresh breakfast; late
town." the through

king's the to Kongens-Nye-Torw; the to went we concluded, meal Our
the near canal the over bridge beautiful the to palace; magnificent
naval hideous its with Thorwaldsen of cenotaph immense the to Museum;
the of lions other the all to and Rosenberg; of castle the to groups;
his in he was absorbed so saw, even uncle my which of place-none
triumphs. anticipated

steeple singular certain a was that and fancy, his struck thing one But
the of quarter southeast the is which Amak, of Island the on situated
that steps my turn to me ordered once at uncle My Copenhagen. of city
does which boat ferry steam the board on went we accordingly and way,
quay. dockyard noted the reached soon very and canal, the on duty

met we where streets, narrow some crossed we instance first the In
and grey trousers, particolored with slaves, galley of groups numerous
taskmasters, severe of sticks the and orders the under working yellow,
Vor-Frelser's-Kirk. the reached finally and

worthy the fact, in itself; in remarkable nothing exhibited church This
was, which circumstance, one by it to attracted been only had Professor
after platform, circular a from started steeple elevated rather its that
very the to round wound which staircase, exterior an was there which
summit.

uncle. my said ascend," us "Let

to subject am "I cried, I towers," church climb could never I "But
head." my in dizziness

bad a of you cure to want I up. go should you why reason very "The
habit."

sir--" good my "But,

time?" valuable much so wasting of use the is What come. to you tell "I

I uncle. my of commands dictatorial the dispute to impossible was It
He, key. the us gave verger a fee, a of payment On groan. a with yielded
the me showed once at uncle My ascent. the to partial not was one, for
I as well as followed I schoolboy. a like steps the up running way,
to began head my than tower, the outside I was sooner no though could,
for enough was earth The me. about eagle the of nothing was There swim.
things Still mind. my entered ever soar to desire ambitious no and me,
the near was and steps, 150 ascended had I until badly go not did
scarcely could I air. cold of rush the feel to began I when platform,
was railing The upwards. looked I railings, the clutching when stand,
winding terrible the skirted which those to nothing but enough, frail
skies. the to ascend to stood, I where from appeared, that staircase,

Henry." then, "Now

despair. of accents in cried, I it!" do can't "I

tone. pitiless a in uncle my said sir?" coward, a all, after you, "Are
say!" I up, "Go

acted air keen the yet And possible. reply no was there this To
round, swim to seemed all earth, sky, system; nervous my on violently
a of those like way gave legs My ship. a like rocked steeple the while
up myself hauled I knees; and hands my upon crawled I man. drunken
allowed and eyes, my closed I Presently snake. a like crawling slowly,
upwards. dragged be to myself

what knows "heaven voice, stern a in uncle my said you," around "Look
practice." excellent is This down. look to have may you abysses profound

What eyes. my opened I cold, with while the all shivering and Slowly,
clouds, fleecy cold the at upwards was glance first My see? I did then
the while still, stand to appeared delusion optical some by as which
along. swiftly carried were selves two our and weathercock, the steeple,
other the on while plain, grassy the seen be could side one on away Far
call we as Sound or Sund, The light. translucent in bathed sea the lay
white with crowded Elsinore, of point the beyond discovered be could it,
while seagulls; of wings the like looked distance that at which, sails,
whole The Sweden. of coast far-off the out made be could east the to
panorama. magic a appeared

and Rise it. for remedy no was there was, I as bewildered and faint But
quite lasted lesson first my protestations my Despite must. I up stand
mother of bosom the reached I later, hours two nearly When, hour. an
pain. with double bent man old rheumatic a like was I earth,

begin will "we hands, his rubbing uncle, my said day," one for "Enough
tomorrow." again

that of end the at and days, five lasted lessons My remedy. no was There
down look to able myself found and enough, blithely ascended I period,
of degree some with and winking, even without below depths the into
pleasure.




6 CHAPTER

Iceland to Voyage Our


Mr. worthy the before, night The last. at came departure of hour The
Baron for introduction of letters cordial most the us brought Thompson
bishop, the to coadjutor Pictursson, M. for Iceland, of Governor Trampe,
uncle my return, In Reykjavik. of town the of mayor Finsen, M. for and
them. shake he did warmly so hands, his crushed nearly

of cargo precious our morning, the in two at month, the of second the On
and followed, We <i>Valkyrie</i>. ship good the board on taken was luggage
two with cabin small a to captain the by introduced politely very were
comfortable. very nor ventilated well very neither places, bed standing
suffer. to expected are men science of cause the in But

mellifluous most his in uncle, my cried wind?" fair a we have and "Well,
accents.

Sound, the leave shall "we Bjarne; Captain replied wind!" excellent "An
set." sails all with free going

under wind, the before started schooner the afterwards, minutes few A
later, hour An channel. the entered and carry, could she canvas the all
no at were we and waves, the into sink to seemed Denmark of capital the
for delighted; was uncle My Elsinore. of coast the from distance great
of glimpse a expect to almost appeared I dissatisfied, and moody myself,
Hamlet. of ghost the

our approve would doubtless "you I, thought madman," "Sublime
the of centre the to us follow even perhaps might You proceedings.
doubts." eternal your resolve to there earth,

fact The walls. ancient the upon appeared else anything or ghost no But
of prince heroic the of time the than later much is castle the is,
the of Strait the of keeper the of residence the now is It Denmark.
all of vessels thousand fifteen than more Sound that through and Sound,
year. every pass nations

well as atmosphere, murky the in disappeared soon Kronborg of castle The
Bank. Swedish the on head its raises which Helsinborg, of tower the as
the of breezes the earnest in feel to began schooner the here And
boats sailing all with but enough, swift was <i>Valkyrie</i> The Kattegat.
pottery, furniture, coal, was cargo Her uncertainty. same the is there
five small, was crew the usual, As corn. of load a and clothing, woolen
work. the of whole the doing Danes

uncle. my asked last?" voyage the will long "How

"unless, skipper, the replied days," ten about think should I "Well,
Islands." Faroe the among gales northeast some with meet we indeed,

the cried delay," considerable very no be will there events, all "At
Professor. impatient

events, all At that. of fear "no captain, the said Hardwigg," Mr. "No,
day." some there get shall we

part northernmost the Skagen, Cape doubled schooner the evening Towards
extreme the night--skirted the during Skagerrak the crossed Denmark, of
the reached then and Lindesnes, Cape of gut the through Norway of point
of coast the from far not were we later days Two Seas. Northern
then and Peterhead, call sailors Danish what near somewhere Scotland,
between Islands, Faroe the for direct out stretched <i>Valkyrie</i> the
ocean the of force full the felt now vessel Our Shetland. and Orkney
Faroe the made difficulty great with we shifting, wind the and waves,
the Myganness, out made captain the day, eighth the On Isles.
for direct headed moment that from and isles, the of westernmost
which for island singular the of shores southern the on cape a Portland,
bound. were we

well, very it bore I record. of worthy incident no offered voyage The
remarkably was shame, even and annoyance, great his to uncle my but
him prevented it that more the him troubled mer de mal This seasick!
the to as Sneffels, of subject the to as Bjarne Captain questioning from
these All transport. of facilities the and communication, of means
time, His arrival. his of period the to adjourn to had he explanations
on anxiously dwelling and groaning, bed in lying spent was meanwhile,
him. pity didn't I voyage. the of termination hoped--for the

Mount towered which over Portland, Cape sighted we day eleventh the On
readily. very out made we clear, being weather the which, Yokul, Myrdals
naked standing granite of mount huge a but nothing is itself cape The
coast, the off kept <i>Valkyrie</i> The waves. Atlantic the meet to alone and
"schools" whole seen be to were sides all On westward. the to steering
solitary a of sight in came we hours some After sharks. and whales of
foaming the which through vault, mighty a forming ocean, the in rock
leap to appeared Westman of islets The fury. intense with poured waves
until seen be to scarcely as water the in low so being ocean, the from
to steered was schooner the moment that From them. upon right were you
of point western the Reykjanes, Cape round to order in westward the
Iceland.

so deck, on crawl to even unable was disgust, great his to uncle, My
Promise. of Land the of view first the lost thus and on, was sea a heavy
under sea to far us drove which storm a after later, hours Forty-eight
a by boarded were and land, of sight in more once came we poles, bare
the brought navigation, dangerous of hours three after who, pilot,
Reykjavik. before Faxa of bay the in anchor an to safely schooner

of full but thin, haggard, pale, cabin his of out came uncle My
the Nearly satisfaction. and pleasure with dilated eyes his enthusiasm,
was, fact The land. us see to foot on was town the of population whole
periodical the by goods some expected but them of one any scarcely that
vessel.

he as rather or prison, his leave to haste in was Hardwigg Professor
caught he so, do to attempted he before but hospital; his it, called
arm my took schooner, the of quarterdeck the to me led hand, my of hold
northern the over right, his with inland pointed and hand, left his with
cone double mountain--a two-peaked high a rose where to bay, the of part
snow. eternal with covered

Sneffels!" behold--Mount voice, awe-stricken an in whispered he "Behold

frowned lips, his to finger his put he remark, further without Then
followed, I us. awaited which boat small the into descended and darkly,
Iceland! mysterious of soil the upon stood we minutes few a in and

of man a us before appeared there when shore on fairly we were Scarcely
was, He officer. military a of costume the wearing appearance, excellent
the of governor the magistrate, a servant, civil a but however,
He with. deal to had he whom knew Professor The Trampe. island--Baron
brief a and Copenhagen, from letters the him handed therefore
stranger, a was course of I which to followed, Danish in conversation
which in language the know not did I for reason, good very a for and
placed Trampe Baron that however, heard, afterwards I conversed. they
Hardwigg. Professor of call and beck the at entirely himself

as who mayor, the Finsen, M. by received graciously most was uncle My
also but governor, the as military as quite was went, costume as far
M. coadjutor, his for As pacific. as quite occupation and character from
portion northern the to visit episcopal an on absent was he Pictursson,
of pleasure the defer to compelled therefore were We diocese. the of
compensated than more however, was, absence His him. to presented being
the in science natural of professor Fridriksson, M. of presence the by
scholar modest This ability. invaluable of man a Reykjavik, of college
he therefore, When, Latin. and Icelandic save languages no spoke
to came once at we Horace, of language the in me to himself addressed
did I that person only the fact, in was, He another. one understand
this in residence my of period whole the during understand thoroughly
island. benighted

at placed were two composed, was house his which of rooms three of Out
baggage, our all with installed were we hours few a in and service, our
of inhabitants simple the astonished rather which of amount the
Reykjavik.

worse the well, goes "an hands, his rubbing uncle, my said Harry," "Now,
over." now is difficulty

amazement. fresh in cried I over?" difficulty worse the "How

descend to but remains more Nothing Iceland. in are we Here "Doubtless.
earth." the of bowels the into

go to only have We right. are you extent certain a to sir, "Well,
to want I question. the not is that concerned, am I as far as down--but,
again." up get to are we how know

trouble way any in not does and business, the of part least the is "That
visit to about am I lose. to hour an not is there meantime, the In me.
from manuscripts some there find may I likely Very library. public the
them." consult to glad be shall I Saknussemm. of hand the

town. the through walk a take will "I replied, I meanwhile," the "In
so?" do likewise not you Will

is me for "What uncle. my said subject," the in interest no feel "I
is what but surface, the above is what not is island, this in curious
below."

out. went and cloak, furred and hat my on put reply, of way by bowed I

of streets two the in oneself lose to matter easy an not was It
a on lies town The way. my ask to need no therefore had I Reykjavik;
it skirts lava of field vast A hills. two between plain, marshy and flat
hand other the On sea. the towards terraces in away falling side, one on
glacier enormous the by north the on bordered Faxa, of bay large the is
at vessel only the then was <i>Valkyrie</i> the bay which in and Sneffels, of
to gunboats, French or English two or one were there Generally anchor.
however, now, were They offing. the in fisheries the protect and watch
duty. on absent

In shore. the to parallel runs Reykjavik of streets the of longest The
with made huts wooden in live traders and merchants the street this
wilds the in find you as such huts, log red--mere painted wood, of beams
a toward runs west, the to more situated street, other The America. of
other the and bishop the of residences the between lake little
commerce. in engaged not personages

thoroughfares. dismal and weary these of wanted I all seen soon had I
bit worn-out old an like turf, discolored of strip a was there and Here
which in garden, kitchen of bit a then and now and carpet; woolen of
suggest to enough diminutive almost lettuce, and cabbage, potatoes, grew
Lilliput. of idea the

cemetery, public the found I street, commercial new the of centre the In
not appeared it large, very not Though wall. earthen an by enclosed
the of house the to went I hence From centuries. for filled be to likely
of House Mansion the with comparison in hut mere Governor--a
the Between houses. Icelandic other the alongside palace a Hamburg--but
Protestant simple in built church, the was town the and lake little
I action. volcanic by up thrown stones, calcined of composed and style,
blown were tiles red its winds high in that doubt slightest the not have
an Upon congregation. and pastor the of annoyance great the to out,
taught were which in school, national the was hand at close eminence
Danish. and French, English, Hebrew,

mind my upon impression general The complete. was tour my hours three In
volcanic sides all speak--on to so vegetation, no trees, No sadness. was
Thanks houses. than roofs like earth--more and turf of huts peaks--the
is grass which roof, the on grows grass residences, these of heat the to
excursion, my during inhabitants few but saw I hay. for cut carefully
the codfish, loading and salting drying, beach, the on crowd a met I but
heavy; but robust appeared men The exportation. of article principal
scale higher a of mien--exiles pensive of but Germans, like fair-haired
more much thought, I but, Eskimos, the than humanity of ladder the in
live to compelled are they perceptions superior with since unhappy,
Circle. Polar the of limits the within

did chance no by but laugh, convulsive a to vent gave they Sometimes
wool, black of capote coarse a of consists costume Their smile. they
hat, broad-brimmed a "vadmel," the as countries Scandinavian in known
a for strings with tied leather of piece a and serge, red of trousers
and sad-looking though women, The moccasin. of kind coarse shoe--a
They expression. much without features, agreeable rather had mournful,
a wear they unmarried When vadmel. somber of petticoat and bodice a wear
married, when but hair; plaited of crown a over cap knitted brown little
tie they which over handkerchief, colored a with heads their cover they
scarf. white a




7 CHAPTER

Discovery and Conversation


worthy my by devoured was meal This ready. was dinner returned, I When
his turned had diet shipboard His voracity. and avidity with relative
than Danish more was which repast, The gulf. perfect a into interior
our of hospitality excessive the but nothing, itself in was Icelandic,
doubly. it enjoy us made host

Fridriksson M. and matters, scientific upon turned conversation The
library. public the of thought he what uncle my asked

of collection a me to appears "it uncle; my cried sir?" "Library,
shelves." empty of amount beggarly a and volumes, odd useless

of volumes thousand eight have we "why, Fridriksson; M. cried "What!"
besides language, Scandinavian the in works--some valuable and rare most
Copenhagen." from publications new the all

my cried they?" are where sir--why, dear my volumes, thousand "Eight
uncle.

studious, very are We Hardwigg. Professor country, the over "Scattered
laborer, every farmer, Every Iceland. in live do we though sir, dear my
instead books that think we write--and and read both can fisherman every
should students, of sight the from far cupboards, in up locked being of
are library our of books The possible. as widely as distributed be
library the to returning without hand to hand from passed therefore
years." for perhaps shelves

see?" to them for nothing is there you, visit foreigners when "Then

first our and libraries, own their have foreigners sir, "Well,
educated. highly be should classes humbler our that is, consideration
In people. Icelandic the in innate is study of love the Fortunately,
many Institute; Mechanics' and Society Literary a founded we 1816
books publish we members; honorary are eminence of scholars foreign
valuable rendered have books these and people, our educate to destined
Hardwigg, Professor honor, the have to me Allow country. our to services
member?" honorary an as you enroll to

scientific and literary every nearly to belonged already who uncle, My
good of wishes amiable the to yielded immediately Europe, in institution
Fridriksson. M.

will, good and gratitude of expressions many after said, he now," "And
be may I perhaps find, to expected you books what me tell will you "if
you." to assistance some of

if as hesitated, he two or minute a For keenly. uncle my watched I
his unveil to perhaps, was, openly speak to speak; to unwilling
mind. his up made he reflection, some after Nevertheless, projects.

"I way, of kind unconcerned easy, an in said he Fridriksson," M. "Well,
any had you works, valuable other among if ascertaining, of desirous was
Saknussemm." Arne learned the of

one of speak "you Reykjavik; of Professor the cried Saknussemm!" "Arne
the of century, sixteenth the of scholars distinguished most the of
traveler." great the alchemist, great the naturalist, great

so." "Exactly

and science Icelandic with connected men distinguished most the of "One
literature."

sir--" say, you "As

all." above illustrious man "A

works?" his but true, is this all sir, "Yes,

them." of none have "We

Iceland?" in "Not

sadly. other, the answered elsewhere," or Iceland in none are "There

so?" "Why

his 1573 in and heresy, for persecuted was Saknussemm Arne "Because
common the of hands the by Copenhagen, at burnt publicly were works
hangman."

of astonishment great the to uncle, my murmured capital!" good! "Very
Icelander. worthy the

sir--" said, "You

is everything chain; the in link the see I clear, is all yes, "Yes,
court, of out put Saknussemm, Arne why understand now I and explained,
conceal to compelled was discoveries, magnificent his hide to forced
secret--" the cryptograph, incomprehensible an of veil the beneath

secret?" "What

uncle. my stammered secret--which," "A

Fridriksson. M. cried manuscript?" wonderful some discovered you "Have

supposition." mere A enthusiasm. my by away carried was I no, "No!

you hope I subject, another to turn to really, But, sir. good, "Very
mineralogical its into examining without island our leave not will
riches."

here been have men learned many So late. rather am I is, fact the "Well,
me." before

Fridriksson. M. cried done," be to much still is there but yes, "Yes,

hidden with twinkling eyes his uncle, my said so," think "You
satisfaction.

volcanoes glaciers, mountains, unknown many how idea no have you "Yes,
sit, we where from moving Without studied. be to remain which are there
see you horizon, the of edge the on Yonder one. you show can I
Sneffels."

uncle. my said Sneffels," yes, "Oh

has which of crater the existence, in volcanoes curious most the of "One
visited." rarely been

"Extinct?"

reply. ready the was years," hundred five these time any "Extinct,

his pressed and flesh, his into nails his dug who uncle, my said "Well,"
a have "I joy. with up leaping himself prevent to together tightly knees
geological the of examination an with studies my begin to mind great
it?" call you do Seffel--Feisel--what Mount this of mysteries

sir." dear my "Sneffels,

therefore I and Latin, in place took conversation the of portion This
countenance my keep scarcely could I said. been had that all understood
and delight his concealing cunningly so uncle my found I when
conceal to on put grimaces, artful his that confess must I satisfaction.
Mephistopheles. new a like look him made happiness, his

endeavor will I me. delights proposition "your continued, he yes," "Yes,
into descend will possible, if and, Sneffels, of summit the to climb to
crater." its

will occupation my "that Fridriksson, M. continued regret," much very "I
have would It you. accompanying my of possibility the preclude entirely
time." the spared have could I if profitable and pleasurable both been

disturb to wish not do "I uncle. my cried no," times thousand a no, "No,
The heart. my all with however, you, thank I man. any of serenity the
most been have doubt no would yourself, as learned so one of presence
everything." before profession and office your of duties the but useful,

the perceive not did host our heart, simple his of innocence the In
remarks. these of irony

some after Icelander the continued project," your approve entirely "I
volcano. this examining by begin to idea good a is "It remarks. further
how place, first the In observations. curious of harvest a make will You
Sneffels?" to get to propose you do

route." rapid most the is that course Of bay. the cross shall I sea. "By

done." be cannot it still But course. "Of

"Why?"

other. the replied Reykjavik," all in boat available an not have "We

done?" be to is "What

more much but longer, is It coast. the along land by go must "You
interesting."

guide." a have must I "Then

man." very your have I and course; "Of

depend." can I whom on "Somebody

He situated. is Sneffels which on peninsula the of inhabitant an "Yes,
He pleased. be will you whom with man, worthy and shrewd very a is
Dane." a like Danish speaks

him--today?" see I can "When

before." here be not will he tomorrow; "No,

sigh. deep a with uncle, my replied it," be "Tomorrow

dinner the During sides. both on compliments by ended conversation The
the Saknussemm, Arne of history the to as much learned had uncle my
became also He document. hieroglyphical and mysterious his for reasons
adventurous his on him accompany not would host his that aware
guide. a have should we day next that and expedition,




8 CHAPTER


LAST AT HUNTER--OFF EIDER-DOWN THE


after Reykjavik, near shore the on walk brief a took I evening That
I where planks, coarse of bed my on sleep early an to returned I which
speaking uncle my heard I awoke I When just. the of sleep the slept
talking was He him. joined and hastily rose I room. next the in loudly
build. Herculean perfectly of and stature, tall of man a with Danish in
eyes, His strength. great very of possessed be to appeared man This
face the head, large very a from prominently rather started which
and quick very appeared naive, and simple was which to belonging
been have would England in even which hair, long Very intelligent.
native This shoulders. athletic his over fell red, exceedingly accounted
moved scarcely he though appearance, in supple and active was Iceland of
of habit the despise who men those of one fact in being arms, his
people. southern to common gesticulation

phlegmatic and calm a revealed manner man's this in Everything
appearance his but him, about indolent nothing was There temperament.
expect to seemed never who those of one was He tranquillity. of spoke
and proper, thought he when work to liked who anybody, from anything
trouble. or astonish could nothing philosophy whose

he which in way the from simply character, his comprehend to began I
While uncle. worthy my of verbiage impassioned and wild the to listened
with stood he sentence, after sentence spoke Professor excellent the
gesticulations. uncle's my all to motionless still, utterly arms, folded
he when right; to left from head his moved he No say to wanted he When
the see scarcely could you that slightly so nodded, he acquiesced
length the to carried was motion of economy This head. his of undulation
avarice. of

had I before time long a been have should I appearance his from Judging
manner his Certainly hunter. mighty a was, he what be to him suspected
get to contrive he did then, How, game. the frighten to likely not was
prey? his at

and tranquil this that knew I when modified slightly was surprise My
which of down the duck, eider the of hunter a only was personage solemn
wealth. Icelanders' the of source greatest the all, after is,

of sort pretty a eider, the of female the summer, of days early the In
to given name fjords--the the of rocks the amid nest its builds duck,
the of part every which countries--with Scandinavian in gulfs narrow all
she than nest her made duck eider the has sooner No indented. is island
comes Then breast. her from down softest the with it of inside the lines
female bereaved poor the nest, the away taking trader, or hunter the
down eider any as long as continues this and again, over task her begins
found. be to is

can he what see to work to sets bird male the more no find can she When
no therefore has and soft, so not is down his however, As, do.
his of him rob to trouble the take not does hunter the value, commercial
the laid, are eggs the finished, accordingly is nest The lining. nest
again is down eider of harvest the year next and born, are ones little
collected.

its build to aspects or rocks steep selects never duck eider the as Now,
Icelandic the sea, the to near cliffs low and sloping rather but nest,
is He difficulty. much without operations trade his on carry can hunter
to only harrow, to nor sow, to plow, to neither has who farmer a like
harvest. his collect

Englishman an as phlegmatic as person, silent sententious, grave, This
in us upon called had He Bjelke. Hans named was stage, French the on
fact, in was, He Fridriksson. M. of recommendation the of consequence
could I over, world the sought I had that me struck It guide. future our
uncle. impulsive my to contradiction greater a found have not

any had them of Neither another. one understood readily however, They,
the him, offered was that all take to ready was one money; about thought
be readily may It asked. was that anything offer to ready other
them. between to come soon was understanding an that then, conceived,

of village the to us take to was he that was, understanding the Now,
at Sneffels, of peninsula the of slope southern the on situated Stapi,
was distance the us told guide, the Hans, volcano. the of foot very the
take would supposed uncle my which journey a miles, twenty-two about
days. two about

of miles, Danish were they that understand to came uncle my when But
his in moderate more be to obliged was he each, yards thousand eight
allow to follow, to had we roads horrible the considering and, ideas,
journey. the for days ten or eight

to two and baggage, the carry to two us, for prepared were horses Four
that declared Hans uncle. and myself of weight important the bear
knew He animal. any of back the on climb him make would ever nothing
very the us take to promised and coast, the of part that of inch every
way. shortest

arrival our with cease to means no by was uncle my with engagement His
time whole the during service his in remain to further was he Stapi; at
the at investigations, scientific his of completion the for required
fourteen exactly being week, a rix-dollars three of salary fixed
One currency. English farthing, one minus twopence, and shillings
to paid be to was money guide--the the by made was however, stipulation,
end. an at was engagement his which, failing night, Saturday every him

the hand to wished uncle My fixed. was departure our of day The
word-- emphatic one in refused he but advance, an hunter eider-down

"Efter."

means--"After." English plain into Icelandic from translated being Which

word. another without retired guide worthy our concluded, treaty The

the suspects little he "only uncle; my said fellow," splendid "A
world." the of history the in play to about is he part marvelous

us?" accompany should he "that amazement, in cried I then," mean, "You

not?" "Why uncle. my replied yes," earth, the of interior the "To

final our made we before elapse to hours forty-eight yet were There
making in up taken was time whole our regret, great my To start.
devoted were ability and industry our All journey. our for preparations
instruments manner--the advantageous most the in object every packing to
provisions the and here tools the other, the on arms the side, one on
groups. distinct four fact, in were, There there.

manufacture: best the of course of were instruments The

which degrees, 150 to up counting Eigel, of thermometer centigrade A 1.
the if half, by hot Too much. too enough--or half appear not did me to
certainly should we case which high--in so ascend to was heat of degree
temperature exact the ascertain to wanted we if enough, cooked--not be
fusion. of state a in metal or springs of

ascertain to used instrument an air, compressed by worked manometer A 2.
a Perhaps ocean. the of level the on pressure atmospheric upper the
pressure atmospheric the well, as done have not would barometer common
surface the below descended we as proportion in increase to likely being
earth. the of

the at set Geneva, of Boissonnas, by made chronometer first-class A 3.
do English the as calculate, Germans which from Hamburg, of meridian
Paris. from French the and Greenwich, from

ascertain to other the guidance, horizontal for one compasses, Two 4.
dip. the

glass. night A 5.

electricity, of current a of means by which, coils, Ruhmkorff Two 6.
of means certain and carried, easily excellent, very a us ensure would
light. obtaining

principle.[1] newest the on battery voltaic A 7.

for instrument an measure); <i>metron</i>, and (<i>thermos</i>, Thermometer [1]
<i>metron</i>, (<i>manos</i>,and air.--Manometer the of temperature the measuring
of rarity or density the show to instrument an measure);
time a measure) <i>metros</i>, and time, (<i>chronos</i>. gases.--Chronometer
for instrument an coil, watch--Ruhmkorff's superior or measurer,
It intensity. great of electricity induced of currents producing
silk, with covered being by insulated wire, copper of coil a of consists
a which in insulated, also wire, fine of coil another by surrounded
inner the through passed is current a when induced is current momentary
gas the action, in is apparatus the When battery. voltaic a from coil
battery The light. continued and white a produces and luminous, becomes
a by fastens traveler the which bag, leather a in carried are wire and
the enables and front, in is lantern The shoulders. his to strap
venture may He obscurity. profound most the in see to wanderer benighted
gases, inflammable most the of midst the into explosion of fear without
Ruhmkorff, D. H. waters. deepest the beneath burn will lantern the and
he 1864 In coil. induction the discovered chemist, learned and able an
ingenious this for 2,000 of prize French quinquennial the won
its Volta, from called so battery, voltaic electricity--A of application
plates metal of series a of consisting apparatus an is designer,
for solutions saline of action the to subjected and pairs in arranged
electricity. of currents producing

Why six-shooters. revolving two with rifles, two of consisted arms Our
every had I say. to me for impossible was it provided were arms these
to natives savage nor beasts wild neither had we that believe to reason
arsenal his to devoted as quite was hand, other the on uncle, My fear.
with careful very was all above and instruments, of collection his to as
any in keep to warranted cotton, gun or fulminating of provision his
than greater be to known was force expansive the which of and climate,
gunpowder. ordinary of that

ladder, silken a crowbars, two pickaxes, two of consisted tools Our
some wedges, dozen a hammer, a hatchet, a poles, Alpine iron-shod three
conceive may You rope. strong of quantity a and iron, of pieces pointed
that mention I when especially parcel, tolerable a made whole the that
long! feet hundred three was itself ladder the

not was hamper The provisions. of question important the came there Then
concentrated in that knew I for satisfactory, tolerably but large very
The months. six last to enough was there biscuit and meat of essence
We drop. a not water, Of Schiedam. was uncle my by provided liquid only
finding on counted uncle my and gourds, of supply ample an however, had,
downward our commenced we as soon as them, fill to enough and water,
to as even and quality, the temperature, the to as remarks My journey.
effect. without wholly remained found, being none of possibility the

of guidance the gear--for traveling our of list exact the up make To
chest surgical and medicine a carried we that travelers--add, future
lint, blows; and fractures wounds, for necessary apparatus all with
looking horrible of collection perfect a fact, lancets--in scissors,
ether, alcohol, ammonia, containing vials of number a instruments;
impossible and possible every fact, in vinegar, aromatic water, Goulard
coil! Ruhmkorff the working for materials the all drug--finally,

tobacco, of supply goodly a in lay to careful been also had uncle My
large a besides tinder, of boxes gunpowder, fine very of flasks several
were watertight rendered boots Good gold. and notes of full crammed belt
box. tool the in six of number the to found be to

general such and boots, such with clothing, such with boy, "My
hope may "we delight, rapturous of state a in uncle, my said equipment,"
far." travel to

we evening the In order. in matters these all put to day whole a took It
and Reykjavik, of Mayor the with company in Trampe, Baron with dined
was Fridriksson M. Iceland. of man medical great the Hyaltalin, Doctor
governor the and he that hear to sorry afterwards was I and present, not
the of administration the with connected matters some on agree not did
a understand not did I that was, consequence the Unfortunately, island.
One reception. semiofficial of kind dinner--a at said was that word
speaking. off left never uncle my say, can I thing

my delighted host worthy Our end. an to came labor our day next The
most a Iceland, of map good a him giving by Hardwigg, Professor uncle,
mineralogist. a for document precious and important

Fridriksson, M. with conversation long a in spent was evening last Our
or him see to expected never I that more much--the very liked I whom
I so, or hour an spending of way agreeable this After again. else anyone
was night my dozes, few a of exception the with vain; In sleep. to tried
miserable.

half real only the from awakened was I morning the in o'clock five At
my under horses of neighing loud the by night the of sleep hour's
was Hans street. the into down went and myself dressed hastily I window.
in did he which baggage, our to stroke finishing the putting in engaged
admirably it did he yet and admiration, my won that way quiet silent, a
directions, him giving in breath of deal great a wasted uncle My well.
words. his of notice slightest the not took Hans worthy but

Fridriksson M. and completed, were preparations our all o'clock six At
the in warmly, him thanked uncle My us. with heartily hands shook
the from truly speaking hospitality, kind his for language, Icelandic
heart.

him paid and phrases Latin best my of few a together put I myself for As
duty friendly and fraternal This could. I compliments highest the
horses. our mounted and forth sallied we performed,

of way by and advanced, Fridriksson M. ready, quite were we as soon As
appeared which Virgil--words of words the in me after called farewell,
uncertain an for starting travelers us, for made been have to
destination:

sequamur." fortuna dederit viam quacunque "Et

follow!") fortune may goest, thou way whichsoever ("And




9 CHAPTER

WAY THE BY ADVENTURES WITH MEET START--WE OUR


adventurous our commenced we when settled, but overcast was weather The
nor heat fatiguing fear to neither had We journey. perilous and
weather. tourist real fact, in was, It rain. drenching

of pleasure the exercise, horse than better liked I nothing was there As
our of part early the caused country unknown an through riding
me. to agreeable particularly be to enterprise

of life a traveling, of delight exhilarating the enjoy to began I
so rose spirits my that is, truth The liberty. and gratification desire,
be to appeared once had what to indifferent be to began I that rapidly,
journey. terrible a

journey a take to Simply risk? I do "what myself, to said I all," "After
the if and mountain, remarkable a climb to country, curious a through
extinct an of crater the into descend to worst, the to comes worst
volcano."

had Saknussemm terrible this all was this that doubt no be could There
passages subterraneous of or gallery, a of existence the to As done.
the absurd, simply was idea the earth, the of interior the into leading
be may that then, All, imagination. distempered a of hallucination
difficulty. no create will and cheerfully, do will I me of required

decision. this to came I that Reykjavik left we before just was It

rapid, steady, a with walking first, went guide, extraordinary our Hans,
own their of followed luggage the with horses two Our step. unvarying
behind, came I and uncle My spur. or whip requiring without accord,
animals. vigorous but small our upon figure tolerable very a cutting

thirty contains It Europe. in islands largest the of one is Iceland
thousand seventy about has and surface, of miles square thousand
to had we and parts, four into it divided have Geographers inhabitants.
Sudvestr called is vernacular the in which quarter southwest the cross
Fjordungr.

of line the followed had Reykjavik, from departure his taking on Hans,
a made which meadows, sparse and poor through way our took We sea. the
rarely very They green. little a show to year every effort desperate
yellow. of show good a in succeed

of edge the on visible dimly were hills rocky the of summits rugged The
heavy some then and now every fogs; misty the through horizon, the
certain while light, morning the in conspicuous showed snow of flakes
their clouds, low grey the in lost first were rocks pointed and lofty
troublous a from rising reefs jagged like above, visible clearly summits
sea.

ground, arid the through down came rock of spur a then and now Every
only not appeared however, horses, Our pass. to room scarcely us leaving
which knew instinct, of kind a by but country, the with acquainted well
urging of satisfaction the even not had uncle My road. best the was
to useless utterly was It voice. or spur, whip, by steed his forward
look him see to smiling help not could I impatience. of signs any show
the touching then and now legs long his horse; little his on big so
centaur. six-footed a like look him made ground

to begin I that you, assure "I cry. would he beast," good beast, "Good
Snow, horse. Icelandic an than intelligent more is animal no think
is He him. stops icebergs--nothing rocks, roads, impracticable tempest,
never step; false a makes never he safe; is he sober; is he brave;
any river, any if that say to dare I path. his from slips or glides
many--you be will there doubt no have I crossed--and be to has fjord
amphibious an like hesitation without water the enter him see will
however, not, must We safety. in side opposite the reach and animal,
I and way, own his have to him allow must we him; hurry to attempt
a leagues ten our do shall we us between that say to undertake will
day."

guide?" worthy our about what "but reply, my was so," do may "We

go people of sort that him: about anxiety slightest the not have "I
moves He Hans. at Look about. are they what even knowing without ahead
if Besides, fatigued. become to him for impossible is it that little so
I horse. my of loan the have could he weariness, of complain to were he
some have to not were I if cramp the of attack violent a have should
little a getting are legs my right--but are arms My exercise. of sort
stiff."

had we country The pace. rapid a at advancing were we while this All
an seen be could there and Here desert. a nearly already was reached
wood, of built house, Icelandic or bur, solitary some farm, isolated
life. of highway the on beggars like lava--looking of fragments earth,
felt we that pity such us in excited huts miserable and wretched These
no are there country this In door. every at alms leave to disposed half
slowly was, it as poor vegetation, and unknown, nearly are paths roads,
few the of traces all obliterated soon perfection, reached it as
place. to place from passed who travelers

miles few a only situated province, the of division this Nevertheless,
most and cultivated best the of one considered is capital, the from
the of state the be must then, What, Iceland. all in peopled thickly
fully traveling After island? the of parts distant more and known less
hut, his of door the at farmer a neither met had we mile, Danish a half
flock. savage and wild his with shepherd wandering a even nor

must then, What, occasionally. seen only were sheep and cows stray few A
broken districts the regions--to upheaved the to come we when expect we
commotions? subterraneous and eruptions volcanic from roughened and

consulting on however, saw, I time. good in all this learn to were We
following by country, rough this of deal good a avoided we that map, the
great the reality, In sea. the of shores desolate and winding the
are phenomena, attendant its all and island, the of movement volcanic
or layers horizontal there, island; the of interior the in concentrated
origin, basaltic of eruptions other, the upon one piled rocks, of strata
supernatural of kind a country this given have lava, of streams and
reputation.

we when us awaited which spectacle the however, expect, I did Little
nature's of agglomerations where Sneffels, of peninsula the reached
chaos. terrible of kind a form ruins

we Reykjavik, of city the left had we after more or hours two Some
It church. principal the or Aoalkirkja, called town little the reached
we Germany or England in what houses--not few a of simply consists
hamlet. a call should

breakfast, frugal our shared He hour. half one here stopped Hans
the of nature the to as questions uncle's my to No and Yes, answered
as was night the pass to were we where asked when last at and road,
usual. as laconic

reply. one-worded his was "Gardar!"

found. be to was Gardar where see to map, the consult to occasion took I
of borders the on name that of town small a found I keenly looking After
my to out this pointed I Reykjavik. from miles four about Hvalfjord, the
grimace. energetic very a made who uncle,

walk." little a only is it Why twenty-two? of out miles four "Only

Hans, but guide, the to observation energetic some make to about was He
horses, the of front in went him, of notice slightest the taking without
always had he phlegm imperturbable same the with ahead walked and
exhibited.

interminable apparently those over traveling still later, hours Three
an Kollafjord, the round go to compelled were we prairies, sandy and
entered we after Shortly gulfs. the crossing than cut shorter and easier
which of clock the and Ejulberg, called jurisdiction communal of place a
rich been had church Icelandic any if twelve, struck have then would
sacred These article. an useful and valuable so possess to enough
without do who people, these like much very however, are, edifices
them. miss never watches--and

then refreshment, and rest some take to allowed were horses the Here
they sea, the and rocks high between shore of strip narrow a following
after and Brantar, of Aoalkirkja the to halt further without us took
the on situated ease, of chapel a Annexia, Saurboer to mile another
Hvalfjord. the of bank southern

Danish four traveled had we and evening the in o'clock four was It
English. twenty to equal about miles,

and sweeping The width. in mile a half about place this in was fjord The
was gulf the rocks; pointed the upon in rolling came waves broken
in feet thousand three cliff, mighty walls--a rocky by surrounded
by there and here separated strata, brown its for remarkable height,
the been have may whatever Now, hue. reddish a of tufa of beds
them, upon reliance slightest the not had I horses, our of intelligence
water salt over ride To sea. the of arm stormy a crossing of means a as
absurd. me to seemed horse little a of back the upon

certainly will "they myself, to said I intelligent," really are they "If
own my to rather trust shall I case, any In attempt. the make not
theirs." than intelligence

of sides the into heels his dug He wait. to humor no in was uncle my But
of edge very the to went horse His shore. the for made and steed, his
retreated. and wave approaching the at sniffed water, the

he beast the as obstinate as quite say, to sooth was, who uncle, My
was attempt This advance. desired the making his on insisted bestrode,
shook quietly which horse the of part the on refusal new a by followed
of volley a by followed was rebellion of demonstration This head. his
the on kicks by followed also whipcord; of application stout a and words
to tried and upwards heels and head its threw which horse, the of part
his out spreading pony, little sturdy the length At rider. his throw
Professor's the under from got attitude, ludicrous and stiff a in legs,
like stone, separate a on feet both with standing, him left and legs,
Rhodes. of Colossus the

foot a into transformed suddenly uncle, my cried animal!" "Wretched
on officer cavalry dismounted a as ashamed and angry as passenger--and
battle. of field the

shoulder. the on familiarly him tapping guide, the said "Farja,"

boat!" ferry a "What,

in boat the lay where to pointing Hans, answered "Der,"
question--"there."

is." it "so information; the with delighted quite cried, I "Well,"

at start not "why uncle; my cried before," so say not you did "Why
once?"

guide. the said "Tidvatten,"

the and delay the by puzzled considerably asked, I say?" he does "What
dialogue.

my for word Danish the translating uncle, my replied tide," says "He
information.

serves." tide the till wait must understand--we I course "Of

uncle. my asked bida?" "For

Hans. replied "Ja,"

where to horses the followed then and feet his stamped frowned, uncle My
lay. boat the

waiting, for necessity the appreciated and understood thoroughly I
highest its at sea the when moment that for fjord, the crossing before
then can flow nor ebb the neither As water. slack of state a in is point
or sea, to out carried being of danger no in was boat ferry the felt, be
coast. rocky the upon dashed

Then evening. the in o'clock six until come not did moment favorable The
a into got horses four the and boatmen two guide, and myself, uncle, my
steam the to been had I as Accustomed boat. flat-bottom awkward very
sorry but boatmen the of oars long the found I Elbe, the of boats ferry
fjord; the crossing in hour an than more were We locomotion. of means
accident. without concluded was passage the length at but

Gardar. reached we later hour an Half




10 CHAPTER

ICELAND IN TRAVELING


the in even night, been have to thought, have would one ought, It
illumination nocturnal the still but latitude; of parallel sixty-fifth
July, and June of months the during Iceland, in For me. surprise not did
sets. never sun the

was I expected. I than lower much very was however, temperature, The
hunger. ravenous as much so me affect not did that even but cold,
doors its opened hospitably which hut the was therefore, indeed, Welcome
us. to

hospitality, of matter the in but peasant, a of house the merely was It
door the at alighted we As king. a of palace the being of worthy was it
any without and hand, his out held forward, came house the of master the
him. follow to us to signaled ceremony, further

narrow, long, A impossible. was him accompany to for him, followed We
beams from made habitation, this of interior the into led passage gloomy
The room. every to ingress gave passage This ax. the by squared roughly
the where workshop, the kitchen, number--the in four were chambers
and family, the of chamber sleeping general the on, carried was weaving
uncle, My invited. especially were strangers which to room, best the
house the when consideration into taken been not had stature lofty whose
roof. the of beams the against head his knock to contrived built, was

hard a with room large of kind a chamber, our into introduced were We
of made were which of panes the window, a by lighted and floor, earthen
from far sheep--very of intestines the from parchment of sort a
transparent.

wooden red long two into thrown hay dry of composed was bedding The
no had really I Icelandic. in painted sentences with ornamented boxes,
to objection one was There comfortable. so made be should we that idea
of fish, dried of odor powerful very the was, that and house, the
did combined fragrances three which milk, sour of and meat, macerated
nerves. olfactory my suit all at not

the costume, traveling heavy our from ourselves freed had we as soon As
the kitchen, the into come to us to calling heard was host our of voice
cold how matter no fire, any make ever Icelanders the which in room only
be. may it

friendly and hospitable this obey to hastened loath, nothing uncle, My
followed. I invitation.

standing stone large A model. antique an on made was chimney kitchen The
a was roof, the in above, fireplace; the was room the of middle the in
parlor kitchen, was apartment This through. pass to smoke the for hole
one. in all room dining and

before, us seen not had he if as host, worthy our entrance, our On
then and happy," "be means which word a uttered ceremoniously, advanced
cheek. the on us of both kissed

ceremonial, same the with word, same the pronounced followed, wife His
hearts, their upon hands right their placing wife, and husband the then
profoundly. bowed

who, children, nineteen of mother the was woman Icelandic excellent This
of midst the in about walked and crawled, rolled, big, and little
the of middle the in fireplace angular the from arising smoke of volumes
slightly a and head, white fresh a see could I then and now Every room.
vapor. the through me at peering countenance, of expression melancholy

whole the with friendly very were however, myself, and uncle my Both
these of four or three were there it, of aware were we before and party,
hanging rest the and boxes, our on many as shoulders, our on ones little
in saellvertu out crying kept speak could who Those legs. our about
all made only speak not did who Those key. impossible and possible every
noise. more the

this At supper. of announcement the by interrupted was concert This
to seeing after in came hunter, eider-duck the guide, worthy our moment
them letting in consisted horses--which the of stabling and feeding the
There prairies. Icelandic the of green stunted the on browse to loose
innutritious and dry very some and moss but eat, to them for little was
we before time some door, the before ready were they day next grass;
were.

Hans. said "Welcome,"

more any without automaton, an of air the with tranquilly, Then
hostess and host the embraced he another, than kiss one in expression
children. nineteen their and

sat all we parties, all of satisfaction the to concluded ceremony This
who Those crowded. somewhat us, of twenty-four is that table, to down
knees. their on juveniles two only had off best were

the table, the on placed was soup inevitable the as however, soon, As
all over prevailed babies, Icelandic to even common taciturnity, natural
of soup lichen of portion a with plates our filled host Our else.
of lump enormous an flavor, disagreeable means no by of moss, Iceland
of kind a skyr, some came there that After butter. sour in floating fish
drink, To juice. juniper-berry and biscuits with served whey, and curds
by that hungry, so hungry, was I water. with milk skimmed blanda, had we
porridge. oaten thick of basin a with up finished I dessert of way

grown the whilst disappeared, children the over, was meal the as soon As
cow heather, turf, placed was which on fireplace, the around sat people
a warm, sufficiently was everybody as soon As fish-bones. dried and dung
couches. respective their to retiring all place, took dispersion general
to according trousers, and stockings our off pull to offered hostess Our
so be to declined graciously we as but country, the of custom the
fodder. dry of bed our to us left she honored,

hospitable these of leave our took we morning, the in five at day, Next
a accept them making in difficulty great had uncle My peasants.
remuneration. proper and sufficient

start. to signal the gave then Hans

of character the when Gardar, from yards hundred a got scarcely had We
less and boggy, and marshy be to began soil The changed. country the
was mountains of range the right, the To progress. to favorable
of fortifications, natural of system great a like indefinitely prolonged
rivulets and streams numerous with met We glacis. the skirted we which
As baggage. our wetting without that and ford, to necessary was it which
we then and now yet and increased, appearance deserted the advanced, we
of turn sudden a When distance. the in flitting shadows human see could
felt I specters, these of one of reach easy within us brought track the
shining with head, swollen a of sight the at disgust of impulse sudden a
wounds revolting and repulsive whose and hair, without utterly skin,
forward came never wretches unhappy The rags. his through seen be could
that but however, quick, so not away; ran they contrary, the on beg; to
saellvertu. universal the with them salute to able was Hans

he. said "Spetelsk,"

uncle. my explained leper," "A

The repulsion. of feeling a caused word a such of sound very The
before vanished almost has which leprosy, as known affliction horrible
not is It Iceland. in common is science, modern of effects the
to prohibited strictly is marriage that so hereditary, but contagious
creatures. unfortunate these

of scene the journey, our enliven to tend not did lepers poor These
grassy of tufts last very The lonely. and sad inexpressibly was which
seen, be to was tree a Not feet. our at die to appeared vegetation
and Now bushes. blackberry as big as about willows stunted few a except
his taking air, misty and grey the in soaring falcon a watched we then
a feeling help not could I regions. sunnier and warmer towards flight
and Land, Native own my for sighed I me. over come melancholy of sense
Gretchen. with back be to wished

a to came last at and fjords, little several cross to compelled were We
at over go to able were we and height, its at was tide The gulf. real
farther. mile a about Alftanes, of hamlet the reach and once,

in rich rivers two Heta, the and Alfa the fording after evening, That
house, deserted a in night the pass to compelled were we pike, and trout
The mythology. Scandinavian of fays the all by haunted being of worthy
his feel us made and there, residence his up taken had Cold of King
night. all presence

particular any of lack its by remarkable was day following The
dreary same the soil; swampy and damp same the Always incidents.
the In scenery. of aspect monotonous and sad same the uniformity;
slept we journey, projected our of half the accomplished having evening,
Krosolbt. of Annexia the at

This lava. but nothing feet our under had we mile whole a For
the on lava crumbled the <i>hraun</i>: called is soil the of disposition
out stretched cables ship like instances some in was surface
lava of field immense an heaps; in up coiled others in horizontally,
whose but volcanoes, extinct all mountains, neighboring the from came
out made be could there and Here been. had they once what showed remains
springs. water hot from steam the

of view cursory a than more take to us for however, time, no was There
the Soon might. we speed what with forward go to had We phenomena. these
while horses, our of feet the under appeared again soil swampy and soft
journey Our lakes. small more or one upon came we yards hundred every at
great the round swept fact, in had, we direction; westerly a in now was
clouds the to rose Sneffels of summits white twin the and Faxa, of bay
miles. five than less of distance a at

the of difficulties and accidents The rapidly. advanced now horses The
tell to began fatigue that confess I them. checked longer no soil
on been had he as hard as and firm as was uncle my but me; upon severely
Professor excellent the both admiring help not could I day. first the
expedition rugged this regard to appeared they for guide; worthy the and
walk! mere a as

reached we evening, the in o'clock six at June, 20th the Saturday, On
ocean; the of shore the on situated picturesquely town small a Budir,
him with settled uncle My money. his for asked guide the here and
his say, to is that himself, Hans of family the now was It immediately.
were We hospitality. us offered who cousins--german, his uncles,
the of advantage much too taking without and received, well exceedingly
have to much very liked have should I people, worthy these of goodness
who uncle, my But journey. the of fatigues the after them with rested
despite and kind; the of anything of idea no had rest, require not did
my mount to more once compelled was I Sunday, was day next that fact the
steed.

whose mountains, the of neighborhood the by affected again was soil The
were We oak. old an of tops like ground the of out peered granite
took never uncle My volcano. mighty the of base enormous the skirting
looking and gesticulating, from keep not could he it; off from eyes his
the is "That say to as much as defiance sullen of kind a with it at
conquer." to mind my up made have I giant

themselves of stopped horses the traveling, steady of hours four After
Stapi. of presbytery the of door the before




11 CHAPTER

"REYKIR" SNEFFELS--THE MOUNT REACH WE


of plain large a on built huts, thirty of consisting town a is Stapi
It volcano. the from reflected sun, the of rays the to exposed lava,
fjord, little a of end the along tenements humble its stretches
character. singular most the of wall basaltic a by surrounded

forms, regular assumes It origin. igneous of rock brown a is Basalt
Nature found we Here appearance. singular their by astonish which
if as fashion, human a after quite working and geometrically, proceeding
If rule. the and compass the line, plummet the employed had she
masses huge up piling by effects artistic grand produces she elsewhere
cones, truncated see we elsewhere connection--if or order without
wishing if as here, lines; of succession odd an with pyramids, imperfect
the of architects the preceding and regularity, in lesson a give to
which architecture, of order severe a erected has she ages, early
ever Greece of marvels the nor Babylon of splendors the neither
surpassed.

Fingal's of and Ireland, in Causeway Giant's the of heard often had I
basaltic real a of spectacle grand the but Hebrides, the of one in Cave
eyes. my before come yet never had formation

and beauty wonderful its all in one of idea an us gave Stapi at This
grace.

consisted peninsula, the of whole the nearly like fjord, the of wall The
These feet. thirty about height in columns, vertical of series a of
an supported proportions, finest the of stone, of pillars upright
half-vaulted of kind a formed which columns horizontal of archivault
basin, natural this below and intervals, certain At sea. the above roof
through openings oval of sight the by surprised and pleased was eye the
banks Some foam. of volleys in thundering came waves outward the which
lay waves, the of fury the by fastenings their from torn basalt, of
temple--ruins ancient an of ruins the like ground the on scattered
producing without swept ages of storms the which over young, eternally
effect! perceptible any

with along us brought had Hans journey. our of stage last the was This
comfortable more somewhat feel to began I and intelligence, and fidelity
way. our on farther still us accompany to was he that reflected I when

incommodious and small a Rector, the of house the before halted we When
his of those than comfortable more nor handsome neither cabin,
his in hammer a horse, a shoeing of act the in man a saw I neighbors,
waist. his round tied apron leathern a and hand,

in salutation national his using hunter, eider-down the said happy," "Be
language. own his

Danish. excellent in former, the replied day!" dag--good "God

uncle. my to him introducing and round turning Hans, cried "Kyrkoherde,"

Harry, dear my appears, "it Professor; worthy the repeated Rector," "The
own his doing above not is and Rector, the is man worthy this that
work."

Kyrkoherde the to intimated guide the words these of speaking the During
his from ceasing man, good The case. the of state true the was what
a almost woman, tall a which upon halloo, of kind a gave occupation,
in which high, feet six least at was She hut. the of out came giantess,
considerable. something is region that

us give to come had she thought I horror. of one was impression first My
not did she for fear, to nothing however, had, I kiss. Icelandic the
house. her into us receive to inclination much show even

in worst the far by be to me to appeared strangers to devoted room The
however, was, There offensive. and dirty narrow, was it presbytery; the
the practicing of notion no had Rector The matter. the about choice no
was day the Before it. from Far hospitality. antique and cordial usual
a hunter, a fisherman, a blacksmith, a with deal to had we found I over,
that favor his in said be must It clergyman. a but anything carpenter,
greater to appeared he probably weekday; a on him caught had we
Sunday. the on advantage

most a Government Danish the from receive priests poor These
of tithe the of quarter one collect and salary, inadequate ridiculously
10s. L3 about or current, marks sixty than more parish--not their
soon we truth, In live. to working of necessity the Hence sterling.
virtues. cardinal the among civility count not did host our that found

with. deal to had he man of kind the of aware became soon uncle My
ill-mannered dull a found he scholar, learned and worthy a of Instead
soon as expedition great his on start to resolved therefore He peasant.
few a spend to resolved and fatigue, about care not did He possible. as
mountains. the in days

our after day next very the made were departure our for preparations The
of place the take to Icelanders three hired now Hans Stapi; at arrival
however, When, luggage. our carry longer no could horses--which the
were they crater, the of bottom the reached had islanders worthy these
they before settled was point This ourselves. to us leave and back go to
start. to agree would

eider-duck the Hans, in confided partly uncle my occasion, this On
continue to intention his was it that understand to him gave and hunter,
limits. possible last the to volcano the of exploration his

or there, go To head. his nodded then and calmly, listened Hans
over travel to or earth, the of bowels the in himself bury to elsewhere,
by occupied and amused me, for As him! to same the all was summits, its
future; inevitable the forget to begun had I travel, of incidents the
affairs. of state actual the realize to destined more once was I now but
leave to intended had really I if But away? Run done? be to was What
not and Hamburg at been have should it fate, his to Hardwigg Professor
Sneffels. of foot the at

idea, terrible very a me: trouble to began others, all above idea, One
than sensitive less even man a of nerves the shake to calculated one and
myself.

ascend to going are "we myself; to said I matter," the consider us "Let
the to visit a pay to about are We good. and Well mountain. Sneffels the
not did and it done have Others still. Good, crater. the of bottom very
course. that from perish

does road a If considered. be to matter whole the not is however, "That,
and dark the into descend to which by itself present really
Saknussemm unhappy thrice this if Earth, Mother of bowels subterraneous
midst the in lost certainly most be shall we truth, the told really has
have we Now, volcano. the of galleries subterraneous of labyrinth the of
we have proof What extinct. really is Sneffels that prove to evidence no
monster the Because place? take to about shortly not is eruption an that
wake? to never is he that follow it does 1219, since soundly slept has

us?" of become to is what wake does he "If

reflected I them upon and about, thinking worth questions were These
without sleep of search in down lie not could I deeply. and long
be to objected I more the thought, I more The eruptions. of dreaming
ashes. and dross of state the to reduced

whole the submit to last at determined I so longer; no it stand could I
form the under and possible, manner adroit most the in uncle, my to case
hypothesis. irreconcilable totally some of

to order in back drew then and fears, my him before laid I him. sought I
ease. his at over passion his get him let

tone quietest the in said, he matter," the about thinking been have "I
world. the in

reason? of voice the to listen to about last at he Was mean? he did What
much too almost was It projects? his suspending of think he Did
true. be to happiness

to not anxious too only was I fact, In remark. no made however I
some After leisure. his at reflect to him allowed and him, interrupt
out. spoke he moments

have we since "Ever resumed. he matter," the about thinking been have "I
grave the with occupied solely almost been has mind my Stapi, at been
would nothing yourself--for by me to submitted been has which question
imprudence." with act to than inconsistent more and unwiser be

hopeful somewhat my was uncle," dear my you, with agree heartily "I
rejoinder.

now though but spoken, has Sneffels since years hundred six now is "It
volcanic New again. speak may he silence, utter of state a to reduced
have I phenomena. well-known perfectly by preceded always are eruptions
carefully have I region; this of inhabitants the examined closely
Harry, dear my emphatically, you tell to beg I and soil, the studied
present." at eruption no be will there

could and stupefied was I affirmations, positive his to listened I As
nothing. say

me." "follow uncle; my said word," my doubt you see "I

mechanically. obeyed I

in opening an through road a took Professor the presbytery, the Leaving
open in soon were We sea. the from away far led which rock, basaltic the
with covered all place a to name a such give could we if country,
of weight the under crushed seemed land whole The deposits. volcanic
all of and lava, of granite, of basalt, of trap, stones--of enormous
substances. volcanic other

vapors, white These air. the in rising steam of spouts many see could I
water hot from come "reykir," language Icelandic the in called
the of activity volcanic the violence their by indicate and fountains,
was, I apprehension. my justify to appeared these of sight the Now soil.
thus uncle my when mortified and surprised more the all therefore,
me. addressed

boy?" my Harry, smoke, this all see "You

sir." "Yes,

the from fear to nothing have you thus, them see you as long as "Well,
volcano."

be?" that can "How

approach the "At Professor. the continued this," remember to careful "Be
activity--to their redouble vapor of spouts these eruption an of
the for eruption; volcanic of period the during altogether disappear
in refuge seek tension, necessary the having longer no fluids, elastic
of fissures the through escaping of instead crater, the of interior the
state, habitual or normal its in remains steam the then, If, earth. the
remark the this, to add you if and increase, not does energy their if
dead and pressure atmospheric heavy by replaced not is wind the that
immediate any of fear no is there that sure quite be may you calm,
eruption."

"But--"

to only is fiat--it her forth sent has science When boy. my "Enough,
obey." and hear

had uncle My disappointed. and downcast quite house the to back came I
I Nevertheless, arguments. scientific his with me defeated completely
the of bottom the at were we once when was, that and hope, one still had
tunnel, or gallery a of default in impossible be would it that crater,
in Saknussemms learned the all despite this, and deeper; any descend to
world. the

chest! my on nightmare a with night following the of whole the passed I
very the in myself found tortures, and miseries unheard-of after and,
planetary into launched suddenly was I which from earth, the of depths
rock! eruptive an of form the under space,

with presbytery the outside us awaited calmly Hans 23d, June day, Next
Two instruments. and tools, provisions, with loaded companions three his
my for reserved were bags, game large two and guns, two poles, iron-shod
minutest the even forgot never who man a was who Hans, myself. and uncle
an as water, of full skin large a baggage our to added had precautions,
days. eight for water us assured This gourds. our to addition

rector The ready. quite were we when morning the in o'clock nine was It
to door the at stood which, knew never I servant, or wife huge his and
final usual the us on inflict to about be to appeared They off. us see
the took adieu their astonishment supreme our To Icelanders. the of kiss
the of use the counted even they which in bill, formidable a of shape
I place dirty and abominable most the truly and really house, pastoral
Swiss a like us robbed and cheated couple worthy The in. was ever
of splendors the pay, to had we sum the by feel, us made and innkeeper,
hospitality. their

his up made had who man A bargaining. without paid however, uncle, My
the not is Earth, the of Interior the into voyage a undertake to mind
rix-dollars. miserable few a over haggle to man

and departure, for signal the gave Hans settled, matter important This
Stapi. left had we later moments few some




12 CHAPTER

SNEFFELS MOUNT OF ASCENT THE


is experiment daring our of stage first the was which volcano huge The
long a of termination the is Sneffels high. feet thousand five above
of system the to character different a of mountains, volcanic of range
pointed huge two its is peculiarities its of One itself. island the
real the out make to impossible was it started we whence From summits.
could we All sky. of field grey the against peak the of outlines
head the from downwards fell which white, of dome vast a was distinguish
giant. the of

that Now awe. with me filled undertaking great the of commencement The
the of reality the in believe to began I started, actually had we
undertaking!

preceded file, single in walked We procession. a quite formed party Our
narrow by us led calmly He hunter. eider-duck imperturbable the Hans, by
abreast. walk possibility no by could persons two where paths
to opportunity more the all had We impossible. wholly was Conversation
around. scene the of grandeur awful the admire and reflect

found we Stapi of fjord the of wall basaltic extraordinary the Beyond
scanty a grew which over turf, fibrous through way our making ourselves
the of vegetation ancient the of residuum the grass, of vegetation
which of field the combustible, this of mass vast The peninsula. swampy
whole a for Iceland warm to suffice would unexplored, utterly is yet as
certain of bottom the from measured pit, turf mighty This century.
the to presents and deep, feet seventy than less not often is ravines,
detritus, rocky burned-up black of layers successive of view the eye
sandstone. porous of streaks thin by separated

and arid its as well as undoubted, was spectacle the of grandeur The
air. deserted

my despite and Hardwigg, Professor great the of nephew true a As
with observed I come, to was what of fears doleful and preoccupation
spread curiosities mineralogical of collection vast the interest great
my to back Looking history. natural of museum vast this in me before out
of history geological whole the thought in over went I studies, recent
Iceland.

from appearance its made have must island curious and extraordinary This
Like date. recent comparatively a at waters of world great the of out
still be know, we aught for may, it Pacific, the of islands coral the
degrees. imperceptible and slow by rising

one only to attributed be can origin its case, the be really this If
fires. subterranean of action continued the of cause--that

thought. happy a was This

Davy; Humphry Sir of theories the with away true, were this if so, If
the Saknussemm; Arne of parchment the of authority the with away
our to uncle--and my of part the on discovery to pretensions wonderful
journey!

smoke. in end must All

A me. about look to carefully more began I idea, the with Charmed
my confirm or negative to necessary was soil the of study serious
to began I and saw, I what of item every in took I hypothesis.
formation. its preceded had which phenomena of succession the comprehend

composed is soil, sedimentary without absolutely being Iceland,
of agglomeration an of say, to is that tufa; volcanic of exclusively
of existence the before Long texture. porous a of rocks of and stones
lifted rock trap massive of body solid a of composed was it volcanoes,
force centrifugal the of action the by sea, the of out slowly and bodily
earth. the in work at

and bounds their burst yet as not had however, fires, internal The
lava. raging and hot with Earth Mother of cake exterior the flooded

geological pedantic somewhat and brief this excuse must readers My
what of understanding complete the to necessary is it But lecture.
follows.

fissure mighty and huge a history, world's the in period later a At
southwest the from diagonally dug been have analogy, by reasoning must,
the flowed degrees by which through island, the of northeast the to
without on went then phenomenon wondrous and great The crust. volcanic
matter, fused seething the and enormous, was outpouring violence--the
in peacefully and slowly spread earth, the of bowels the from ejected
mounds. or mamelons called are what or plains, level vast of form the

and syenites, feldspars, called rocks the that epoch this at was It
appeared. porphyries

island the of depth the overflow, this of consequence natural a as But
of quantity enormous an what believed be readily can It increased.
afforded it last at when centre, its within up piled were fluids elastic
taken had crust the cooling of process the after openings, other no
place.

of weight and thickness enormous the despite when came time a length At
below gases combustible the of forces mechanical the crust, upper the
made and back weighty the upheaved actually they that great, so became
which volcanoes the Hence shafts. gigantic and huge themselves for
which craters, the next and crust, upper the through arose suddenly
creations. new these of summit the at forth burst

the with connection in phenomena first the that seen be will It
shortly however, these, to eruptive; simply were island the of formation
phenomena. volcanic the succeeded

of mass marvelous the escaped openings, formed newly the Through
covered. was crossing now were we plain the which with stones basaltic
which, color, grey dark of rocks heavy over way our trampling were We
"back the In prisms. six-sided into moulded been had cooling, while
were formerly which cones, flattened of number a see could we distance"
mouths. fire-vomiting many so

volcano, the rest, at set and appeased was eruption basaltic the After
free gave craters, extinct the of that with increased which of force the
and cinders of mass the to and lava, of overflow fiery the to passage
like mountain, the of sides the over scattered now stone, pumice
Bacchante. a of shoulders the on hair disheveled

which from phenomena the of history whole the had I nutshell, a in Here,
interior of action fierce the in rise their take All arose. Iceland
of state a in remain not did mass central the that believe to and fires,
madness. purely and simply was hot, white fire, liquid

to folly insensate what (Q.E.D.), proved satisfactorily being This
earth! mighty the of interior the into penetrate to pretend

journey, a on proceeding while myself to delivered lecture mental This
and enterprise; our of fate the to as reassured quite was I good. me did
to battery, bristling a mounting soldier brave a like went, therefore
Sneffels. old of assault the

soil The difficult. more moment every became road the advanced, we As
feet, our under way gave and broke rocks The dangerous. and broken was
and dangerous avoid to order in careful scrupulously be to had we and
falls. constant

Plain; Salisbury over walking been had he if as calmly as advanced Hans
we and stone, of blocks huge behind disappear would he sometimes
and anxiety of period little a was There him. of sight lost momentarily
him. for look to where us tell to just whistle, shrill a was there then

of lumps up pick to stop to head his into it take would he Occasionally
might we that order in heaps, small into up them pile silently and rock,
return. our on way our lose not

undertake. to about were we journey the of idea no had He

useless utterly how though one; good a was precaution the events, all At
anticipate. not must I unnecessary--but and

brought only had incessantly, walking fatigue, terrible of hours Three
what of notion some give will This mountain. great the of foot the to us
undergo. to still had we

that to signs made he is, halt--that a cried Hans however, Suddenly,
before lava the on out laid was breakfast of kind summary a effect--and
to eager so was Hardwigg, Professor simply was now who uncle, My us.
for halt This clown. greedy a like food his bolted he that advance,
therefore was Professor The repose. for halt a also was refreshment
did who guide, imperturbable his of pleasure good the wait to compelled
hour. good a for departure for signal the give not

say not did comrade, their as taciturn as were who Icelanders, three The
soberly. and quietly very drinking and eating on went but word; a

the of slopes the ascend to began we stage, real first our this, From
call to began we as nightcap, snowy magnificent Its volcano. Sneffels
to me to appeared mountains, in common very delusion optical an by it,
before elapse must hours weary long many how yet and hand; at close be
endure! we must fatigue unheard-of What summit. its reached we

soil, of cement no by together held side, mountain the on stones The
under continually way gave herbs, creeping or roots no by together bound
small of series a like plains, the into below rushing went and feet, our
avalanches.

angle an at were mountain stupendous this of sides the places certain In
compelled were we and upwards, climb to impossible was it that steep so
might. we best as obstacles these round get to

difficulties. our comprehend will climbing Alpine understand who Those
climbing our of means by along other each help to obliged were we Often
poles.

possible. as me to close as stuck he that uncle, my for this say must I
me supplied arm his occasions many on and me, of sight lost never He
apparently and wiry, strong, was He support. solid and firm with
had he that was him with advantage great Another fatigue. to insensible
in failed or slipped never he equilibrium--for of sentiment innate the
the with climbed loaded, heavily though Icelanders, The steps. his
mountaineers. of agility

of volcano great the of height the at then, and now every up, Looking
on summit the to reach to impossible wholly me to appeared it Sneffels,
speedily not did inclination of angle the if events, all at side; that
change.

gymnastic of and fatigues, unheard-of of hour an after Fortunately,
vast a to came we acrobat, an to trying been have would that exercises
the of cone the of bottom the surrounded wholly which ice, of field
such some from probably tablecloth, the it called natives The volcano.
mountain their call Hope Good of Cape the in dwellers the as reason
Bay. Table roads their and Mountain, Table

steps, stone of flight actual an found we surprise, mutual our to Here,
stairs of flight singular This ascent. our assisted wonderfully which
those of one by formed been had It volcanic. else, everything like was,
Icelandic the which of and eruptions, the by up cast stones of torrents
its in checked been not had torrent singular this If stina. is name
would it mountain, the of flanks the of shape peculiar the by descent
islands. new formed have would and sea, the into swept have

the of character abrupt The admirably. us served it was, it as Such
little a steps, stone remarkable these but increased, momentarily slopes
simple one the were pyramids, Egyptian the of those than difficult less
proceed. to enabled were we which by means natural

two up clambered having after day, that of evening the in seven About
of kind a overlooking ourselves found we steps, rough these of thousand
the which upon buttress of sort mountain--a the of projection or spur
support. for leaned called, so properly crater, conelike

two thousand three than more of depth a at us beneath lay ocean The
of region the reached had We spectacle. mighty and grand feet--a hundred
snows. eternal

with blew wind The intense. and searching keen, was cold The
exhausted. utterly was I violence. extraordinary

further refused legs my that clearly saw Professor, the uncle, worthy My
and hot his Despite exhausted. utterly was I fact, in that, and service,
the called He halt. a upon sigh, a with decided, he impatience, feverish
head. his shook however, worthy, That side. his to hunter eider-duck

reply. spoken sole his was "Ofvanfor,"

go must we "that look, woebegone a with uncle my says appears," "It
higher."

this for reason some give to him asked and Hans, to turned then He
response. decisive

guide. the replied "Mistour,"

a in guides Icelandic the of one cried mistour," the mistour--yes, "Ja,
tone. terrified

spoken. had he time first the was It

inquired. anxiously I signify?" word mysterious this does "What

uncle. my said "Look,"

prodigious a vast, a saw I and below, plain the upon down looked I
the to rising dust, of sand, of stone, pumice pulverized of volume
fearful the resembled It waterspout. mighty a of form the in heavens
desert the in travelers the to known character similar a of phenomenon
Sahara. great the of

which on Sneffels of side that towards directly it driving was wind The
sun the and us between up standing veil opaque This perched. were we
sand this If mountain. the of flanks the on shadow deep a projected
its in crushed destroyed, infallibly be all must we us, over broke spout
the when common very phenomenon, extraordinary This embraces. fearful
the in is plains, arid the over sweeps and glaciers, the shakes wind
"mistour." called tongue Icelandic

guide. our cried hastigt!" "Hastigt,

that understood thoroughly I but Danish, of nothing knew certainly I Now
us. quicken to meant were gestures his

back the to us take would which direction a in rapidly turned guide The
slightly. ascending while the all crater, the of

fatigue. excessive our despite rapidly, followed We

The back. look to us enable to paused Hans later hour an of quarter A
to mountain the of slope the up spreading was sand of whirlwind mighty
up, caught were stones Huge halt. to proposed had we where spot very the
were We eruption. an during as about thrown and air, the into cast
of out therefore and wind, the of direction the of out little a happily
our guide, our of knowledge and precaution the for But danger. of reach
to cast been have would limbs, broken and crushed our bodies, dislocated
meteor. unknown some from dust like wind, the

bare the on night the pass to prudent it think not did however, Hans,
zigzag a in journey our continued therefore We cone. the of side
accomplished be to remained which feet hundred fifteen The direction.
the windings, and turnings The hours. five least at us took
insignificant that turned marches, and marches the no-thoroughfares,
fatigue misery, such felt never I leagues. three least at into distance
cold. and hunger from faint to ready was I life. my in exhaustion and
lungs. my upon acted painfully time same the at air rarefied The

night, at eleven about gasp, last my at myself thought I when last, At
Mount of summit the reached we dark, quite region that in being it
fatigue, my despite that mind, of mood awful an in was It Sneffels!
the for us shelter to was which crater the into descended I before
of day very the on midnight at rise sun the behold to paused I night,
pale ghastly its of spectacle the enjoyed and declension, lowest its
feet! our at sleeping lay which isle the upon cast rays

to England from way the all traveling people at wondered longer no I
spectacle. wondrous and magical this behold to Norway




13 CHAPTER

SCARTARIS OF SHADOW THE


did everybody which after rapidity, and ease with eaten was supper Our
bed The crater. the of hollow the within himself for could he best the
in painful--lying situation the unsatisfactory, shelter the hard, was
sea! the of level the above feet thousand five air, open the

on did I as well so sleep to me to happened seldom has it Nevertheless,
of effects the for much So dream. even not did I night. particular that
fatigue." "wholesome called uncle my what

we sun, glorious and bright a of rays the under awoke we when day, Next
one made and couch granite my left I air. keen the by frozen nearly were
which spectacle magnificent the of view a enjoy to party the of
feet. our at panorama-like, itself, developed

I Thence peak. southern Sneffels' Mount of summit lofty the upon stood I
optical The island. the of part greater the of view a obtain to able was
island, the of shores the raised heights, lofty all to common delusion,
too means no by was It depressed. appeared portions central the while
stretched was picture giant a that believe to fancy of flight a great
in other each crossed that valleys deep the see could I me. before out
wells, of sides like looking precipices see could I direction. every
like looked that ponds ponds, into changed be to seemed that lakes
right my To brooks. petty into transformed were that rivers and puddles,
light with topped peaks, multiplied and glaciers, upon glaciers were
smoke. of clouds

snowy whose mountains, of numbers infinite these of undulation The
remembrance my to recalled foam, by covered if as look them make summits
the west, the towards looked I If ocean. storm-beaten a of surface the
it as continuation a grandeur, majestic its all in me before lay ocean
hilltops. fleecy these of were,

to eye the for impossible was it began sea the and ended earth the Where
distinguish.

in awakened is which sensation mysterious and strange that felt soon I
do to able was I now and hilltops, lofty from down looking when mind the
hardened fortunately having nervousness, of feeling any without so
contemplation. sublime of kind that to myself

a with intoxicated became I was. I where and was, I who forgot wholly I
my which into abysses the of thought without sublimity, lofty of sense
brought however, presently, was I me. plunge to about soon was daring
Hans, and Professor the of arrival the by life of realities the to back
peak. the of summit lofty the upon me joined who

light a me to out pointed direction, westerly a in turning uncle, My
out rising land of outline faint a with haze, of kind a vapor, of cloud
waters. the of

he. said "Greenland!"

reply. in I cried "Greenland?"

as spoke anything explaining when always who uncle, my continued "Yes,"
thirty-five than more not are "we chair; professor's a in were he if
breakup annual great the When land. wonderful that from distant leagues
the by carried Iceland, to over come bears white place, takes ice the of
of matter a is however, This, north. the from ice of masses floating
the great, the of summit the on now are We consequence. little
Hans south. and north peaks, two its are here and Sneffels, transcendent
which on that call Iceland of people the which by name the you tell will
stand." we

as spoke and nodded, who guide, imperturbable the to turned uncle My
word. usual--one

"Scartaris."

glance. triumphant and proud a with me at looked uncle My

hear?" "you said, he crater," "A

reply. make to unable totally was I but hear, did I

gaping the cone, inverted an represented Sneffels Mount of crater The
feet. indefinite depth the across; mile a half apparently orifice
and flame of full when like been have must hole this what Conceive
about was hollow funnel-shaped the of bottom The lightning. and thunder
the that seen be will it which by circumference, in feet hundred five
were we and gradual, very was bottom the to summit the from slope
difficulty. or fatigue much without there get to able clearly therefore
and cannon; loaded enormous an to crater this compared I Involuntarily,
me. terrified completely comparison the

"when myself, to thought I cannon," a of interior the into descend "To
of act the is shock, least the at off go will and loaded, is it perhaps
madman." a

a with Hans, hesitate. to me for opportunity any longer no was there But
of head the at post usual his took air, indifferent and calm perfectly
syllable. a uttering without followed I band. little adventurous the

slaughter. the to led lamb the like felt I

down way his took Hans difficult, less descent the render to order In
the as making, fashion, zigzag a rather in cone the of interior the
ones long equally by followed eastward, the to tracks long say, sailors
eruptive of midst the through walk to necessary was It west. the to
with down rolling went balance, their in shaken which, of some rocks,
falls continual These abyss. the of bottom the to clamor thundering
effect. and power singular of echoes awoke

whenever Hans, glaciers. inferior of consisted cone the of portions Many
of show great a with advanced obstacles, these of one with met he
to order in pole iron long his with soil the sounding precaution,
or doubtful many In snow. soft deep of layers and fissures discover
a by together tied be to us for necessary became it places, dangerous
to enough unfortunate be us of one any should that order in rope long
was link connecting This companions. his by supported be would he slip,
with unattended means any by not but precaution, prudent a doubtless
danger.

descent, the of difficulties manifold the all despite and Nevertheless,
made we unacquainted, wholly was guide our which with slopes along
rope of parcels great our of One accident. without progress considerable
to cut short a by rushed and porters, Iceland the of one from slipped
abyss. the of bottom the

saw and upwards, looked I journey. our of end the at were we midday By
to frame circular a as served which cone, the of orifice upper the only
singularly me to seemed which portion sky--a the of portion small very a
sky! sunlit lovely that on gaze again ever I Should beautiful.

of Peak the was landscape, extraordinary this to exception only The
heavens. the of void great the in lost seemed which Scartaris,

through shafts, separate three of composed was crater the of bottom The
the action, in was Sneffels when eruption, of periods during which,
vapors. poisonous and lava burning its forth sent furnace central great
kept I path. our in open-mouthed gaped shafts or chimneys these of Each
the take to venturing even not possible, as them from away far as
downwards. peep faintest

and disposition their of examination rapid a after Professor, the for As
to one from ran He panting. and breathless became he characteristics,
uttering and wildly, gesticulating schoolboy, delighted a like other the
languages. of sorts all in phrases disjointed and incomprehensible

some on themselves seated companions humbler his and guide, the Hans,
a for uncle my took clearly They on. silently looked and lava of piles
result. the and--waited lunatic;

I first At cry. unearthly wild, a uttered Professor the Suddenly
of one into headlong falling was and footing, his lost had he imagined
out spread arms his him, saw I kind. the of Nothing gulfs. yawning the
upright standing apart, stretched legs his extent, widest their to
a bear to enough black and enough high pedestal, enormous an before
man a of that were mien and attitude His Pluto. of statue gigantic
the to changed speedily was stupefaction his But stupefied. utterly
joy. wildest

haste--wonderful--wonderful!" "make cried; he here!" come Harry! "Harry!

commands. his obey to turned I meant, he what understand to Unable
step. a moved Icelanders other the nor Hans Neither

French the of manner the of something in Professor, the said "Look!"
army. his to pyramids the out pointing general,

the on read I joy, his not if stupefaction, his partaking fully And
eaten half characters, same the stone, of block huge the of side eastern
times thousand a me to name, the time, of action corrosive the by away
accursed--

Glyphs] Runic [Illustration:

to begin you do unbeliever, "now, uncle, my cried Saknussemm!" "Arne
faith?" have

to back went I word. single a answer to me for impossible totally was It
was evidence The awe. silent of state a in lava, of pile my
overwhelming! unanswerable,

German my in back away, far were thoughts my however, moments, few a In
of one for given have I would What cook. old the and Gretchen with home,
for and omelettes, domestic's ancient the of one for smiles, cousin's my
bed! feather own my

that is, say can I All not. know I state this in remained I long How
at remained there hands, my between from head my raised I last at when
Icelandic The Hans. and uncle my myself, only crater the of bottom the
slopes exterior the descending now were and dismissed been had porters
myself wish I did heartily How Stapi. to way their on Sneffels, Mount of
them! with

lava, of rill of kind a in rock a of foot the at tranquilly slept Hans
walking was uncle MY bed. ready and rough a himself made had he where
no had I cage. a in beast wild a like crater the of bottom the about
position. recumbent my from move to strength, the I had neither desire,
somnolency, painful of kind a to way gave I guide, the by example Taking
and heavings continued feel and hear to both seemed I which during
mountain. the in shudderings

crater. a of interior the in night first our passed we way this In

over pall funereal a like hung sky heavy cloudy, grey, a morning, Next
the from much so it notice not did I cone. volcanic the of summit the
uncle my which with rage the from as us, around reigned that obscurity
devoured. was

heart my made hope of glimpse a again and reason, the understood fully I
cause. the explain briefly will I joy. with leap

could one only steps, our beneath yawned which openings three the Of
words the to According Saknussemm. adventurous the by followed been have
particular one that by known be to only was it Icelander, learned the of
it, upon fell Scartaris of shadow the that cryptograph, the in mentioned
June. of month the of days last the in mouth its touching just

an of stylus the as peak pointed the consider to fact, in were, We
the like day, given one on pointed which of shadow the sun-dial, immense
the into led which chasm yawning the to fate, of finger inexorable
earth. the of interior

burst to fail sun the should regions, these in happens often as Now,
discovering of chance no Consequently, shadow. no clouds, the through
kindly the If June. 25th the reached already had We aperture. right the
should we days, more six for clouded densely remain only would heavens
certainly when year, another for discovery of voyage our off put to have
sufficient had already I party. the in fewer person one be would there
enterprise. monstrous and mad the of

Professor of rage impotent the depict to impossible utterly be would It
shadow a of outline faintest the not and away, passed day The Hardwigg.
moved never guide the Hans crater. the of bottom the at seen be could
if about, were we what know to curious been have must He place. his from
he uncle, my for As anything. about were we believe could he indeed
warm! it keep to wrath his nursing was He me. to word a addressed never
hideous complexion his atmosphere, foggy and black the on fixed eyes His
nose his fierce, so appeared eyes his had Never passion. suppressed with
firm. and hard so mouth his aquiline, so

fell snow and rain of mixture A better. the for change no 26th the On
into lava of hut a himself built quietly very Hans day. whole the during
delight malicious a took I tub. his into Diogenes like retired he which
of side the down flowed that cascades little thousand the watching in
"vasty the into stones of stream a times at them with carrying cone, the
below. deep"

a even make to enough was it sure, be to frantic: almost was uncle My
his of goal the extent certain a to reached had He angry. man patient
port. in wrecked be to likely was he yet and desires,

pain much us causing of capable are elements the and heavens the if But
for reserved was there And medal. a to sides two are there sorrow, and
to was which surprise sudden and brilliant a Hardwigg Professor
sufferings. his all for him compensate

last the 28th, the Sunday, on but overcast, still was sky the day Next
moon new a and wind of change sudden a with month, the of two but day
the to rays beaming its poured sun The weather. of change a came there
crater. the of bottom very

had soil the of asperity every stone, every rock, every hillock, Each
the on heavily fell shadow its and effulgence, luminous the of share its
was Scartaris of shadow the delight, insane his to others, Among soil.
day. of start radiant the with slowly moved and clear, and marked

ecstasy. mental of state a in it with moved uncle My

highest its attained had sun the when exactly, o'clock twelve At
pit! central the of edge the upon fell shadow the day, the for altitude

is--we it "here joy, of agony an in Professor the gasped is," it "Here
Earth." the of Interior the into friends, my Forward, it. found have

this to make would he reply what see to Hans at curiously looked I
announcement. terrific

tranquilly. guide the said "Forut,"

of heaven seventh the in now was who uncle, my answered is," it "Forward
delight.

past minutes thirteen indicated watches our ready, quite were we When
one!




14 CHAPTER

COMMENCES JOURNEY REAL THE


and courage our Hitherto commenced. now had journey real Our
times; at fatigued were We difficulties. all overcome had determination
fearful and unknown encounter to about were we Now all. was that and
dangers.

into abyss horrible the down glimpse a take to ventured yet as not had I
had, moment fatal The plunge. to about was I more minutes few a in which
or refusing of option the still had I arrived. last at however,
was I But enterprise. audacious and foolish this in share a accepting
to seemed Hans hunter. eider-duck the than fear more show to ashamed
calm such with tranquilly, so journey the of difficulties the accept
I that danger, all of recklessness perfect such with indifference,
he! than man a of less appear to blushed actually

and down sat have certainly should I uncle, my with alone been I Had
my held I guide the of presence the in but fully; point the argued
then and cousin, charming my of thought the to moment one gave I tongue.
shaft. central the of mouth the to advanced I

three about made which diameter, in feet hundred a about measured It
edge, its on stood which rock a over leaned I circumference. in hundred
limbs my chattered, teeth my end, on stood hair My down. looked and
head my while gravity, of centre my lose to utterly seemed I trembled.
nothing is There man. drunken a of that like whirl, of sort a in was
fall to about was I abyss. an towards attraction this than powerful more
and firm a by back drawn was I when well, gaping the into headlong
at enough lessons taken not had I Hans. of that was It hand. powerful
lofty from down looking of art the in Copenhagen of Frelser's-Kirk the
blinking! without eminences

this down gazed I which during were minutes the as few However,
to it of glimpse sufficient a had I shaft, wondrous even and tremendous
were which sides, Its conformation. physical its of idea some me give
numerous presented well, a of those as perpendicular as almost
descent. our assist would doubtless which projections

fence. or bannister without staircase, savage and wild of sort a was It
our support certainly would surface, the near above, fastened rope A
arrived had we when how, but bottom, the reach to us enable and weight
a thought, I was, This above? it loosen to we were depth, utmost its at
importance. some of question

prepared always nearly are who men those of one was however, uncle, My
this obviating of method simple very a upon hit He expedients. with
least at and thumb, my as thick as about cord a unrolled He difficulty.
the down go to it of half about allowed He length. in feet hundred four
the on stood which lava of block great a over hitch a in catch and pit
the after half second the threw he done, This precipice. the of edge
first.

When hand. one in cords two the catching by descend now could us of Each
go let to was do to had explorer the all below, feet hundred two about
at falling come would cord the when other, the at away pull and end one
to was necessary was that all farther, down go to order In feet. his
operation. same the continue

one. correct a doubt, no and proposition, excellent very a was This
that again up coming the was it enough; easy me to appeared down Going
thoughts. my occupied now

important this completed had he as soon as uncle, my said "Now,"
into divided be must It baggage. the about see us "let preparation,
I back. his on one carry must us of each and parcels, separate three
articles." fragile and important more the to allude

came we that consider to appear not did uncle ingenious and worthy My
denomination. the under

the of some and tools the of charge take will "you continued, he "Hans,"
the of third another of possession take must Harry, you, provisions;
the of rest the with myself load will I arms. the of and provisions
instruments." delicate more the with and eatables,

ladders--who and cord of mass this clothes, "our exclaimed, I "But,"
down?" them carry to undertake will

themselves." of down go will "They

asked. I so?" how "And

see." shall "You

the in anything like he did nor measures, half of fond not was uncle My
the of whole the had he Hans to orders his Giving hesitation. of way
and firmly packet, the and bundle; one into up made articles nonfragile
gulf. the of edge the over pitched simply was fastened, solidly

of noise the and air, displaced suddenly the of moaning the heard I
of descent the followed abyss the over leaning uncle My stones. falling
until rise not did and air, self-satisfied perfectly a with luggage his
sight. from disappeared completely had it

turn." our is "it cried, he then," "Now

to possible it sense--was common of man any to faith good in it put I
shudder? a without cry energetic this hear

took Hans back. his on instruments of case his fastened Professor The
the in commenced then descent The arms. the of I tools, the of charge
last. went I and followed, uncle my first, went Hans order: following
by troubled only silence silence--a profound in made was progress Our
fell sides, jagged the from breaking which rock, of pieces of fall the
below. depths the into roar a with

the on frantically holding speak, to so slide, to myself allowed I
the off myself keeping other the with and hand one with cord double
time the all was idea One pole. iron-shod my of assistance the by rocks
me. fail would support upper the that feared I brain. my upon impressed
such three of weight the bear to fragile too far me to appeared cord The
as it of use little as made I luggage. our with were, we as persons
of way the in miracles doing and agility own my to trusting possible,
of spurs and shelves projecting the upon strength and dexterity of feats
hands. my as strongly as clutch to seemed feet my which lava

and slippery the of one when and said, have I first, went guide The
usual his to recourse had he feet his under from broke supports frail
speaking. of way monosyllabic

akt--" "Gif

uncle. my repeated out," "Attention--look

a by formed terrace small of kind a reached we hour an half about In
shaft. the of sides the from distance some projecting rock of fragment

going other the only, side one on cord the upon haul to began now Hans
with bringing last, at fell It down. came other the as upward quietly as
rain of kind disagreeable a dust, and lava stones, small of shower a it
hail. or

to more once ventured I bench extraordinary this on seated were we While
still was bottom the that discovered I sigh a With downwards. look
the of interior the to direct going then, we, Were invisible. wholly
earth?

hour an of quarter a and recommenced, cord the with performance The
feet. hundred two another of depth the to reached had we later

during would, geologist determined most the if doubts strong very have I
earth of layers different the of nature the studied have descent, that
we whether matter; the about much head my trouble not did I him. around
I soil, primitive or Silurians, carbon, combustible the among were
know. to cared nor knew neither

way the all notes taken have must He Professor. inveterate the so Not
lecture. brief a began he halts, our of one at for, down,

the in confidence my is greater "the he, said advance," we farther "The
the confirms absolutely strata volcanic these of disposition The result.
the of region the within still are We Davy. Humphry Sir of theories
of operation chemical the place took which in soil the soil, primordial
I water. and air the with contact in coming by inflamed becoming metals
central a of theory exploded forever now and old the regret once at
truth." the know soon shall we events, all At fire.

was however, I, came. he which to conclusion everlasting the was Such
else something had I matter. the discuss to humor in being from far very
to continued we still and consent; for taken was silence My of. think to
down. go

off far as appearance, all to were, we hours, three of expiration the At
I however, upwards, looked I When well. the of bottom the from ever as
size. in decreasing minute every was orifice upper the that see could
were we together, closer and closer getting were shaft the of sides The
night! eternal of regions the approaching

descend! to continued we still And

the from detached were stone of pieces when that noticed I length, At
less with up swallowed were they precipice, stupendous this of sides
approaching were We heard. sooner was sound final The before. than noise
abyss! the of bottom the

cord of changes the all of account keep to careful very been had I As
had we depth the was what exactly tell to able was I place, took which
taken. had it time the as well as reached,

a taking operation each times, twenty-eight rope the shifted had We
be to had this To hours. seven made all in which hour, an of quarter
at started We half. a and hours ten all in pauses; twenty-eight added
night. at o'clock eleven about therefore, now, was it one,

that know to arithmetic of knowledge great require not does It
feet hundred six thousand five makes feet hundred two times twenty-eight
mile). English an than (more all in

It silence. the broke voice a calculation mental this making was I While
Hans. of voice the was

cried. he "Halt!"

to about was I when moment the at just suddenly, very myself checked I
head. the on uncle my kick

a in Professor worthy the said journey," our of end the reached have "We
tone. satisfied

side. his to down slipping I, said earth?" the of interior the "What,

well." the of bottom the reached have we but fellow! stupid you "No,

hopefully I made?" be to progress farther no is there suppose I "And
exclaimed.

to obliquely off turns which tunnel, of sort a see dimly can I yes, "Oh,
sup us Let tomorrow. that about see must we events, all At right. the
may." we best as slumber seek and now,

fairly was I point. that on observations no made but time, it thought I
forward go to was do to had I all and course, desperate a on launched
trustingly. and hopefully

most a in down filtering light the dark, quite now even not was It
manner. extraordinary

best his did each and supper, frugal a ate bag, provision the opened We
had which lava and dirt, stones, of pile the amid bed a find to
shaft. the of bottom the at ages for accumulated

we which clothes and ladders, ropes, of pile the out grope to happened I
day's a such After myself. stretched I them upon and down; thrown had
down! as soft as seemed bed rough my labor,

trance. pleasant of sort a in lay I while a For

and eyes my opened I minutes, some for quietly lying after Presently,
the at dot, little brilliant a out made I so did I As upwards. looked
telescope. gigantic long, this of extremity

calculation, my to According rays. scintillating without star a was It
Bear. Little the of constellation the in Beta be must it

sound a into dropped I recreation, astronomical of bit little this After
sleep.




15 CHAPTER

DESCENT OUR CONTINUE WE


us. awoke day of dawn of kind faint a morning, next the o'clock eight At
passed it as light the collected lava the of prisms one and thousand The
sparks. of shower a like us to it brought and

us. around objects see to ease with able were We

hands his rubbing Professor, delighted the cried boy," my Harry, "Well,
in night tranquil more a pass ever you Did now? you say "what together,
no wheels, cart of sounds deafening No Konigstrasse? the in house our
watermen!" or boatmen from language bad no hawkers, of cries

there me to well--but this of bottom the at quite are we Uncle, "Well,
calm." this in terrible something is

already were you say would "one hotly, Professor the said "Why,"
that know, you Do presently? on get you will How afraid. be to beginning
earth." the of bowels the into inch one penetrated not have we yet, as

reply. astonished and bewildered my was sir?" mean, you can "What

island the of soil the reached just only have we that say to mean "I
crater the of bottom the at ends which tube, vertical long This itself.
sea." the with level a on about just here ceases Sneffels, of

sir?" sure, you "Are

barometer." the Consult sure. "Quite

the in gradually rising after mercury, the that true quite was It
stopped had place, taking was descent our as long as instrument,
degrees. twenty-nine at precisely

the endure to only yet as have "we Professor, the said perceive," "You
the by barometer the replace to curious am I air. of pressure
manometer."

the as soon useless--as become to about was fact, in barometer, The
the above as calculated was what than greater was air the of weight
ocean. the of level

this that feared be to much very not it "is I, said "But,"
and painful very out turn end the in not may pressure ever-increasing
inconvenient?"

be will lungs our and slowly, very descend shall "We he. said "No,"
that known well is It air. compressed breathe to accustomed gradually
all--why, at air without nearly be to as high so gone have aeronauts
a say, have, we when breathe to ourselves accustom not we should then,
Let it. prefer shall I certain am I myself, For it? of much too little
our in us preceded which packet the is Where moment. a lose not us
descent?"

and it, seen not had Hans uncle. my to out it pointed smilingly I
it. phrased he as "Huppe" us: above somewhere caught it believed

who people like fast break and breakfast, us "let uncle, my said "Now,"
them." before work day's long a have

flavored water of mouthfuls some by down washed meat, dried and Biscuit
meal. luxurious our of material the was Schiedam, with

notebook a pocket his from took uncle my finished, was it as soon As
placed already had He travels. our of memoranda by filled be to destined
wrote: he what is this and order, in instruments his


29th June Monday,

morning. 17m. 8h. Chronometer,

inches. 29.6 Barometer,

Fahr.] degrees [43 degrees 6 Thermometer,

E.S.E. Direction,



indicated was and gallery, obscure the to referred observation last This
compass. the by us to

"we voice, of tone enthusiastic an in Professor, the cried Harry," "Now,
Earth; the of Interior the into step first our take to about truly are
You world. the of creation first the since man by visited before never
really travels our moment precise this at that therefore, consider, may
commence."

coil Ruhmkorff the hand one in took he remark, this made uncle my As
the put he other the with and neck, his round hung which apparatus,
a And lantern. the of worm the with communication into current electric
tunnel! gloomy and dark that illumined once at light bright

magical! was effect The

operation. into put also it had apparatus, second the carried who Hans,
enabled purposes practical to electricity of application ingenious This
flow the even amid day, artificial an of light the by along move to us
gases. combustible and inflammable most the of

my first, went Hans burden. his up took Each uncle. my cried "Forward!"
gallery! somber the entered we third, going I and followed, uncle

I passage, dismal this in ourselves engulf to about were we as Just
I sky Iceland that saw shaft tubelike the through and head, my up lifted
again! see to never was

sky? any of see ever should I last the it Was

had 1219 in earth the of bowels the from flowing lava of stream The
the of whole the lined It tunnel. the through passage a itself forced
added light electric The coating. brilliant and thick its with inside
effect. the of brilliancy the to greatly very

prevent to we were How began. now journey our of difficulty great The
some Happily plane? inclined steeply the down slipping from ourselves
the served irregularities, other and soil, the of abrasures cracks,
to luggage heavy our allowing slowly; descended we and steps; of place
cord. long a of end the at before, on slip

places other in became feet our under steps as served which that But
of form the took places, certain in porous very lava, The stalactites.
limpid with adorned quartz, opaque of Crystals blisters. round little
to seemed lusters, like roof the to suspended glass natural of drops
the that fancied have would One them. beneath passed we as fire take
receive to palaces underground their illuminating were romance of genii
men. of sons the

enthusiasm, involuntary of moment a in cried I glorious!" "Magnificent,
of shades variegated these admire not you Do Uncle! spectacle, a "What
to brown reddish from colors, of series whole a through run which lava,
they crystals, these And degrees? insensible most the yellow--by pale
globes." luminous like appear

my cried Harry," Master travel, of charms the see to beginning are "You
yet as have we What farther. advance we until bit, a "Wait uncle.
onwards!" boy, my nothing--onwards, is discovered

he had expression, appropriate and correct more far a been have would It
with plane inclined an down going were we for slide," us "let said,
a in moving were we that indicated compass The ease. perfect
right the to turned never had lava of flow The direction. southeasterly
line. straight a of inflexibility the had It left. the or

heat. in increase perceptible no found we surprise, my to Nevertheless,
and truth, on founded be to Davy Humphry of theories the proved This
silent in thermometer the examining myself found I once than more
astonishment.

degrees fifty-four marked only it departure our after hours Two
was descent our that this from believe to reason every had I Fahrenheit.
to depth exact the discovering for As vertical. than horizontal more far
he as Professor The easier. be could nothing attained, had we which
kept he but inclination; and deviation of angles the measured advanced
himself. to observations his of result the

for signal the gave uncle my evening, the in o'clock eight About
to hung were lamps The ground. the on himself seated Hans halting.
was air where cavern large a in now were We rock. lava the in fissures
of cause the be could What abounded. it contrary, the On wanting. not
But draught? this ascribed be could agitation atmospheric what this--to
Fatigue then. just discuss to care not did I which question a was this
seven of march unceasing An reasoning. of incapable me made hunger and
and really was I exhaustion. great without up kept been not had hours
Halt. word the hear to was I enough delighted and out; worn truly

with supped each we and lava, of lump a on provisions some out laid Hans
water uneasiness--our great us caused however, thing, One relish. keen
in confidence full had uncle My exhausted. half already was reserve
in failed completely had we hitherto but resources, subterranean finding
the to attention uncle's my calling help not could I doing. so
circumstance.

said. he springs?" of absence total this at surprised are you "And

enough not certainly have We point. the on uneasy very am "Doubtless--I
days." five us last to water

we it for answer "I uncle. my continued matter," that on easy quite "Be
want." shall we than more far fact, water--in of plenty find shall

when?" "But

springs expect you can How lava. of crust this through get once we "When
walls?" stone solid these through way their force to

not does lava of mass concrete this that prove to there is what "But
done yet as have we think don't I earth? the of centre the to extend
way." vertical a in much

mildly. uncle my asked boy?" my head, your into that puts "What

the below far very descended had we if that me to appears it "Well,
have." we than hotter rather it find should sea--we the of level

the does what "but uncle; my said system," your to "According
say?" thermometer

nine of increase an only is which Reaumur, by degrees fifteen "Scarcely
departure." our since

the inquired to?" you bring that does conclusion what and "Well,
Professor.

most the to According simple. very is this from draw I deduction "The
interior the of temperature the of augmentation the observations, exact
local certain But feet. hundred every for degree one is earth the of
Siberia, in Yakoust at Thus figure. this modify considerably may causes
thirty-six every degree a increases heat the that remarked been has it
certain of conductibility the on depends evidently difference The feet.
remarked been has it volcano, extinct an of neighborhood the In rocks.
every in degree one only was temperature of elevation the that
is calculation--which this upon go then, us, Let feet. five-and-twenty
calculate." favorable--and most the

boy." my away, "Calculate

"Nine pencil. and notebook my out pulling I, said easier," "Nothing
hundred eleven of depth a make feet twenty-five and hundred one times
feet." twenty-five and

geometrically." more spoken have not could "Archimedes

"Well?"

feet thousand ten least at are we observations, my to according "Well,
sea." the of level the below

possible?" be it "Can

figures." in truth no is there or correct, is calculation my "Either

were We correct. perfectly were Professor the of calculations The
than earth the of bowels the in down deeper feet thousand six already
had man which to depth known lowest The before. been ever had anyone
and Tirol, the in Kitzbuhel, of mines the in was penetrated hitherto
Wurttemberg. of those

place this in was eighty-one, been have should which temperature, The
consideration. serious for matter a was This fifteen. only




16 CHAPTER

TUNNEL EASTERN THE


the in o'clock six at June--and of 30th the Tuesday, was day next The
journey. our resumed we morning

natural perfect a lava, of gallery the follow to continued still We
in which, planes inclined those of some as descent of easy as pathway,
on went This staircases. of purpose the serve houses, German old very
we which at instant precise the twelve, past minutes seventeen until
suddenly had advance, in somewhat been having who, Hans, rejoined
stopped.

shaft." the of end the reached have "we uncle, my cried last," "At

cross four of centre the in were We me. about wonderingly looked I
it which to as arose now question The tunnels. narrow and paths--somber
difficulty. small no was itself of this and take; to wise was

the about hesitation any have to appear to wish not did who uncle, My
pointed He mind. his up made once at guide, the or myself before matter
its within entered we delay, without and, tunnel; eastern the to quietly
recesses. gloomy

been have might it hesitation of feeling any entertained he had Besides,
to which by indication no was there for indefinitely, prolonged
chance to trust to necessary absolutely was It choice. a on determine
fortune! good and

and gradual very was gallery narrow and obscure this of descent The
course its arches, of succession a through gazed we Sometimes winding.
sculptors artistic great The cathedral. Gothic a of aisles the like very
studies their completed here have might Ages Middle the of builders and
of ideas suggestive and beautiful most Many advantage. with
passing After them. by discovered been have would beauty architectural
mile a about came, suddenly we way, cavernous the of phase this through
Romans, early the by adopted arch, of system square a upon on, farther
roof. the of weight the up keeping and rock, solid the from projecting

which tunnels subterranean low of series a upon come would we Suddenly
and narrow whose foxes--through of work the or holes, beaver like looked
crawl! to literally had we ways winding

an With degree. supportable a quite at remained still heat The
when been have must heat the what on reflected I shudder, involuntary
of streams and flames, smoke, its pouring was Sneffels of volcano the
now were we road the by up come have must which of lava--all boiling
darting stone seething hot of torrents the imagine could I following.
sulphurous and steam, smoke, of accompaniments with up bubbling on,
stench!

were volcano old the "if mused, I consequences," the of think to "Only
work." to set to more once

uncle. my to reflections unpleasant rather these communicate not did I
been have would but them, understood have not would only not He
slid, he walked, He ahead. go to was idea only His disgusted. intensely
broken of heaps down rolled he fragments, of piles over clambered he
to not impossible was it conviction and earnestness an with lava,
admire.

one but journey, wearisome very a after evening, the in o'clock six At
southward, the towards miles six made had we before, as fatiguing so not
downwards. mile a than more gone not had but

in meal our ate We halt. to signal the gave usual, as uncle, My
sleep. to retired then and silence, thoughtful

A simple. and primitive very were night the for arrangements Our
had We bedding. our all was himself, rolled each which in rug, traveling
bury who Travelers visit. unpleasant any or cold fear to necessity no
seek who desert, African the of depths and wilds the in themselves
to compelled are World, New the of forests the in pleasure and profit
region this in but sleep; of hours the during watch to turn in it take
supreme. reigned security complete and solitude absolute earth the of

beasts. wild from or savages from either fear to nothing had We

There action. for ready and fresh awoke we repose, sweet night's a After
to continued We journey. our on started we us, detain to nothing being
out make to impossible was It before. as tunnel lava the through burrow
of instead moreover, tunnel, The way. making were we soil what through
horizontal. absolutely became earth, the of bowels the into down going

tending actually were we that examination, some after thought, even I
so became things of state this day the in o'clock ten About upwards.
slacken to obliged was I fatiguing, very change the finding that, clear
halt. a to come finally and pace my

matter?" the is "what quickly, Professor the said "Well,"

reply. earnest my was tired," dreadfully am I is, fact "The

easy so by and walk, hours' three a after "tired uncle, my cried "What,"
road?" a

fatiguing." very but say, dare I enough, "Easy

downwards." go to is do to have we all when be, that can how "But

going are we that noticed have I time some For sir. pardon, your beg "I
upwards."

be?" that can "how shoulders, his shrugging uncle, my cried "Upwards,"

have slopes the hour half last the For it. about doubt no be can "There
find shall we longer much way this in on go we if upward--and been
Iceland." in back ourselves

be to want not does who man a of air the with head his shook uncle My
me, answer not would He conversation. the continue to tried I convinced.
was thought I silence His departure. for signal the gave more once but
ill-temper. concentrated by caused only

and boldly and load, my up took more once I be, might this However
not did I uncle. my of advance in now was who Hans, followed resolutely
lose to not anxious naturally was I distanced. even or beaten be to like
that in lost behind, left being of idea very The companions. my of sight
ague. the with as shiver me made labyrinth, terrible

clamber, to painful and arduous more was path ascending the if Besides,
all to was It delight. and consolation secret of source one had I
itself of That earth. the of surface the to back us taking appearance
began I and belief, my in me confirmed took I step Every hopeful. was
my with marriage my to relation in air the in castles build to already
cousin. little pretty

aspect the in change sudden and great a was there o'clock twelve About
the from it noticed first I gallery. the of sides rocky the of
the of reflection the back cast which light of rays the of diminution
became it lava, resplendent and shining with coated being From lamp.
quite became sometimes which walls, sloping were sides The rock. living
vertical.

of state a call professors geological the what in now were We
this because called so stones, Silurian of period the in transition,
counties the in England in common very is formation early of specimen
Silures. as known nation Celtic the by inhabited formerly

which waters the from sediment "the cried; I now," clearly see can "I
its of period second the during formed earth whole the covered once
our turning are We rocks. calcareous these and schists these existence
would who Hamburg from people like are and rocks, granite the on backs
Hanover." of way by Lubeck to go

geological My myself. to observations my kept have well as just might I
Professor and judgment, cooler my of however, better, the got enthusiasm
observations. my heard Hardwigg

gravity. great of tone a in said, he now?" matter the is "What

calcareous of layers different these see not you "do I, cried "Well,"
strata?" slate of indication first the and rocks

then?" what "Well;

first the when existence world's the of period that at arrived have "We
appearance." their made animals first the and plants

so?" think "You

yourself." for judge and examine look; "Yes,

his of light the cast to difficulty some with Professor the induced I
some expected I gallery. winding long the of sides the on lamp
worthy The mistaken. much very was I lips. his from burst to exclamation
word. a spoke never Professor

was it Perhaps not. or me understood he whether say to impossible was It
not did professor--he learned a and uncle pride--my his in that possible
or tunnel, eastern the chosen having in wrong was he that own to like
quite was It it? of end the to go to price any at determined he was
we which by road the that and lava, of region the left had we evident
Sneffels. Mount of crater great the to back us take not could going were

and question, whole the on ruminating help not could I along went we As
and sudden these on stress a great too lay not did I if myself asked
crust. earth's the of modifications peculiar

range the within was it mistaken--and be to likely very was I all, After
through way our making not were we that possibility and probability of
lower the on piled recognized I believed I which rocks of strata the
formation. granitic of layer

certainly must "I myself, to thought I right," am I if events, all "At
absolutely be will it and plants, primitive of remains some find
good a have us Let evidence. indubitable such to way give to necessary
search."

more gone not had and searching, of opportunity no lost accordingly I
in up cropped for sought I evidence the when yards, hundred a about than
that natural quite was It eyes. my before manner incontestable most the
the period Silurian the during for signs, these find to expect should I
and animal different hundred fifteen than fewer no contained seas
lava arid and hard the to accustomed long so feet, My species. vegetable
the dust, soft of kind a on treading themselves found suddenly soil,
shells. and plants of remains

plain as outline, the out make clearly could I themselves walls the Upon
and worthy The lycopods. the and fucus the of picture, sun a as
about mistake any make course of not could Hardwigg Professor excellent
continued and eyes, his closed deliberately he believe I but matter; the
step. unalterable and firm a with way his on

too deal great a obstinacy his carrying was he that think to began I
a on stooped I composure. or prudence with act longer no could I far.
undoubtedly had which shell, perfect almost an up picked and sudden
day. present the of some resembling much very animal some to belonged
uncle. my of wake the in followed I prize, the secured Having

said. I this?" see you "Do

"it tranquillity, imperturbable most the with Professor, the said "Well,
the of order extinct the of animal crustaceous a of shell the is
you." assure I more, nothing trilobites;

no draw you "do coolness, his at troubled much I, cried "But,"
it?" from conclusion

yourself?" it from draw you do conclusion what ask, may I if "Well,

thought--" I "Well,

and perfectly right, are you and say, would you what boy, my know, "I
the and lava of crust the abandoned finally have We right. incontestably
have may I that possible quite is It ascended. lava the which by road
to get I until error my discover to unable be shall I but mistaken, been
gallery." this of end the

I "and replied, I concerned," is that as far as right quite are "You
the fear to not had we if decision, your of approve highly should
dangers." all of greatest

that?" is what "And

water." of "Want

on ourselves put must We helped. be can't it Henry, dear my "Well,
rations."

went. he on And




17 CHAPTER

MINE COAL DEEPER--THE AND DEEPER


supply Our rations. upon ourselves put to compelled were we truth, In
about out this found I days. three than more not last certainly would
called is what in that, was matter the of part worst The time. supper
with meet should we expected be to hardly was it rocks, transition the
water!

a were, we where that knew I and thirst, of horrors the of read had I
adventures--and our to end an put would sufferings its of trial brief
my with matter the discuss to useless utterly was it But lives! our
Plato. from axiom some by answered have would He uncle.

this through journey our on proceeded we day next of whole the During
journeyed We tunnel. after tunnel arch, after arch gallery, interminable
Hans, as reticent and mute as become had We word. a exchanging without
guide. our

it had, it if events, all at tendency; upward an longer no had road The
doubt no be could there Sometimes clearly. very out made be to not was
be to scarcely was inclination this But downwards. going were we that
because Professor, the to reassuring means no by was and distinguished,
transition the and modified, wise no in was strata the of character the
marked. more and more became rocks the of character

the out brought light electric the how see to sight glorious a was It
red old the and rocks, calcareous the of walls the in sparkles
cuttings deep those of one in oneself fancied have might One sandstone.
Some soil. of kind this to name their given have which Devonshire, in
gallery: the of sides the from projected marble of specimens magnificent
others character, variegated of veins white with grey agate an of some
seen be might off farther veins; red with color, spotted yellow a of
all in found be to were seams cherry-tinted which in color of samples
shades. brightest their

of marks the with stamped were marbles these of number greater The
had creation and nature evening, previous the Since animals. primitive
I trilobites, rudimentary the of Instead progress. considerable made
in fish the others, Among order. perfect more a of remains the perceived
of form first the discover to able been has geologist a of eye the which
reptile. the

this of animals of number vast a by inhabited were seas Devonian The
new of rocks the in thousands of tens in deposited were which species,
formation.

animal of scale the ascending were we that me to evident quite was It
Professor, the uncle, excellent My summit. the forms man which of life
any at determined was He warnings. these of notice take to not appeared
proceed. to risk

a that either things; two of one of expectation in been have must He
to him allow thus and feet, his under open to about was well vertical
compel would obstacle insurmountable some that or descent, his continue
evening But traveled. long so had we road the by back go and stop to us
realized! be to doomed was hope neither horror, my to and, again, came

of agony gnawing the feel to began I when night a after Friday, On
rose band little our decreased, appetite consequence in when and thirst,
and ascents the windings, and turnings the followed more once and
I gloomy. and silent were All gallery. interminable this of descents,
far. too ventured had uncle my even that see could

and dull progress progress--a further of hours ten about After
and reverberation, the that remarked degree--I last the to monotonous
singularly had tunnel, the of sides the upon lamps our of reflection
red the rocks, calcareous the schist, the marble, The diminished.
gloomy and dark a places their in leaving disappeared, had sandstone,
narrow remarkably a reached we When brightness. without and somber wall,
rock. the against hand left my leaned I tunnel, the of part

quite was it it, at glance to happened and away, hand my took I When
Earth. Central the of strata coal the reached had We black.

cried. I mine!" coal "A

severely. little a uncle, my responded miners," without mine coal "A

tell?" we can "How

am "I tone. doctorial and sharp a in uncle, my replied tell," can "I
coal of layers successive through gallery this that certain perfectly
or nature of work the is it whether But man. of hand the by cut not was
has meal evening our for hour The us. to concern little of is not
sup." us come--let

that to come had I food. preparing in himself occupied guide, the Hans,
drops few the were about cared I All eat. longer no could I when point
to useless is it suffered I What share. my to fell which water of
left was that all was full, half quite not gourd, guide's The record.
three! us for

down themselves laid companions two my repast, their finished Having
and fatigue their for remedy a sleep in found and rugs, their upon
until hours the counting lay I sleep, not could I me, for As sufferings.
morning.

Twenty again. started we o'clock, six at Saturday, morning, next The
mighty its From excavation. vast a upon came suddenly we later minutes
do to nothing had have could man of hand the that once at saw I extent
it was, it as in; fallen have would above vault the mine; coal this with
nature. of miracle some by together held only was

a about by wide, feet hundred a about was cavern natural mighty This
some by apart cast been evidently had earth The high. fifty and hundred
prodigious some to way giving mass, The commotion. subterranean violent
which into gap vast the leaving two, in split had nature, of upheaving
time. first the for penetrated had earth the of inhabitants we

dark those on written was period coal the of history singular whole The
the follow to easily able been have would geologist A walls. gloomy and
by separated were coal of seams The formation. its of phases different
down crushed be to appeared which clay, compact a sandstone, of strata
above. from weight the by

the epoch, secondary the preceded which world the of period that At
to due vegetation, rich and enormous of coating a by covered was earth
vast A humidity. perpetual and heat tropical of action double the
preventing sides, all on earth the surrounded vapor of cloud atmospheric
it. reaching ever from sun the of rays the

this from arise not did heats intense these that conclusion the Hence
caloric. of source new

brilliant its for ready quite not was day of star the even Perhaps
level a and exist, yet as not did Climates universe. a illumine work--to
at existing heat same globe--the the of surface whole the pervaded heat
equator. the at as Pole North the

earth? the of interior the From come? it did Whence

and fierce a Hardwigg, Professor of theories learned the all of spite In
great the of entrails the within burned certainly fire vehement
the of crust topmost very the to even felt was action Its spheroid.
vivifying the of deprived being existence, in then plants the earth;
their but odor, nor flowers, nor buds, neither had sun, the of rays
early of earth burning the from life vigorous and strong a drew roots
days.

plants, herbaceous trees--only called be may what of few but were There
those in however, which, families, rare mosses, briers, turfs, immense
thousands. of tens and tens by counted were days

origin. its owes coal that vegetation exuberant this to entirely is It
the of influence the under yielded still globe vast the of crust The
arose Hence beneath. work at forever was which mass, boiling seething,
The earth. upper the of in falling continual and fissures, numerous
themselves formed soon waters, the beneath being plants of mass dense
agglomerations. vast into

the of depths the in chemistry; natural of action the about came Then
the to thanks then, turf, became first at mass vegetable the ocean
the underwent they fermentation, subterranean and gases of influence
mineralization. of process complete

prodigious and vast those formed were days, early in manner, this In
use utterly must consumption ever--increasing an which coal, of layers
more some find not do people if more, centuries three about in up
steam. than power motive cheaper some and gas, than light economic

my to came studies, school my of memories the reflections, these All
whose coal, of accumulations mighty these upon gazed I while mind
of working The utilized. ever be to likely scarcely are however, riches,
never would that expense an at out carried be only could mines these
profit. a yield

is coal when consideration, worthy scarcely is however, matter, The
the of yards few a within globe, the of surface whole the over scattered
knew I therefore, strata, untouched these at looked I As crust. upper
lasts. world the as long as remain would they

the of length the forgot alone I journey, our continued still we While
The considerations. geological these to wholly up myself giving by road,
were we while as same the much very be to continued temperature
of sense my hand other the On schists. the and lava the amid traveling
that knew immediately I odor. powerful very a by affected much was smell
miners the gas dangerous that with overflowing to filled was gallery the
and fearful such caused has which of explosion the damp, fire call
a in orphans of hundreds and widows hundred a making accidents, terrible
hour. single

Ruhmkorff the of means by progress our illumine to able were we Happily,
this explore to as imprudent and rash so been had we If apparatus.
to end an put have would explosion terrible a hand, in torch gallery,
left. be would travelers no because simply travels, our

the of bowels very the in mine coal wondrous this through excursion Our
his conceal to able scarcely was uncle My evening. until lasted earth
advance to still continuing road the at dissatisfaction and impatience
direction. horizontal a in

rear, the in and advance in yards few a opaque and dense darkness, The
gallery. the of length the was what out make to impossible it rendered
and interminable, simply was it that believe to began I myself, For
months. for manner same the in on go would

to right, the To wall. a of front in stood we o'clock, six at Suddenly,
a reached had We passage. any there was nowhere below, above, left the
Thoroughfare. accents--No unmistakable in said rocks the where spot

was uncle My arms. his folded simply guide The stupefied. stood I
silent.

know now "I last, at uncle, my cried better," the much so well, "Well,
by followed road the upon not decidedly are We about. are we what
night's one take us Let back. go to is do to have we All Saknussemm.
have shall we you promise I over, are days three before and rest, good
divided." galleries the where point the regained

lamentable a in cried, I long," as lasts strength our if may, we "Yes,
voice.

not?" why "And

just is It water. of drop a be not will there three, us among "Tomorrow,
gone."

tone. severe a in speaking uncle, my said it," with courage your "And

exhaustion sheer from and side, my on round turned I say? I could What
awoke I And water! of dreams by disturbed sleep heavy a into fell
unrefreshed.

water! spring pure of glass a for mine diamond a bartered have would I




18 CHAPTER

ROAD! WRONG THE


no was There hour. early very a at place took departure our day, Next
days' five had we account, my to According delay. least the for time
divided. galleries the where place the to back get to work hard

uncle My return. our upon endured we sufferings the all tell never can I
with is, wrong--that the in been has who man a like them bore
his of resignation the all with Hans, anger; suppressed and concentrated
and complain, but nothing did I that confess I--I and character; pacific
fortune. bad this for heart no had I despair.

upset probably would outset the at Defeat consolation. one was there But
journey! whole the

completely gave water of supply our first, the from expected had I As
to reduced was liquids of provision Our march. day's first our on out
it--this say will I horrible--nay, this but Schiedam; of supply our
of sight the bear even not could I and throat, the burnt liquor infernal
with paralyzed was I stifling. be to temperature the found I it.
ground. the to insensible fall to about was I once than More fatigue.
excellent my and Icelander worthy the and halted, then party whole The
however, could, I me. comfort and console to best their did uncle
extreme the against painfully contending was uncle my that see plainly
absence the by generated torture awful the and journey, our of fatigues
water. of

was all anything--when recollect to ceased I when came time a length At
dream! fantastic hideous, awfull one

on crawling after July, of month the of seventh the Tuesday, on last, At
the reached we alive, than dead more hours, many for knees and hands our
mass inert an log, a like lay I galleries. the between junction of point
morning. the in ten then was It soil. lava arid the on flesh human of

at away nibble to tried wall, the against leaning uncle, my and Hans
my from escaped sighs and groans deep while biscuit, of pieces some
lethargy. deep of kind a into off fell I Then lips. swollen and scorched

arms. his in tenderly up me lift and approach, uncle my felt I Presently

commiseration. deep of tone a in say him heard I boy," "Poor

to accustomed means no by being words, these by touched profoundly was I
hands trembling his caught I Professor. the in weakness womanly of signs
without so do to me allowed He pressure. gentle a them gave and mine in
with wet were eyes His time. the all kindly me at looking resistance,
tears.

surprise, my To side. his at wore he which gourd the take him saw then I
lips. my to it placed he stupefaction, my to rather or

said. he boy," my "Drink,

looked I mad? uncle my Was me? deceived not had ears my possible it Was
not could I expression. idiotic an quite sure, am I with, him, at
disappointment. of counteraction the feared much too I him. believe

again. said he "Drink,"

a question the myself ask could I however, Before, aright? heard I Had
throat--one and lips parched my cooled water of mouthful a time, second
life. to back me brought it believe do I but mouthful,

speak. to full too was heart My hands. my clasping by uncle my thanked I

my hear, you last--do very the water, of mouthful "one he, said "Yes,"
bottle my of bottom the at it of care taken have I last! very boy--the
resisted have I times, hundred a times, Twenty eye. my of apple the as
you." for it saved I Harry, But--no--no, it. drink to desire fearful the

and hot my down rolled tears big the and exclaimed, I uncle," dear "My
cheeks. feverish

this place, this reached you when that knew I boy, poor my "Yes,
my saved I and dead, half down fall would you earth, the in crossroad
you." restore to order in water of drop last

heart." my from "thanks cried; I "Thanks,"

partially nevertheless had I quenched, really was thirst my as little As
relaxed--and throat my of muscles contracted The strength. my recovered
I events, all At subsided. measure some in lips my of inflammation the
speak. to able was

do. to have we what to as now doubt no be can "there said, I "Well,"
us Let end. an at therefore is journey our us; failed utterly has Water
return."

his down held he face: my avoided evidently uncle my thus, spoke I While
right the but direction possible every in turned were eyes his head;
one.

to back go must "we words, own my by excited getting continued, I "Yes,"
revisit to more once us enable to strength us give heaven May Sneffels.
crater." the of summit the on stood now we that Would day. of light the

so?" be it must "and himself, to speaking uncle, my said back," "Go

cried. vehemently I moment," single a losing without and back--yes, "Go

vault. gloomy and dark that under silence was there moments some For

of tone singular very a in Professor the said Harry," dear my "So,
your restore to sufficed not have water of drops few "those voice,
courage." and energy

cried. I "Courage!"

to way give still before--and as downcast as quite are you that see "I
despair." and discouragement

entering were projects other what and of, made man the was then, What,
brain! audacious and fertile his

sir?" discouraged, not are "You

cried. he success?" of verge the on are we as just up Give "What!
retreated." Hardwigg Professor that said be it shall never "Never,

helpless a with cried I perish," to minds our up make must we "Then
sigh.

from far very am I me, leave Go, not. certainly boy, my Harry, "No,
alone.</i>" on go will <i>I you. with Hans Take death. your desiring

you?" leave to us ask "You

perilous and dangerous this undertaken have I say. I me, "Leave
the to return never will I end--or the to it carry will I adventure.
you--go!" to say I more Harry--once Go, Earth. Mother of surface

had before which voice, His excited. terribly was spoke he as uncle My
to appeared He menacing. and harsh became womanly, almost tender, been
not did I impossible. the against energy desperate with struggling be
other the on while, abyss, that of bottom the at him abandon to wish
fly. to me told preservation of instinct the hand,

and calmness profound with on looking was guide our Meanwhile,
he yet and party, unconcerned an be to appeared He indifference.
gestures Our us. between on going was what knew well perfectly
follow--and to wished each roads different the indicated sufficiently
appeared Hans But undertake. to other the influence to tried each which
life of question a really was what in interest slightest the take to not
which signal the obey to ready quite waited but all, us for death and
the into journey desperate his resume to or aloft, go say should
earth. the of interior

him make could I that soul and heart my all with wished I then How
the groans, and sighs my representations, My words. my understand
that convinced have would spoken have should I which in accents earnest
stolid the which of perils and dangers fearful Those nature. hard cold,
have, would him--I to out them pointed have would I idea, no had guide
convinced have might we us, Between feel. and see him made were, it as
could we worst, the to come had worst the If Professor. obstinate the
Sneffels. of summit the to return to him compelled have

a moved never He mine. in hand his caught I Hans. approached quietly I
He crater. the of top the to road the him to indicated I muscle.
have must countenance, haggard my form, panting My motionless. remained
his shook gently Icelander The sufferings. my of extent the indicated
uncle. my to pointed and head

said. he "Master,"

English. as well as Icelandic is word The

you tell no--I fury--"madman! with myself beside cried, I master!" "The
with him drag must we fly! must we lives; our of master the not is he
say?" I me, understand you Do me? hear you do us!

make to tried I arm. the by Hans held I that explained already have I
him force to tried and him with struggled I seat. his from rise him
interposed. now uncle My away.

my from nothing obtain will "You said. he calm," be Henry, good "My
say." to have I what to listen therefore, follower; devoted

the in full uncle my looked and could, I as well as arms, my folded I
face.

the to obstacle sole the "is said, he water," of want wretched "This
and schist, lava, of made gallery, entire the In project. my of success
possible quite is It molecule. liquid one not found we true is it coal,
tunnel." western the in fortunate more be may we that

incredulity. deep of air an with head my shake to was reply sole My

well-known his in Professor the said end," the to me to "Listen
I motion, or life without yonder lay you "While voice. lecturing
other this of conformation the into journey reconnoitering a undertook
the into downwards directly goes it that discovered have I gallery.
granitic old the to us take will hours few a in and earth, the of bowels
The springs. innumerable find undoubtedly shall we this In formation.
instinct and certainty, mathematical a this makes rock the of nature
serious the is this Now, so. is it that say to logic with agrees
asked Columbus Christopher When you. to make to have I which proposition
ill, men his promise, of land the discover to days three men his of
was World New the days--and three him gave yet hopeless, and terrified,
region, subterranean this of Columbus Christopher the I, Now discovered.
not have I expired, is time that when If, day. more one you of ask only
give will I you, to swear I search, in are we which of water the found
surface." earth's the to return and enterprise mighty my up

to uncle my cost it much how knew I despair, and irritation my Despite
the Under language. conciliatory such hold to and proposition, this make
yield? but do I could what circumstances,

your reward heaven may and wish, you as be it "let cried, I "Well,"
are hours our water, discover we unless as, But energy. superhuman
ahead." go but time, no lose us let numbered,




19 CHAPTER

ROUTE NEW GALLERY--A WESTERN THE


up took Hans gallery. second the of means by resumed now was descent Our
yards hundred a than more gone not had We usual. as front in post his
walls. the examined carefully Professor the when

is road--onwards right the on are formation--we primitive the is "This
hope!" our

morning, world's the of hours first the in cool got earth whole the When
of state a produced earth the of volume the of diminution the
and crevasses ruptures, by followed crust, upper its in dislocation
ages which, through kind, this of fissure a was passage The fissures.
turnings and windings thousand The granite. eruptive the flowed had ago,
soil. ancient the through labyrinth inextricable an formed

soil primitive the composing layers of successions descended, we As
science Geological detail. of fidelity utmost the with appeared
it and crust, mineral the of base the as soil primitive this considers
layers, or strata different three of composed is it that recognized has
granite. as known rock immovable the on resting all

marvelous a such in placed themselves found even had mineralogists No
sounding The beauty. naked and real her all in nature study to position
the earth the of surface the to bring not could machine, mere a rod,
were we which structure, internal its of study the for value of objects
hands. own our with touch to eyes, own our with see to about

journey. the after this writing am I that Remember

wound tints, green beautiful by colored rocks, the of streak the Across
and platinum of traces with manganese, of copper, of threads metallic
of entrails the in buried riches these at gazing help not could I gold.
of end the to enjoyment the have would man no which of and Earth, Mother
the in buried were inexhaustible, and treasures--mighty These time!
or crowbar no that depths, awful such at history, earth's the of morning
tomb! their from them drag ever will pickax

of myriad the by tenfold increased coil, Ruhmkorff's our of light The
and direction, every in fire of jets its sent rock, of masses prismatic
rays the diamond, hollow huge a through traveling myself fancy could I
effects. extraordinary of myriads produced which of

visibly and sensibly began light of festival this o'clock, six Towards
a assumed gallery the of sides The ceased. almost soon and decrease, to
more commingle to began mica white hue; somber a with tint, crystallized
true the called be may what form to quartz, and feldspar with freely
being without supports, that all, above hard is which stone rock--the
soil. earth's the of stories four the crushed,

granite! of prison immense an by walled were We

The water. of sign no was there still and o'clock, eight now was It
our of head the at kept now uncle My horrible. were endured I sufferings
but had meanwhile, I, stop. to him induce could Nothing column. little
a of sound the catch to watch the on keenly was ear My thought. real one
listening my upon fell water falling of sound pleasant no But spring.
ear.

I longer. me carry to refused limbs my when came time the last at But
I because endured, I tortures terrible the against heroically contended
the be would this knew I him To halt. to uncle my compel to wish not did
stroke. fatal last

longer no could eyes My me. over come faintness deadly a felt I Suddenly
fell! cry--and despairing one gave I shook. knees my see;

dying!" am I help, "Help,

with me at looked He steps. his retraced slowly and turned uncle My
accents, hollow in escape, to sentence one allowed then and arms, folded
lips: his from

over." is "All

and pain with distorted fearfully face a was saw I thing last The
closed. eyes my then and sorrow;


motionless, me, near lying companions my saw I them, opened again I When
For dead? or asleep they Were rugs. traveling huge their in wrapped
I over, fit fainting My question. the of out wholly was sleep myself,
my visit to sleep for much too suffered I lark. the as wakeful was
The death--dying. unto sick myself thought I that more, eyelids--the
is ears--all my in buzzing be to seemed uncle my by spoken words last
prostration of state the In right. was he that probable was it And over!
the seeing again ever of think to madness was it reduced, was I which to
day. of light

I it, of thought I As crust. earth's the of miles upon miles were Above
crushed, was I shoulders. my on resting weight whole the fancy could
granite my in turn to attempts vain in myself exhausted and annihilated!
bed.

reigned silence terrible and profound A away. passed hours upon Hours
heard itself make could Nothing tomb. the of silence us--a around
was thought very The granite. of walls gigantic these through
stupendous.

which into calm deadly of kind the despite apathy, my despite Presently,
noise. peculiar but slight a was It me. aroused something cast, was I
becoming was tunnel the that observed I intently, watching was I While
saw I thought I remained, that light dim the through gazing Then dark.
hand. in lamp departure, his taking Icelander the

uncle My us? abandon to mean guide the Hans Did thus? acted he had Why
voice, My him. arouse and out, cry to tried I dead. asleep--or fast lay
that in echo no found lips, fevered and parched my from issuing feebly
my of roof the to stuck tongue my dry, was throat My place. fearful
even last at and intense, become time this by had obscurity The mouth.
distance. blank the in lost was footsteps guide's the of sound faint the
let only welcome, appeared death and anguish, with filled seemed soul My
quickly. come it

come man, a are you if "Hans--Hans, cried. I us," leaving is "Hans
back."

aloud. heard be not could They myself. to spoken were words These
was I over, were terror of moments few first the after Nevertheless,
so behaved had hitherto who man a against suspicions my of ashamed
suspicion. justified character or conduct his in Nothing admirably.
be not could departure His me. reassured reflection moment's a Moreover,
down deeper going was he gallery, the ascending of Instead flight. a
been have would way his design, bad any had he Had gulf. the into
upwards.

hope! to began I and little a me calmed reasoning This

have not certainly would Hans imperturbable and peaceful, and good, The
bent he Was motive. grave and serious some without sleep his from arisen
night the of silence still deep, the During discovery? of voyage a on
so all were we which about murmur sweet that heard last at he had
anxious?




20 CHAPTER

DISAPPOINTMENT BITTER A IT? IS WHERE WATER,


brain delirious wildly my crossed there hour, weary long, long, a During
and quiet our aroused have could what to as reasons of sorts all
my through passed ideas ridiculous and absurd most The guide. faithful
half either was I believe I other. the than impossible more each head,
mad. wholly or

earth, the of depths the from were it as arose, there however, Suddenly,
returning. was Hans footsteps! of sound the was It comfort. of voice a

the of walls the upon shine to began light uncertain the Presently
length At tunnel. sloping the down far view in came it then and passage,
appeared. himself Hans

gently and shoulder, his upon hand his placed uncle, my approached He
arose. instantly was, it who saw he as soon as uncle, My him. awakened

Professor. the exclaimed "Well!"

hunter. the said "Vatten,"

sort a by yet and language, Danish the of word single a know not did I
said. had guide the what understood I instinct mysterious of

hands, my clapping tone, frantic and wild a in cried, I water!" "Water,
madman. a like gesticulating and

gratitude. and emotion deep of voice a in uncle, my murmured "Water!"
("Where?") "Hvar?"

("Below.") "Nedat."

the by hunter the caught had I word. every understood I below!" "Where?
perfect with on looked he while heartily, them shook I and hands,
calmness.

soon were we and long, take not did departure our for preparations The
tunnel. the into descent rapid a making

two descended and yards, thousand a advanced had we later hour An
feet. thousand

along running sound well-known and accustomed an heard I moment this At
like roar, sullen and dull of kind rock--a granite the of floors the
waterfall. distant a of that

discovered the finding not advance, our of hour half first the During
I more Once return. to appeared suffering intense of feelings my spring,
I downhearted how observing however, uncle, My hope. all lose to began
conversation. the up took becoming, again was

dull the is "that enthusiastically; exclaimed he right," was "Hans
torrent." a of roaring

words. welcome the hearing even at delighted cried, I torrent," "A

subterranean "a replied, he it," about doubt slightest the not "There's
us." beside flowing is river

began I hope. by animated more once on, hastened but reply, no made I
The me. overpowered had hitherto which fatigue deep the feel to even not
We me. refreshed already water murmuring glorious this of sound very
for which torrent, The moment. every volume in increasing it hear could
distinctly ran now heads, our over flowing heard be could time long a
falling. still and spluttering, rushing, roaring, wall, left the along

trace some find to hoping rock the across hand my passed I times Several
vain. in Alas! percolation. slightest the humidity--of of

advanced. we Again toil. weary same the in passed hour half a Again

been not had absence, his during hunter, the that evident became now It
peculiar instinct an by Guided farther. any researches his carry to able
the "smelt" he finders, water and regions mountain in dwellers the to
precious the seen not had he Still rock. the through spring living
drop one us brought nor thirst, own his quenched neither had He liquid.
gourd. his in

progress our if that, discovery disastrous the made soon we Moreover,
of sound the torrent, the from away moving be soon should we continued,
precise the at halted Hans back. turned We diminished. gradually which
nearest. appeared torrent the of sound the where spot

myself seated and longer, no suffering and suspense the bear could I
and seething water the hear could I which behind wall, the against
still granite of wall solid a But away. feet two not effervescing
it! from us separated

saw I thought I once for enough, strange and, me, at keenly looked Hans
face. imperturbable his on smile a

lamp. the up took and seated, been had he which on stone a from rose He
firm the along slowly moved He following. and rising help not could I
and curiosity mingled with him watched I wall. granite solid and
stone, dry the against ear his placed and halted he Presently eagerness.
and care extreme most the with listening and along slowly moving
spot exact the for searching was he that once at understood I attention.
soon he point This heard. plainly most was roar torrent's the where
the above feet three about side, left the on wall lateral the in found
floor. tunnel the of level

what believe dared scarcely I excitement. intense of state a in was I
a in impossible however, was, It do. to about was hunter eider-duck the
him smother to even and applaud, and understand both to not more moment
an commence and crowbar heavy the raise him saw I when embraces, my in
itself. rock the upon attack

cried. I "Saved!"

myself; than delighted and excited more even uncle, my cried "Yes,"
never should We man! excellent worthy, the Oh, right. quite is "Hans
idea." an such of thought have

as simple process, a Such so. done have would think, I else, nobody And
Nothing heads. our entered have not certainly most would seemed, it
that in pickaxes with work to begin to than dangerous more be could
break-up a work at was he while Supposing globe. the of part particular
inch an gained having once torrent the supposing and place, take to were
rock! broken the through bodily pouring come and ell, an take to were

at But real. too only were They chimerical. was dangers these of one Not
was inundation of even or roof, the of in falling of fear no moment that
we it quench to that intense so was thirst Our us. stopping of capable
itself. Ocean old of bed the below dug have would

would I nor uncle my neither which work work--a to quietly went Hans
had we if that great so was impatience Our price. any at undertaken have
into split have soon would rock the crowbar, and pickax with begun once
moderate, ready, calm, contrary, the on guide, The fragments. hundred a
making instrument, his of blows steady little by rock hard the away wore
heard, I stood, I As inches. six about than hole larger a at attempt no
in increasing momentarily torrent the of roar the heard, I thought I or
water of sensation pleasant the felt almost I times at and loudness,
lips. parched my upon

enabled which hole a made had Hans age, an appeared what of end the At
work at been had He rock. solid the into feet two enter to crowbar his
with wild getting was I dozen. a appeared It hour. an exactly
I measures. violent more using of think to began uncle My impatience.
hold got just indeed had He him. checking in difficulty greatest the had
or stream, a Then heard. was hiss welcome and loud a when crowbar his of
force such with out came and wall the through burst water of jet, rather
side! opposite the hit to as

to able scarcely was shock, the by upset half was who guide, the Hans,
when, meaning his understood I grief. and pain of cry a down keep
and wild a gave myself I jet, sparkling the into hands my plunging
hot! scalding was water The cry. frantic

disappointment. bitter in cried, I "Boiling,"

cool." get soon will "it uncle, my said mind," never "Well,

stream small a while vapor, of clouds by filled be to began tunnel The
some had we time short a In earth. the of interior the into away ran
mouthfuls. huge in it swallowed We drink. to cool sufficiently

was What luxury! incomparable and rich delight--what exalted what Oh!
fact simple The that? was what us To come? it did whence water, this
it, about warmth of tingle a with still though and, water; was was--it
surely must it, for but which, life that heart, the to back brought it
it. tasting without almost greedily, drank I away. faded have

a made I thirst, ravenous my quenched almost had I however, When,
discovery.

water!" chalybeate is it "Why,

mineralized. highly "and uncle, my replied stomachic," excellent most "A
Spa." to twenty worth journey a is Here

replied. I good," very "It's

a is There ground. under miles six found Water so. think should "I
Hans disagreeable. means no by is which it, about flavor inky peculiarly
you do What discovery. rare a made having on himself congratulate may
the name to travelers, of custom usual the to according nephew, say,
him?" after stream

once at was Brook") ("Hans "Hansbach" of name the And I. said "Good,"
upon. agreed

he than determination our hearing after proud more bit a not was Hans
welcome the of modicum small very a taken having After before. was
usual his with corner a in himself seated had he refreshment,
gravity. imperturbable

waste." to run water this letting while worth not is "it I, said "Now,"

river this which from source "the uncle, my replied use," the is "What
inexhaustible." is rises

and gourds, and goatskin our fill us "let continued, I mind," "Never
up." opening the stop to try then

be to attempted or followed was hesitation, some after advice, My
knocked had he granite of pieces broken the all up picked Hans followed.
up shut to tried him, about have to happened he tow some using and out,
hands. his scald to was did he All wall. the in made had he fissure the
failures. utter were attempts our all and great, too was pressure The

is springs these of surface upper the "that remarked, I evident," is "It
the from infer fairly may we above--as height great very a at situated
jet." the of pressure great

of column this "if uncle, my replied doubtful," means no by is "That
pressure atmospheric the high, feet thousand thirty-two about is water
me." struck just has idea new a But enormous. something be must

that?" is what "And

aperture?" this close to trouble much so at be "Why

"Because--"

reason. real no having stammered, and hesitated I

shall we that sure all at not are we empty, are bottles water our "When
uncle. my observed them," fill to able be

probable." very is that think "I

in follow naturally course, of will, It run. water this let then, "Well,
us." refresh and guide to serve will and track, our

rivulet this with "and reply, in cried I one," good a idea the think "I
in succeed not should we why reason further no is there companion, a as
project." marvelous our

coming are you all, "after laughing, Professor, the said boy," my "Ah,
round."

success." ultimate of confident now am I that, than "More

repose." of hours some taking by begin us Let mine. nephew moment, "One

however, chronometer, The night. was it that forgotten utterly had I
and restored sufficiently were we Soon fact. the of me informed
sleep. profound a into fallen all had and refreshed,




21 CHAPTER

OCEAN THE UNDER


first The sufferings. past our forgotten nearly had we day next the By
I and thirsty, being not at surprise was experienced I sensation
in flowed which stream, running The reason. the myself asked actually
reply. satisfactory the was feet, my at wavelets rippling

the of fill our drank then and appetite, good a with breakfasted We
my anywhere go to ready man, new a quite myself felt I water. excellent
seriously as man a not should Why think. to began I lead. to chose uncle
worthy as guide a excellent so with succeed, uncle, my as convinced
ideas brilliant the were These myself? as nephew a devoted so and Hans,
back go to made been now proposition the Had brain. my invaded now which
a in offer the declined have should I Sneffels, Mount of summit the to
manner. indignant most

to about were We up. going of question no was there fortunately But
earth. the of interior the into farther descend

world. old the of echoes the awakening cried, I moving," be us "Let

The morning. the in o'clock eight at Thursday on march our resumed We
ways, winding and sinuous by round went it as tunnel, granite great
appearance the all fact in and turns, sharp then and now every presented
the towards general in was however, direction, Its labyrinth. a of
compass. his consult to order in pauses several made uncle My southwest.

with direction, horizontal a in downwards trend to began now gallery The
flowed stream murmuring The furlong. every in fall of inches two about
spirit, familiar some to it compare but not could I feet. our at quietly
tepid its in fingers my dabbled I and earth, the through us guiding
to began humor good My progressed. we as naiad a like sang which water,
character. mythological a assume

the of character horizontal the of complain to began he uncle my for As
instead prolonged, indefinitely be to began found, he route, His road.
expression. his to according ray," celestial the down "sliding of

the towards led road our as long as and choice; no had we But
to reason no was there made, we progress little centre--however
complain.

sang naiad the greater, much were slopes the time to time from Moreover,
earnest. in downwards dip to began we and loudly, more

the over got not had I sensation. painful no felt I however, yet, As
water. of discovery the of excitement

and horizontal, of amount considerable a did we next the and day That
traveling. vertical, little very relatively

we estimation, our to according July, of tenth the evening, Friday On
and Reykjavik, of southeast the to leagues thirty been have to ought
startling rather a received now We deep. half a and leagues two about
surprise.

delighted so was uncle My well. horrible a opened there feet our Under
was sharp and steep how saw he hands--as his clapped actually he that
descent. the

way. long a us take will "this delight; rapturous in cried, he ah!" "Ah,
fearful a "it's exclaimed, he Hah!" rock. the of projections the at Look
staircase!"

ropes, the up given never had troubles our all in who however, Hans,
descent Our accidents. any prevent to as them of dispose to so care took
too already was I for descent, perilous a it call not dare I began. then
very a but anything as it upon look to work of sort that with familiar
affair. ordinary

the of granite massive the in opening narrow of kind a was well This
scaffolding, terrestrial the of contraction The fissure. a as known kind
ever had it If cause. the evidently been had cooled, suddenly it when
the passed which through funnel of kind a as times former in served
it how explain to loss a at was I Sneffels, by vomited masses eruptive
like something spiral, a descending fact, in were, We mark. no left had
houses. modern in use in staircases winding those

in down sit to thereabouts or hour an of quarter every compelled were We
on ourselves seated then We ached. calves Our legs. our rest to order
we while gossiped and over, hanging legs our with rock projecting some
stream running warm pleasantly the from still mouthful--drinking a ate
us. deserted not had which

fissure shaped curiously this in that say to necessary scarcely is It
was It size. its of detriment the to cascade a become had Hansbach the
knew we Besides wants. our for more, and sufficient, however, still,
must stream the abrupt, so be to ceased declivity the as soon as that,
uncle, my of me reminded it moment this At course. peaceful its resume
I peacefully, more flowed it when while rage, and impatience his
guide. Icelandic the of placidity the myself to pictured

followed we July, of seventh and sixth the days, two of whole the During
two penetrating fissure, the of staircase spiral extraordinary the
leagues five us put which earth, the of crust the into farther leagues
in o'clock twelve at however, eighth, the On sea. the of level the below
still slope gentle more much a assumed suddenly fissure the day, the
direction. southeast a in trending

dreadfully time same the at and easy, comparatively became now road The
out turned have to matters for difficult been have would It monotonous.
by diversified being of chance no had journey peculiar Our otherwise.
idea. my was such events, all At scenery. and landscape

leagues seven actually were we fifteenth, the Wednesday on length, At
leagues fifty and earth, the of surface the below miles) (twenty-one
we told, be truth the if Though, Sneffels. of mountain the from distant
a in was and suffering, all resisted had health our tired, very were
even not had medicaments of box traveler's Our state. satisfactory most
opened. been

compass, the of indications the hour every note to careful was uncle My
afterwards he which all thermometer, the of and manometer, the of
our of account scientific and philosophical elaborate his in published
of relation exact an give to able therefore was He voyage. remarkable
fifty were we that me informed he therefore, When, situation. the
I point, starting our from distant direction horizontal a in leagues
exclamation. loud a suppress not could

uncle. my cried now?" matter the is "What

my was head," my entered has idea an only important, very "Nothing
reply.

boy." My it, with out "Well,

longer no are we correct are calculations your if that opinion my is "It
Iceland." under

so?" think you "Do

and map a out pulling replied, I out," find easily very can "We
compasses.

mistaken. not am I "that measurement, careful after said, I see," "You
the to leagues fifty those and Portland; Cape beyond far are We
sea." open the into us take will southeast

delighted a with hands his rubbing uncle, my cried sea," open the "Under
air.

heads!" our over flows Ocean old doubt "no cried, I "Yes,"

in that know not you Do natural! more be can what boy, dear my "Well,
been have which mines coal are there Newcastle of neighborhood the
sea?" the under out far worked

as discovery this regarded doubt no Professor, the uncle, worthy my Now
one. pleasant a means no by was idea the me to but fact, simple very a
mattered what seriously, over matter the think to came one when yet And
our over suspended were Iceland of mountains and plains the whether it
whole The Ocean? Atlantic the of billows mighty the or heads, devoted
I However, us. above roof granite the of solidity the on rested question
down, running now level, now passage the for ideal the to used got soon
the into deeper and deeper going kept southeast, the to always still and
Earth. Mother of abysses profound

we Saturday, a on July, of day eighteenth the on later, days Three
usual his Hans paid here uncle My grotto. vast of kind a reached
of day a be should day next the that decided was it and rix-dollars,
rest.




22 CHAPTER

GROUND BELOW SUNDAY


bustle and hurry of sense any without morning Sunday on Awoke I
to devoted be to day the Though departure. immediate an on attendant
in and circumstances, strange such under spent was reflection and repose
began all we Besides, one. pleasant a was idea the place, a wonderful so
of think to ceased almost had I existence. of kind this to used get to
in towns; and houses, trees, the of stars, the of moon, the of sun, the
we position peculiar our In necessities. terrestrial any about fact,
reflections. such above far were

the soil granitic its Along hall. magnificent and vast a was grotto The
now it was distance a great So pleasantly. and placidly flowed stream
be could and lukewarm, scarcely was water its that source fiery its from
difficulty. or delay without drunk

some devote to mind his up made Professor the breakfast, frugal a After
order. in calculations and notes his putting to hours

prove, and verify to many good a have "I said, he place," first the "In
our on able be to wish I position. exact our know may we that order in
of kind a journey, our of map a make to regions upper the to return
of profile the were, it as be, will which globe, the of section vertical
expedition." the

your make you can but Uncle; work, curious a be indeed would "That
precision?" and certainty like anything with observations

the care great with note to failed occasion any on never have I can. "I
the Take mistake. no made having to as certain am I slopes. and angles
points." she how examine and compass

care. with instrument the at looked I

southeast." quarter one "East

going and observation, the noting Professor, the resumed good," "Very
two journeyed have we that out make "I calculations. rapid some through
departure." our of point the from miles fifty and hundred

heads?" our over rolling are Atlantic the of waves mighty the "Then

"Certainly."

raging are tempests fierce that possible is it moment very this at "And
just blasts angry the against battling are ships and men that and above,
heads?" our over

uncle, my rejoined possibility," of range the within quite is "It
smiling.

sea, the of bottom the thrashing shoals, in playing are whales that "And
prison?" adamantine our of roof the

breaking their of danger no is there point; that on rest at quite "Be
two southeast, the to are We calculations. our to return to But through.
my to according and, Sneffels, of base the from miles fifty and hundred
downward a in leagues sixteen gone have we think I notes, preceding
direction."

cried. I miles!" leagues--fifty "Sixteen

it." of sure am "I

of thickness the for science by allowed limit extreme the is that "But
studies. geological my to referring replied, I crust," earth's the

answer. quiet his was assertion," that contravene not do "I

the on laws known all to according journey, our of stage this at "And
hundred <i>fifteen of temperature a here be should there heat, of increase
Reaumur</i>." of degrees

boy." my say, be--you should "There

of state a in be but exist, not would granite this case which "In
fusion."

usual, as facts, that and so, not is it that boy, my perceive, you "But
theories." all overruling things, stubborn very are

am I but senses, my of evidence the to yield to forced am "I
surprised." much very nevertheless

the continued indicate?" really thermometer the does heat "What
philosopher.

six-tenths." "Twenty-seven

degrees seventy-four and hundred fourteen by wrong is science that "So
the that demonstrated is it which, to According four-tenths. and
Davy Humphry error. exploded an is temperature in increase proportional
wisely acted have I and right, is He glory. his all in forth shines here
statement?" this to make to answer any you Have him. believe to

way no in I deal. great a said have might I spoken, have to chosen I Had
of theory the for out held still Davy--I Humphry of theory the admitted
it. feel not did I though heat, of increase proportional

volcano extinct an of chimney this that allow to willing more far was I
bad a fact heat--in to refractory kind a of lava by covered was
to temperature of increase great the allow not did conductor--which
the of view my supported jet water hot The sides. its through percolate
matter.

for seeking or discussion, useless and long a on entering without But
up taking with myself contented I uncle, my controvert to arguments new
were. they as facts

correct, are calculations your all that granted for take I sir, "Well,
conclusion." definite and rigorous a them from draw to me allow but

goodhumoredly. uncle my cried say," your boy--have my on, "Go

the Iceland, of latitude the under are, now we where place the "At
leagues." eighty-three and hundred fifteen about is depth terrestrial

quarter." a and eighty-three hundred "Fifteen

a of out Now, numbers. round in hundred sixteen say we suppose "Well,
sixteen." completed have we leagues hundred sixteen of voyage

then?" what say, you "As

eighty-five than less no of journey diagonal a of expense the "At
leagues."

"Exactly."

it." about days twenty been have "We

days." twenty "Exactly

we If expedition. contemplated our of part hundredth the is sixteen "Now
five about is that days, thousand two be shall we way this in on go
down." going half, a and years

speak. not did but listened, arms, his folded Professor The

us costs leagues sixteen of descent vertical a if that counting "Without
thousand eight about go to have shall we eighty-five, of horizontal a
in somewhere out come therefore must we and southeast, the to leagues
centre." the reach to hope can we before long circumference the

"On rages. old his of one in uncle my cried calculations," your "Bother
take not does passage this that know you do How rest? they do basis what
favor, my in have I Moreover, require? we end the to direct us
has another do, to undertaken have I What precedent. a fortunately,
successful?" equally be not I should why succeeded, having he and done,

to--" allowed be may I suppose I still, but will, you indeed, hope, "I

"when Hardwigg, Professor cried tongue," your hold to allowed are "You
this." as unreasonably so talk you

my in alive still was Professor doctorial old the that once at saw I
unpleasant the dropped I passions, angry his rouse to fearful uncle--and
subject.

that does What manometer. the "consult explained, he then," "Now,
indicate?"

pressure." of amount considerable "A

gradually by and slowly, descending by that then, see, You good. "Very
shall we atmosphere, lower this of density the to ourselves accustoming
suffer." not

the in pain of amount certain a be may it except not, suppose I "Well,
reply. grim rather my was ears,"

that of rid get easily will you and nothing, is boy, dear my "That,
with communication in air exterior the bringing by discomfort of source
lungs." your in contained air the

to wise no in mind my up made quite had I for I, said "Perfectly,"
a experience should I that almost fancy should "I uncle. my contradict
dense this into plunge a making in satisfaction of amount certain
propagated?" is sound wonderfully how of note taken you Have atmosphere.

the into journey a that doubt no be can There have. I course "Of
deafness." for cure excellent an be would earth the of interior

will density "this observe, to mildly ventured I Uncle," then, "But
increase." to continue

true is It defined. scarcely is however, which, law a to "Yes--according
the to proportion in just diminish will weight of intensity the that
of surface the on is it that well very know You go. we which to depth
the on while felt, powerfully most is action its that earth the
any have to cease bodies earth the of centre very the in contrary,
all." at weight

atmosphere the not will progress we as but case, the is that know "I
water?" of density the assume finally

ten and hundred seven of pressure the under placed when it; know "I
gravity. imperturbable with uncle my cried atmospheres,"

anxiety. natural with asked I down?" lower still are we when "And

greater." even become will density the down, lower "Well,

atmospheric this through way our make to able be we shall how "Then
fog?"

our filling by ourselves ballast must we nephew, worthy my "Well,
Hardwigg. Professor said stones," with pockets

reply. only my was everything," for answer an have you Uncle, "Faith,

wide the into farther any go to me of unwise was it that feel to began I
difficulty, some revived have certainly should I for hypotheses of field
Professor. the enraged have would that impossibility, rather or

might which pressure a under air the that nevertheless, evident, was It
becoming by end would atmospheres, of thousands by multiplied be
the resisted bodies our admitting then that and solid, perfectly
the in reasonings the all of spite in stop, to have should we pressure,
arguments. all overcome Facts world.

simply would uncle My argument. this urge to not best it thought I But
Icelander's learned the Supposing Saknussemm. of example the quoted have
to answer simple one was place--there taken have to really ever journey
made: be

had manometer the nor barometer the neither century sixteenth the In
discover to able been have Saknussemm could then, invented--how, been
earth? the of centre the reach did he when

and, myself to kept however, I, objection learned and unanswerable This
how of aware events--little of course the awaited courage, my up bracing
journey. remarkable our of incidents the be to were yet adventurous

and calculation in spent was repose and leisure of day this of rest The
in Professor the with agree to point a it made I conversation.
without who, Hans, of indifference perfect the envied I but everything;
onwards blindly went effect, and cause the about trouble such any taking
him. lead to chose destiny wherever




23 CHAPTER

ALONE


I and well, on gone had yet as things confessed, be truth all in must It
of medium true the If complained. have to taste bad in acted have should
of range the within was it increase, not did difficulties our
Then journey. our of end the reach ultimately might we that possibility
soul my of ardor aroused newly the in began I ours! be would glory what
The serious? I was Well, Professor. the to enthusiastically speak to
to impossible was it mystery--and a was existed we which in state whole
earnest. in was I not or whether know

more became slopes the halt, memorable our after days several For
so vertical, character--almost frightful most a of even were rapid--some
During mass. interior solid the into down going forever were we that
leagues two even half, a and league a descended actually we days, some
sufficiently were descents The earth. the of centre the towards
to fully learned we them in engaged were we while and perilous,
we him Without Hans. guide, our of coolness marvelous the appreciate
devoted Icelander impassible and grave The lost. wholly been have should
and, ease; and sang-froid incomprehensible most the with us to himself
him, for but where, over, got was pass dangerous a many him, to thanks
fast. stuck have inevitably should we

influenced be to began we that think I day. every increased silence His
the that certain is It character. his in trait peculiar this by
on action direct a have surrounded are you which by objects inanimate
walls four between up himself shuts who man a that be must It brain. the
persons many How words. and ideas associating of faculty the lose must
mad--simply gone have confinement solitary of horrors the to condemned
dormant! lain have faculties thinking the because

conversation, interesting last our followed that weeks two the During
recorded. especially being of worthy nothing occurred there

one for vain in memory my taxed memoirs, these writing while have, I
period. particular this during travel of incident

memory, very Its indeed. terrible is related be to event next the But
cold. run blood my and shudder, soul my makes now, even

descents successive and constant Our August. of seventh the on was It
that earth, the of interior the into leagues thirty quite us taken had
hundred a nearly leagues, thirty us above were there that say to is
nothing say to towns, and continents, and oceans, and rocks, of miles,
two about direction, southeasterly a in were We inhabitants. living of
Iceland. from leagues hundred

almost an assume to begun had tunnel the day memorable that On
course. horizontal

one of charge had uncle My front. in on walking occasion this on was I
its of means By other. the of possession had I coils, Ruhmkorff the of
was I granite. of layers different the examining busy was I light
work. my in absorbed completely

alone! was I that found I round, turning and halting Suddenly

fast--or too walking been certainly have "I myself, to I thought "Well,"
is do can I thing best The rest. to stopped have uncle my and Hans else
tire to ascent little very is there Luckily, them. find and back go to
me."

least at for walked so, doing while and, steps my retraced accordingly I
around. eagerly looked and paused I uneasy, Rather hour. an of quarter a
the amid lost was voice My reply. No aloud. called I soul. living a Not
aroused! it echoes cavernous myriad

shook shiver cold A uneasy. seriously feel to time first the for began I
skin. my upon burst terrible, and chill perspiration, and body, whole my

away drive to whistle boys as aloud, speaking said, I calm," be must "I
There companions. my find shall I that doubt no be can "There fear.
I all ahead; considerably was I that certain is It roads. two be cannot
back." go to is do to have

least at for tunnel the ascended I determination this to come Having
landmarks certain seen ever had I if decide to unable hour, an half
was appeal loud any if discover to paused I then and now Every before.
I atmosphere intensified and dense that in that knowing well me, to made
silence extraordinary most The no. But off. way long a it hear should
footsteps own my of echoes the Only gallery. immense this in reigned
heard. be could

I isolation. my of fact the realize scarcely could I stopped. I last At
was I that not but mistake, a made had I that think to willing quite was
shuddered lost--I if way; my find might I mistake, a made had I If lost.
it. of think to

they and road, one only is there "since myself, to I said come," "Come,
go to still is do to have I All meet. last at shall we it, by come must
ahead, was I forgetting and me, seeing not however, Perhaps, upwards.
I if case, this in even Still, me. of search in back gone have may they
the about doubt no be can There them. to up get shall I haste, make
matter."

to clear quite been have would it aloud, words last these spoke I as But
of convinced means no by was I one--that been there listener--had any
and ideas simple these together associate to order in Moreover fact. the
could I time. some required reasoning, of form the under them reunite to
think. to brain my bring once at all not

Of ahead? I was all, After soul. my upon fell doubt dread another Then
I uncle. my by preceded behind following doubt no was Hans was. I course
his strap to moment a for stopped having his recollected perfectly
was, It detail. trifling this remembered now I shoulder. his on baggage
my continue to determined had I that moment very that at just believe, I
route.

is "there possible, was as calmly as reasoning I, thought "Again,"
through me guide to thread a way, my losing not of means sure another
forgotten--my had I which retreat--one subterraneous labyrinthine the
river." faithful

to resolved I and spirits, drooping my roused reasoning of course This
lost. be to was time No delay. further without journey my resume

of thoughtfulness the bless to reason had I that moment this at was It
the close to hunter eider the allow to refused he when uncle, my
of mass great the in fissure small spring--that hot the of orifices
during thirst from us saved having after spring beneficent This granite.
road. right the regain to me enable now would days many so

started I before mind, my up made I decision, mental this to come Having
good. of deal great a me do certainly would ablution that upwards,

the of water pleasant the in forehead and hands my plunge to stopped I
consolation. certain a as presence its blessing stream, Hansbach

dusty, hard, a treading was stupefaction!--I and horror my Conceive
wholly had reckoned I which on stream The granite. of road shingly
disappeared!




24 CHAPTER

LOST!


was I despair. utter my depict can language human any in words No
die to but me before expectation other no with alive; buried literally
thirst. and hunger of torture horrible slow the all in

my to Never rock. arid and dry the feeling about, crawled I Mechanically
dry. so anything felt ever I had fancy

the of course the lost I had how myself, asked frantically I But,
the in flow to ceased had it doubt no be could There stream? flowing
the of cause the understand to began I Now was. now I which in gallery
my from appeal any if tried I last when prevailed which silence strange
ear. my reach perchance might companions

wrong the in step imprudent an took first I when that happened so It
stream. all-important the of absence the perceive not did I direction,

have must tunnel another halted, we when that evident quite now was It
unconsciously had I that and torrent, little the of waters the received
companions my had depths unknown what To gallery. different a entered
I? was Where gone?

feet My none! absolutely was there landmark or Clue back! get to How
agony with throbbed brain My shingle. and granite the on signs no left
My problem. terrible this of solution the discover to tried I as
summed be to finally had reflection, and sophistry all after situation,
words-- awful three in up

LOST!!! Lost!! <i>Lost!</i>

be to appeared understanding, finite my to which, depth a at Lost
immeasurable.

shoulders my upon weighed earth the of crust the of leagues thirty These
the by crushed myself felt I Atlas. of shoulders the on globe the like
to man sanest the drive to position a indeed was It weight. awful
madness!

long so world the of things the to back thoughts my bring to tried I
doing in succeeded I that difficulty greatest the with was It forgotten.
Gretchen--all cousin dear my Konigstrasse, the on house the Hamburg, so.
now my before floated shadow a like vanished before had which world that
imagination. vivid

a of influence the Under unreal. how but me, before were they There
pass journey our of incidents the all saw I hallucination terrible
inmates, its and ship The panorama. a of scenes the like me before
said I Sneffels! Mount of summit great the and Fridriksson, M. Iceland,
shadowy and faint most the retained I position my in if that, myself to
It delirium. approaching of sign sure a be would it hope, a of outline
despair! to wholly way give to better were

power human what philosophy, and calmness with reason but I did fact, In
earth, the of surface the to back me take to able existence in there was
mighty and huge those twain in rend to asunder, split to too, ready, and
my find to me enable could Who head? my above stand which vaults
companions? my regain road--and

hope! of shadow a even entertain to madness and folly Insensate

cry. despairing my was Uncle!" "Oh,

I for lips; my to came which reproach of word only the was This
Professor worthy the sorrowfully and deeply how understood thoroughly
for seek patiently would he turn his in how and loss, my regret would
me.

aid further no that fact the to myself resign to began last at I When
to powerless utterly was I that knowing and man, from expected be to was
and fervor earnest with kneeled I salvation, own my for anything do
childhood, innocent my of remembrance The Heaven. from assistance asked
forth welling came infancy, my in only known mother, my of memory the
to right a had I as little And prayer. to recourse had I heart. my from
and prosperity, of hour the in forgotten had I whom Him by remembered be
sincerely. and earnestly prayed I invoked, tardily so I whom

of amount greater much a about brought faith youthful my of renewal This
intelligence and strength my all concentrate to enabled was I and calm,
situation. unprecedented my of realities terrible the on

days' forgotten--three wholly first at had I which that me about had I
the Nevertheless, full. quite was bottle water my Moreover, provisions.
find to Try alone. remain to was do to impossible was it which thing one
take? I should course which But price. any at must, I companions my
retrace to right was it Doubtless descend? again or upwards, go I Should
direction. upward an in steps my

had I where point the reach must I coolness, and care with this doing By
bifurcation fatal the find must I stream. rippling the from away turned
all at could, I feet, my at river the once spot, this at Once fork. or
thought not I had Why Sneffels. Mount of crater awful the regain events,
most The safety. of hope reasonable a was last, at This, before? this of
the of bed the discover to was done be to then, thing, important
Hansbach.

giant a like rose I water, of draught a and meal slight a After
the of ascent the began I pole, my on heavily Leaning refreshed.
advanced I But difficult. rather and rapid very was slope The gallery.
of out way his making is last at who man a like carefully, and hopefully
follow. to road one only is there knows and forest, a

I As progress. my check to happened nothing hour whole one During
my to recall tunnel--to the of shape the recollect to tried I advanced,
had I that myself persuade rocks--to of projections certain memory
could sign particular one no But before. routes winding certain followed
would gallery this that allow to forced soon was I and mind, to bring I
my from myself separated had I which at point the to back me take never
the in alley blind mere issue--a without absolutely was It companions.
earth.

fate, my knew I rock, solid the facing when, came length at moment The
floor! arid the on inanimate fell and

then I which into fear and despair of state horrible the describe To
which courage the hope, last My impossible. and vain be now would fell
granite pitiless this of sight the before drooped me, sustained had
rock!

every in spread which of sinuosities the labyrinth, vast a in Lost
and vain a was it knew I compass, or clue guide, without direction,
down lie to was me to remained that All flight. attempt to task useless
deaths! of horrible and cruel most the die and down lie To die. and

perhaps, day one that head my into came idea the mind, of state my In
level the below far so discovery their found, were bones fossil my when
scientific interesting and solemn to rise give might earth the of
discussions.

alone sounds inarticulate and hollow, hoarse, but aloud, cry to tried I
panted literally I lips. parched my through heard themselves make could
breath. for

new a despair, and anguish of sources horrible these all of midst the In
out got had down, falling by lamp, My soul. my of possession took horror
becoming already was light Its it. repairing of means no had I order. of
expire. would soon and paler, and paler

luminous the watched I despair, and resignation of sense strange a With
moved shadows of procession A less. and less getting coil the in current
eyelids, my lower to dared scarcely I wall. granite the along flashing
it instant Every light. fugitive this of spark last the lose to fearing
forever--in me leave to and vanish to about was it that me to seemed
darkness! utter

it followed I lamp; the in remained flame trembling final one last, At
it upon concentrated I breath; for gasped I vision; of power my all with
was I light of scintillation last the upon as soul, my of power the all
and Cimmerian in forever lost be to was I then and see: to destined ever
shades. tenebrous

most the during earth On lips. my escaped cry plaintive and wild A
a allows never light darkness, complete comparatively and profound
diffuse, so is Light power. its of extinction and destruction complete
remain, may little whatever and everywhere, permeates it that subtle, so
place this In it. finding in succeed will eye the of retina the
sense. every in blind me made obscurity absolute nothing--the

the of effects the trying arms, my raised I lost. wholly now was head My
the in painful was It wall. stone cold the against getting in feeling
I what not knew I me. of possession taken have must Madness extreme.
inextricable this in haphazard at rushing fly, to run, to began I did.
the underneath wildly running downwards, going always labyrinth,
furnaces, subterranean the of inhabitant an like crust, terrestrial
falling rocks, pointed the by bruised until howling, roaring, screaming,
the drink to madly seeking blood, with covered all up myself picking and
only blood this because mad features, torn my from dripped which blood
which wall horrid this for always watching and face, my over trickled
dash not could I which against obstacle fearful the me to presented ever
head. my

of ignorant perfectly was I say. to impossible was It going? I was Where
matter. the

utterly having time, long a After way. this in passed hours Several
the of side the along mass inert heavy a fell I strength, my exhausted
consciousness. lost and tunnel,




25 CHAPTER

GALLERY WHISPERING THE


wet, was face my being, and life of sense a to back came I last at When
of state this long How tears. with knew, soon I as wet, but
no had I say. to now me for impossible quite is it lasted, insensibility
creation the since Never time. of account any taking of me to left means
completely was I existed. mine as solitude a such had world the of
abandoned.

the with flooded myself felt I blood. much lost I fall my After
Why one. natural a perhaps was sensation first My liquid. life-giving
I do. to left something was there alive, was I Because dead? not I was
I able, was I as far As longer. no think to mind my up make to tried
crouched I grief, and pain by overcome utterly and ideas, all away drove
wall. granite the against

sensation the and again, on coming fainting the feel to commenced just I
a on annihilation--when, complete before struggle last the was this that
the to resemblance some had It ears. my reached uproar violent a sudden,
distinguished clearly I and thunder, of voice rumbling prolonged
the of depths distant the in other, the after one lost voices, sonorous
gulf.

new from supposed be to was it Naturally, noise? this came Whence
of mass solid the of bosom the in place taking were which phenomena
some of fall the or vapors, gaseous some of explosion The Earth! Mother
rock. other or granitic the of solid,

if hear to anxious extremely was I attention. deep with listened I Again
whole A renewed! be to likely was sound inexplicable and strange this
solemn and Deep expectation. painful in elapsed hour an of quarter
beatings the hear could I that still So tunnel. the in reigned silence
hopefulness. of kind strange a with waited waited, I heart! own my of

to appeared wall, the against accidentally leaned which ear, my Suddenly
heard I that thought I sound. a of echo faintest the were, it as catch,
with over all quivered I voices. distant and incoherent vague,
hope! and excitement

true!" not is it be! cannot "It cried. I hallucination," be must "It

that myself convince did really I attentively, more listening By no! But
meaning any make To voices. human of sound the truly was heard I what
to even weak too was I power. my beyond was however, sound, the of out
speaking. was someone that fact positive a was it Still distinctly. hear
certain. quite was I that Of

be might it that soul my upon fell dread A fear. of moment a was There
without Perhaps echo. distant a by me to back brought words own my
lips, my closed resolutely I aloud. crying been have might I it, knowing
wall. granite huge the to ear my placed more once and

voices. human of sound the truth in was It certain. for Yes,

the along myself dragged determination great of exercise the by now I
more hear could I where point a reached I until cavern, the of sides
out make only could I sound, the detect could I though But distinctly.
as ear my reached They words. incomprehensible and strange, uncertain,
off. afar were, it as tone--murmured, low a in spoken been had they if

tone a in times several repeated forlorad word the out made I last, At
sorrow. and anguish mental great betokening

my either be must It it? speaking was who and mean, word this could What
must they them, hear could I therefore, If, Hans! guide the or uncle
me. hear to able be surely

dying!" am I "help, voice; my of top the at cried I "Help,"

sound slightest the for panted I breath; a scarcely with listened then I
supreme. reigned silence But question! a sigh, a cry, darkness--a the in
ideas of flood whole A passed. minutes some way this In came! answer No
by weakened voice, my that fear to began I mind. my through flashed
search in were who companions my reach not could suffering, and sickness
me. of

buried be possibility any by could else "who cried; I they," be must "It
was supposition mere The earth?" the of level the below miles hundred a
preposterous.

attention. breathless most the with again listen to therefore, began, I
a found I in, was I place the of side the along ears my moved I As
their attain to appeared voices the where were, it as point mathematical
ear. my reached distinctly again forlorad word The intensity. of maximum
me awakened had which thunder like noise rolling that again came Then
torpor. of out

devoted time little some after myself to said I understand," to begin "I
reaches sound the that mass solid the through not is "it reflection; to
the and granite, solid of are retreat cavernous my of walls The ears. my
them. penetrate to enough uproar make not would explosion fearful most
must in was I place The itself. gallery the along come must sound The
own." its of properties acoustic peculiar some possess

name my heard time--I this time--yes, this and listened; I Again
space. into were it as cast pronounced: distinctly

conversation in was He speaking. was who Professor, the uncle, my was It
ears, my reached often so had which word the and guide, the with
expression. Danish a was forlorad,

must too I heard, myself make to order In all. it understood I Then
the carry would which gallery, the of side the along were it as speak
point from fluid electric the carries wire the as just voice my of sound
point. to

a remove to only were companions my If lose. to time no was there But
my over, be would effect acoustic the stood, they where from feet few
towards crawled therefore again I destroyed. be would Gallery Whispering
could: I as distinctly and clearly as said and wall, the

Hardwigg." "Uncle

reply. a awaited then I

extreme such with traveling of property the possess not does Sound
and light from depth that at air the of density the Besides rapidity.
Several circulation. of rapidity the to adding from far very was motion
and ages; appeared imagination, excited my to which elapsed, seconds
heart: beating wildly my moved and ears, eager my reached words these

you?" that is boy, my "Harry,

answer. and question between delay short A

"Yes--yes."

..........

you?" are "Where

..........

"Lost!"

..........

lamp?" your "And

..........

"Out."

..........

stream?" guiding the "But

..........

lost!" "Is

..........

best." our do will We Harry. courage, your "Keep

..........

answer to strength longer no have "I cried; I uncle," my moment, "One
speak--to you--continue--to sake--do heaven's But--for questions. your
annihilation. be would felt, I silence, Absolute me!"

not do weak, so are you "As uncle. my said courage," your up "Keep
going by both directions, all in you for searching been have We speak.
give to begun had I boy, dear My gallery. the in downwards and upwards
and sorrow of tears bitter what know never can you hope--and all over
road the on still be to you supposing last, At shed. have I regret
signals. as guns off firing descended, again we Hansbach, the beside
each reach voices our that and you, found have we that however, Now,
conversing are We meet. actually we before time long a be may it other,
labyrinth. the of arrangement acoustic extraordinary some of means by
hear to even gained something is It boy. dear my despair, not do But
other." each

certain A reflecting. work at was brain my speaking, was he While
wildly. beat heart my made yet, as shapeless and vague hope, undefined
one know to me for necessary absolutely was it place, first the In
I which wall, the against head my leaned therefore, more, once I thing.
spoke. again and lips, my with touched almost

"Uncle."

..........

moments. few a after answer his was boy?" "My

..........

are we far how know should we that consequence utmost the of is "It
asunder."

..........

difficult." not is "That

..........

asked. I hand?" at chronometer your have "You

..........

"Certainly."

..........

the exactly noting name, my Pronounce hand. your into it take "Well,
your hear I as soon as reply will I speak. you which at second
reply my which at moment the exactly note then will you words--and
you." reaches

..........

will answer your and question my between time mean the and good; "Very
you." reaching in voice my by occupied time the be

..........

reply. eager my was Uncle," mean, I what exactly is "That

..........

ready?" you "Are

..........

"Yes."

..........

the said name," your pronounce to about am I ready, make "Well,
Professor.

as and gallery, cavernous the of sides the to close ear my applied I
my placing and, round turned I ear, my reached "Harry" word the as soon
sound. the repeated wall, the to lips

..........

between seconds forty elapsed has "There uncle. my said seconds," "Forty
ascend. to seconds twenty takes therefore, sound, The words. two the
have second--we every for feet twenty and thousand a allowing Now,
one-eighth." and half a and league feet--a hundred four thousand twenty

knell. death of kind a like soul my on fell words These

voice. despairing and low a in muttered I half," a and league "A

..........

"depend tone; cheery a in uncle my cried boy," my over, got be shall "It
us." on

..........

enough. faintly asked I descend?" or ascend to whether know you do "But

..........

vast a reached have You why. you tell will I and descend, to have "We
in diverge galleries which from crossroad, bare of kind a space, open
bring necessarily must lying now are you which in That direction. every
these fissures, mighty these all that appears it for point, this to you
we which cavern vast the from radiate interior, globe's the of fractures
continue and courage have then, yourself, Rouse occupy. moment this at
if along--slide, yourself drag not if can, you if Walk route. your
will you rapid--and rather be must slope The possible. is else nothing
a Make journey. your of end the at you receive to arms strong find
fellow." good a like start,

frame. sinking my in courage of kind some rouse to served words These

departure. my take to about am I uncle, good present, the for "Farewell
then, Farewell, commingle. to cease will voices our start, I as soon As
again." meet we until

..........

which words last the were Such Welcome." say we Harry--until "Adieu,
hopeless almost and weary my commenced I before ears anxious my reached
journey.

the through place took which conversation surprising and wonderful This
speakers the exchanged, words these labyrinth, earth's the of mass vast
pleasant and hopeful with apart--ended miles five about being
of words up sent I Heaven, to prayer more one breathed I expressions.
the to me led had He that heart inmost my in thanksgiving--believing
ears. my reach could friends my of voices the where place only

by explainable easily is mystery acoustic astounding apparently This
There rock. the of conductibility the from arose it laws; natural simple
not are which sound of propagation singular this of instances many are
of gallery interior the In positions. mediate less its in perceptible
are phenomena these Sicily, in caverns curious the amid and Paul's, St.
of Ear the as known is all them of marvelous most The observable.
Dionysius.

fresh came studies, and reading early my of past, the of memories These
could I and uncle my if that reason to began I Moreover, thoughts. my to
exist could obstacle serious no distance, a great so at communicate
sound the whence direction the follow to was do to had I All us. between
my if him reach must I it, putting logically and me; reached had
fail. not did strength

not could I that however, found, soon I feet. my to rose accordingly I
very was expected I as slope The along. myself drag must I that walk;
down. slip to myself allowed I but rapid;

proportions; frightful assume to began descent the of rapidity the Soon
at grasped I sides; the at clutched I fall. fearful a menaced and
weakness My vain. in All backwards. myself threw I rocks; of projections
myself. save to nothing do could I great so was

me. failed earth Suddenly

against struck then I void. gloomy and dark a into launched first was I
head My well. perfect a gallery, vertical a of asperities projecting the
existence. of knowledge all lost I and rock, pointed a against bounded
own. his for me claimed had death concerned, was I as far As




26 CHAPTER

RECOVERY RAPID A


myself found I existence, of consciousness the to returned I When
soft and thick some on lying semiobscurity, of kind a by surrounded
my on intently fixed eyes watching--his was uncle My coverlets.
the At eye. his in tear a face, his on expression grave a countenance,
When hand. my of hold took he bosom, my from struggled which sigh first
cry loud a uttered he his, upon themselves fix and open eyes my saw he
lives!" he lives! "He joy. of

whispered. I uncle," good my "Yes,

heart, his to me clasping Professor, grim the continued boy," dear "My
saved!" are "you

words these which in tone the by touched unaffectedly and deeply was I
them. accompanied which care kindly the by more even and uttered, were
tried severely be must who men those of one was however, Professor, The
this At emotion. gentle or affection of display any induce to order in
of that in hand my saw He us. joined guide, the Hans, friend our moment
beamed eyes his was, he as taciturn that, say to venture I and uncle, my
satisfaction. lively with

said. he dag," "God

could I as tone a hearty as in replied, I day," good Hans, day, "Good
I are. we where me tell together, are we that Uncle, now, "and assume,
else." everything of as position, our of idea all lost have

weak. too far are you "Today replied. he tomorrow," Harry, "Tomorrow,
be not must that poultices and bandages with surrounded is head Your
you that all know will you tomorrow and sleep, boy, my Sleep, touched.
require."

is?" it day is--what it o'clock what know me "let cried, I "But,"

is It Sunday. more once is this and night, at o'clock eleven now is "It
from you prohibit distinctly I And August. of month the of ninth the now
same." the of tenth the until questions more any asking

closed soon eyes my and indeed, weak very told, were truth the if was, I
off went I and rest, night's good a require did I involuntarily.
interior the in adventure perilous my that moment last the at reflecting
days! four lasted had darkness, total in earth, the of

around look to began I awakening, my at day, next the of morning the On
a in was bedding, traveling our all of made place, sleeping My me.
all in glittering stalagmites, magnificent with adorned grotto, charming
sand. silvery and soft of floor the rainbow, the of colors the

yet and lighted, was lamp no torch, No prevailed. obscurity dim A
made and without, from penetrated light of beams unexplained certain
grotto. beautiful the of opening the through way their

flow and ebb the like murmur, indefinite and vague a heard moreover, I,
the hear could I believed verily I sometimes and strand, a upon waves of
wind. the of sighing

dreaming. be must I awake, being of instead that, believe to began I
occurred that all and fall, my by affected been not had brain my Surely
of visions frenzied the not was hours twenty-four last the during
came I faculties, my of trial a reflection, some after yet And madness?
not could ears and Eyes mistaken. be not could I that conclusion the to
me. deceive both surely

has "which myself, to said I daylight," blessed the of ray a is "It
the is what But rocks. the in fissure mighty some through penetrated
the of moaning unmistakable this waves, of murmur this of meaning
the of whistling the enough, plainly too, hear, can I billows? salt-sea
illness, my during uncle, my If mistaken? altogether be I can But wind.
my on he, Has earth! the of surface the to back me carried but has
has manner strange some in or expedition, wondrous his up given account,
end?" an to come it

the when questions, other and these over brain my puzzling was I
me. joined Professor

quite are you fancy "I tone. joyous a in cried he Harry," day, "Good
well."

bed. my in up sitting actually replied, I better," much very am "I

and soundly both slept you as it, of end the be would that knew "I
we hour every and watch, to turn taken each have I and Hans tranquilly.
amelioration." of signs visible seen have

do could I if as feel I "for reply, my was Uncle," right, be must "You
me." before put could you meal any to justice

Our you. left has fever The eat. shall you boy, my eat, shall "You
not know I with bruises and wounds your rubbed has Hans friend excellent
And secret. the possess alone Icelanders the which of ointment, what
a he's Ah, manner. marvelous most the in bruises your healed have they
Hans." Master is fellow wise

articles several me before placing was uncle my speaking, was he While
As devoured. readily I injunctions, earnest his despite which, food, of
with him overwhelmed I appeased, was hunger of rage first the as soon
answers. give to hesitated longer no now he which to questions,

had fall providential my that time, first the for learned, then I
came I As gallery. perpendicular almost an of bottom the to me brought
on falling which of least the stones, of shower perfect a amidst down,
I that conclusion the to came they death, to me crushed have would me
this on were it as Riding rock. dislocated entire an me with carried had
into And arms. uncle's my into headlong cast was I chariot, terrible
blood. with covered and insensible fell, I them

you "that remark, final Professor's the was miracle," a indeed is "It
to never care take us let But over. times thousand a killed not were
again." meeting never risk should we surely for separate;

separate." to again never care take us "Let

then, journey, The heart. my upon chill of sort a with fell words These
My astonishment. and surprise with uncle my at looked I over. not was
is "What said: countenance, my of examination instant's an after uncle,
Harry?" matter, the

right all am I that say You question. serious very a you ask to want "I
health?" in

are." you "Certainly

asked. I exertion?" new of capable and sound are limbs my all "And

undoubtedly." "Most

question. anxious next my was head?" my about what "But

exactly is contusions, two or one have you that except head, your "Well,
laughing. uncle, my said shoulders," your be--on to ought it where

I fact, In right. exactly not is head my that is opinion own my "Well,
delirious." slightly myself believe

so?" think you makes "What

we "Have cried. I senses," my lost have I fancy I why explain will "I
Earth?" Mother of surface the to returned not

not." "Certainly

not I do day? of light the see not I do for mad, be must I truly "Then
a of wash the distinguish not I can and wind? the of whistling the hear
sea?" great

smile. a with uncle, my said uneasy?" you makes that all is that "And

explain?" you "Can

utterly is matter whole the for explain; to attempt any make not will "I
then will You yourself. for judge and see shall you But inexplicable.
are we that infancy--and its in yet as is science geological that find
world." the enlighten to doomed

my restrain to able longer no eagerly, cried I then," advance, us "Let
curiosity.

precautions take must "you responded; he Harry," dear my moment, a "Wait
air." open the into going before illness your after

air?" open "The

I violent--and rather is wind the that you warn to have I boy. my "Yes,
precautions." necessary without yourself expose to you for wish no have

illness." my from recovered perfectly am I that you assure to beg I "But

to inconvenient be would relapse A boy. my patience, little a just "Have
may voyage sea approaching our lose--as to time no have We parties. all
duration." long of be

ever. than bewildered more cried, I voyage?" "Sea

on go to ready be shall we and rest, day's another take must You "Yes.
smile. peculiar a with uncle, my replied tomorrow," by board

me. astonished utterly words The board!" on "Go

we had lake, a river, a upon come we Had how? and board--what on Go
of part some in anchor at lying vessel a Was sea? inland some discovered
earth? the of interior the

vain made uncle My pitch. highest very the to up worked was curiosity My
my that discovered he however, last, at When me. restrain to attempts
the that good--and than harm more do would impatience feverish
of state calm a to me restore alone could wishes my of satisfaction
way. gave mind--he

my please to precaution the taking then rapidly--and myself dressed I
the of out rushed I coverlets, the of one in myself wrapping of uncle,
grotto.




27 CHAPTER

SEA CENTRAL THE


the to unused wholly eyes, My nothing. absolutely saw I first At
was I and brightness; sudden the bear not could light, of effulgence
still, stood I them, reopen to able was I When them. close to compelled
of effects wildest the all Not astonished. than stupefied more far
I sea," sea--the "The scene! a such up conjured have could imagination
cried.

Central "the pride; pardonable of tone a in uncle, my replied "Yes,"
it; discovered having my of fact the deny will navigator future No Sea.
name." a it giving of right a acquiring of hence and

lake a of end the water, of expanse limitless vast, A true. quite was It
distance. the in lost was it until us, before spread ocean, an of not if
soft beautiful a of consisted indented, much very was which shore, The
of some of home long-deserted the shells, small with mixed sand, golden
a with incessantly--and broke waves The age. past a of creatures the
A localities. underground in found be to murmur, sonorous peculiarly
waters; pellucid the along blew wind the as arose flake frothy slight
mighty The face. my into blown was spray of dash a many and
left height inconceivable an to above rose which rock of superstructure
of margin large a was there stood, we where opening--but narrow a only
cliffs, enormous and promontories and capes were sides all On strand.
countless through waves, the of breaking eternal the by worn partially
like away faded rocks mighty the side, to side from gazed I as And ages!
cloud. of film fleecy a

an of characteristics usual the all with ocean, an reality in was It
savage. and cold rigid, wild--so horribly only sea, inland

to able was I that it was How greatly. me puzzled and startled thing One
utter in plunged being of instead water of sheet vast that upon look
there But day. like up lit was me before landscape vast The darkness?
the of irradiation splendid the brilliancy, dazzling the wanting was
the of brightness the moon; the of illumination cold pale the sun;
its from region, subterranean this in power illuminating The stars.
very the whiteness, dry clear its character, Rickering and trembling
of that to superiority great its temperature, its of elevation slight
aurora the of nature the in something electric; evidently was moon, the
up light to able and constant, were phenomena its that only borealis,
cavern. ocean the of whole the

to appeared speak, to so sky, the heads, our above vault tremendous The
motion. constant in vapors, nebulous of conglomeration a of composed be
atmospheric an such under that, supposed have originally should I
not could water of evaporation the place, that in exist must as pressure
which law, physical some of action the from yet and place, take really
that along rolling clouds dense and heavy were there memory, my escaped
produced currents Electric roof. the concealing partially vault, mighty
around especially distance, the in shade and light of play astonishing
suddenly, then and beneath, cast were shadows Deep clouds. heavier the
and beauty, unusual of ray a come would there clouds, two between
no gave it for sun, the like not was it yet And intensity. remarkable
heat.

noble a of Instead melancholy. excruciatingly and sad was effect The
roof heavy a me above was there stars, with studded blue, of firmament
me. crush to seemed which granite, of

who captain English the of theory the of think to began I around, Gazing
the which of interior the in sphere hollow vast a to earth the compared
pressure, atmospheric of means by state luminous a in retained is air
mysterious their in there circled Proserpine, and Pluto stars, two while
right! was fellow old the suppose all, After orbits.

excavation. vast a in were, it as imprisoned--bound were we truth, In
hand, either on shore, the out; make to impossible was it width Its
equally was length its while sight; to lost until rapidly widening
its to As view. our bounded horizon distant the on haze A uncertain.
Looking roof. the to miles many be must it that see could we height,
began. roof stupendous the where discover to impossible was it upward,
two of elevation an at floating been have must clouds the of lowest The
which vapors, terrestrial of that than greater height a yards, thousand
air. the of density extreme the to owing doubtless was circumstance

cannot I place. the of idea an give to order in "cavern" word the use I
of idea an convey to fails language human grandeur; awful its describe
been not had or had vacuum singular this Whether sublimity. savage its
I fusion, of state a in when earth the of cooling sudden the by caused
caverns--but, gigantic and wonderful most of read had I say. not could
this. like way any in none

learned the by visited Colombia, in Guachara, of grotto great The
Kentucky--what in Cave Mammoth explored partially and vast the Humboldt;
speechless in stood I which in that to earth the in holes these were
mighty the and light, electric its clouds, vapory its with admiration!
alone can description, not Imagination, bosom! its in slumbering ocean
cave. the of vastness and splendor the of idea an give

wanting utterly were Words silence. profound in marvels these at gazed I
stood I as seemed, I experienced. I wonder of sensations the indicate to
a of inhabitant wandering some were I if as shore, mysterious that upon
some of spectacle the at time first the for present planet, distant
and body give To existence. another to belonging phenomena terrestrial
new of coinage the required have would sensations new such to existence
looked I fault. at wholly itself found brain feeble my here words--and
not stupefaction of state a in admired, I reflected, I thought, I on,
fear! with unmingled altogether

I cheeks. pallid my to color some restored spectacle unexpected The
this of influence the under better getting actually be to seemed
my reanimated atmosphere dense the of vivacity the Moreover, novelty.
oxygen. unaccustomed with lungs my inflating by body

forty-seven of imprisonment an after that conceived readily be will It
I that delight infinite with was it tunnel miserable and dark a in days,
of influence reviving genial, the like was It air. saline this breathed
waves. sea salt the

surprise. first the over got already had uncle My

that-- was idea his Horace poet Latin the With

know, I art the all is admire to Not

so. him keep to and happy man make To


the appreciate to thoroughly time me giving after said, he "Well,"
up walk to enough strong feel you "do sea, underground this of marvels
down?" and

greater me give would "nothing answer, ready my was "Certainly,"
pleasure."

along stroll will we and arm, my on "lean said, he boy," my then, "Well
beach." the

of shores the along walk to began we and eagerly, offer his accepted I
upon one piled rocks, abrupt were left our To lake. extraordinary this
leaped sides their down pile; titanic stupendous other--a the
murmuring and limpid becoming last, at which cascades, innumerable
rose which vapors, Light lake. the of waters the in lost were streams,
rock, to rock from clouds fleecy in floated and there, and here
vast the into superfluity their poured also which springs, hot indicated
feet. our at reservoir

Hansbach, the stream, faithful and old our recognized I them Among
since flowing been had it if as seemed basin, wild that in lost which,
world. the of creation the

sigh. deep a with remarked, I friend," excellent our miss shall "We

is it another, or That it? matters "what testily, uncle my said "Bah!"
same." the all

but so; say to inclined almost felt and ungrateful, remark the thought I
forbore. I

spectacle. unexpected an by attracted was attention my moment this At
steep a turned suddenly we yards, hundred five about gone had we After
of consisted It forest! lofty a to close ourselves found and promontory,
seemed air The parasols. like shape in tops, tufted with trunks straight
breeze tolerable a of spite in trees--which these upon effect no have to
petrified. been had they if as motionless and still as remained

formations. singular these for name no find could I forward. hastened I
we were trees--or known more and thousand two the to belong not they Did
last at we When means. no By growth? new a of discovery the make to
to way gave surprise my trees, the beneath stood and forest, the reached
admiration.

the of product ordinary very a of presence the in simply was I truth, In
unhesitatingly uncle My proportions. gigantic and singular of earth,
names. real their by them called

mushrooms." of forest "a manner, coolest his in said, he only," is "It

the of Judge mistaken. not was he that found I examination close On
that heard had I soils. hot damp of product this by attained development
here but circumference, in feet nine reaches giganteum Lycoperdon the
equal of tops with and high, feet forty nearly mushrooms, white were
make not could light thousands--the countless in grew They dimensions.
a reigned them beneath and substance, massive their through way its
darkness. mystic and gloomy

singular this of shades the in cold The forward. go to wished I Still
visible this in about wandered we hour an nearly For intense. was forest
the to returned more once and spot, the left I length At darkness.
warmth. comparative and light to lake, the of shores

to confined not was land subterraneous of vegetation amazing the But
not had We step. every at us awaited wonders New mushrooms. gigantic
trees other of group mighty a upon came we when yards, hundred many gone
an of Earth, Mother of trees humble common leaves--the discolored with
flowering high; feet hundred a lycopods size: phenomenal and exorbitant
grasses! gigantic pines; as tall as ferns

have we "here uncle; my cried splendid!" magnificent, "Astonishing,
of that world, the of period second the of flora whole the us before
first the in which gardens, our of plants humble the Behold transition.
No Harry. dear my you, around Look trees. mighty were world the of ages
sight!" a such on gazed before ever botanist

now was required, was than more little a always enthusiasm, uncle's My
excusable.

designed have to appears "Providence remarked. I Uncle," right, are "You
antediluvian of hothouse mysterious and vast this in preservation the
so them figuring in men learned of sagacity the prove to plants,
paper." on marvelously

But hothouse. mighty a indeed is it said; well boy--very my said, "Well
you if sense, common and reason of bounds the within be also would you
menagerie." vast a also is it that added

as exaggerated as were animals the If around. anxiously rather looked I
serious. be certainly would matter the plants, the

menagerie?" "A

the foot--behold under treading are we dust the at Look "Doubtless.
covered--" is seashore the of soil whole the which with bones

animals." antediluvian of bones the certainly, "yes, replied, I "Bones,"

remains, singular two or one up picked and spoke, I as down stooped I
gigantic these to name a give to easy was It age. bygone a of relics
trees. of trunks as big as instances some in bones,

as almost cried, I mastodon," a of jawbone lower the clearly, is, "Here
the of molars the are "here uncle; my as enthusiastically and warmly
You Megatherium. the to belonged which bone leg a is here Dinotherium;
to animals mighty the for menagerie; a indeed is it Uncle, right, are
of shores the on died and lived have belonged, once bones these which
yonder Look, plants. these of shadow the under sea, subterranean this
yet--" skeletons--and whole are

a to came suddenly I that noticing uncle, my said nephew?" yet, "And
stop. full

caverns, granite in beasts such of presence the understand not do "I
reply. my was prodigious," and vast however

professional old his of much very with uncle, my said not?" "Why
impatience.

during earth on existed only life animal that known well is it "Because
the by formed was soil sedimentary the when period, secondary the
primitive the of rocks burning and hot the replaced thus and alluviums,
age."

a have I and Harry, patience, with and earnestly you to listened have "I
this that is, that and objections: your to answer clear and simple
soil." sedimentary a is itself

earth?" the of surface the from depth enormous such at be that can "How

certain a At geologically. and simply both explained be can fact "The
to liable crust, elastic an of only consisted earth the period,
of law the of virtue in movements downward and upward alternative
those in place took landslip a many that probable very is It attraction.
huge into cast were soil sedimentary of portions large that and days,
chasms." mighty and

antediluvian these if Uncle, "But, remarked. dryly I possible," "Quite
likely more what regions, subterranean these in lived formerly animals
behind concealed be moment this at may monsters these of one that than
rocks." mighty yonder of one

of point every care with examining around, keenly looked I spoke, I As
deserted these on exist to appeared alive nothing but horizon; the
shores.

and walk The so. uncle my told and fatigued, rather felt now I
seated therefore I state. weak my in me for much too were excitement
broke waves the which of foot the at promontory, a of end the at myself
vast of projections by formed bay a round looked I rolls. incessant in
huge by protected port little a was end extreme the At rocks. granitic
lain have might schooners four or three and brig A stones. of pyramids
my minute every that seem, it did natural So ease. perfect with there
and sail all under out coming vessel a expect to me induced imagination
breeze. southerly warm a of influence the under sea open the for making

the were We minute. a than more lasted never illusion fantastic the But
world! subterranean this in creatures living only

a when wind, of cessation utter an was there periods certain During
upon fell desert the of silence the than terrible more deeper, silence
weight leaden a like hang to seemed rocks--and arid and solitary these
awful the amid sought, I ocean. singular this of waters the upon
veil the down tear to fog, distant the through penetrate to stillness,
were words unspoken What distance. mysterious the concealed which
did and ask to wish I did questions lips--what trembling my by murmured
able be ever we Should lead? it did what end--to sea this did Where not!
shores? distant its examine to

our that convinced was He matter. the about doubts no had uncle my But
state a in was I part, my For successful. be end the in would enterprise
to and journey the on embark to desired indecision--I painful of
result. the feared I still and succeed,

the of contemplation silent in more or hour an passed had we After
to way our on bank the towards down went and rose we spectacle, wondrous
I repast, slight a After gain. to sorry not was I which grotto, the
tedious and many after length, at and slumber, in refuge sought
eyes. weary my over came sleep struggles,




28 CHAPTER

RAFT THE LAUNCHING


completely awoke I surprise, great my to day, next the of morning the On
and illness long my after delightful be would bath a thought I restored.
of waters the into plunged and went I rising, after soon So, sufferings.
invigorating. and fresh cool, was bath The Mediterranean. new this

worthy our Hans, appetite. excellent an with breakfast to back came I
able were we as eatables such cook to how understood thoroughly guide,
was he that so discretion, at water and fire both had he provide; to
repast. ordinary our of monotony weary the vary to slightly enabled

by coffee with breakfast, English capital a like was meal morning Our
welcome so been beverage delicious this had never And windup. a of way
refreshing. and

interrupt to not health of state my for regard sufficient had uncle My
I when delighted evidently was he but meal, the of enjoyment the in me
finished. had

I and tide, the of height the is It me. with "come he, said then," "Now
phenomena." curious its study to anxious am

Uncle?" tide, the say you "did astonishment, in rising cried, I "What!"'

did." I "Certainly

doubt, respectful of tone a in replied, I say," to mean not do "You
below." here felt is moon and sun the of influence the "that

universal of law the by influenced bodies all not Are not? why pray "And
the from exempt be sea underground vast this should Why attraction?
like nothing is there Besides, universe? the of rule the law, general
atmospheric great the Despite demonstrated. and proved is which that
falls and rises sea inland this that notice will you here, down pressure
itself." Atlantic the as regularity much as with

the heard and saw and shore, sandy the reached we spoke, uncle my As
rising. evidently were They beach. the on monotonously breaking waves

feet. my at water the at looking cried, I flood," the truly is "This

the with hands his rubbing uncle, my replied nephew," excellent my "Yes,
foam of streaks several these by see you "and philosopher, a of gusto
feet." twelve or ten least at rises tide the that

marvelous." indeed is "It

natural." quite is it contrary, the "on responded; he means," no "By

all "but reply, my was uncle," dear my eyes, your in so appear may "It
It marvelous. the of partake to me to appear place the of phenomena the
wildest his in Who see. I which that believe to impossible almost is
there earth, our of crust the beneath that, imagined have could dreams
its with tides, flowing and ebbing with ocean, real a exist could
the laughed have should one for I storms! its even and winds, of changes
scorn." to suggestion

smile; pitying a with uncle, my inquired not?" why boy, my Harry, "But,
it?" to opposition in reason physical any there "is

earth, the of heat central the of theory great the up give we if "Well,
as upon looked be should anything why reasons no offer can certainly I
impossible."

is Davy Humphry Sir of system the "that added, he own," will you "Then
seen?" have we what by justified wholly

no see can certainly I granted, once point that is--and it that allow "I
even wonders, other and seas of existence the doubting for reason
globe." the of interior the in countries,

uninhabited?" are countries varied these course of so--but is "That

why see not do I still, not: than likely more is it that grant I "Well,
fish." unknown of species some to shelter given have not should sea this

rather are probabilities the and any, discovered not have we "Hitherto
Professor. the observed so," doing ever our against

wonders. these of presence the in skepticism my losing was I

try to intention my is It question. the solve to determined am I "Well,
hook." and line fishing my with luck my

my with pleased uncle, my said experiment," the make "Certainly;
to proper only be certainly will it it, about are we "While enthusiasm.
region." extraordinary this of secrets the all discover

quite have I time this "all asked; I now?" we are where all, after "But,
philosophical your doubtless, which, question, a you ask to forgotten
answered." since long have instruments

one only from situation the "examining Professor, the replied "Well,"
from leagues fifty and hundred three distant now are we view, of point
Iceland."

exclamation. my was much?" "So

made have to not sure am and times, several matter the over gone have "I
positively. uncle my replied yards," hundred five of mistake a

southeast?" the to going still we direction--are the to as "And

forty-two degrees, nineteen of declination[2] western a with "Yes,
have I inclination[3] the for As above. is it as just minutes,
fact." curious very a discovered

true the from needle the of variation the is declination The [2]
place. a of meridian

to tendency a with needle magnetic the of dip the is Inclination [3]
earth. the towards incline

me." interests information Your Uncle? be, that may "What

on does it as pole the towards dipping of instead needle the that "Why,
tendency." upward an has hemisphere, northern the in earth,

attraction magnetic of point great the "that cried, I proves," "This
have we spot the and earth the of surface the between somewhere lies
reaching." in succeeded

and elated uncle, my exclaimed nephew," observant my "Exactly,
getting in succeed we if that probable quite is it "and delighted,
of degree seventy-third the near regions--somewhere polar the toward
shall we pole, magnetic the discovered Ross James Sir where latitude,
by discovered therefore have We upward. directly point needle the behold
very a at situated not is attraction of centre great this that analogy,
depth." great

astonish will discovery "this surprised, rather I, said "Well,"
suspected." never was It philosophers. experimental

uncle my replied unerring," end the in and mighty great, "Science,
have which errors--errors many into fallen has "science dogmatically,
the been have they for otherwise, than rather useful and fortunate been
truth." to steppingstones

matter. another to turned I discussion, further some After

reached?" have we depth the of idea any you "Have

thirty-five "exactly Professor, the continued now," are "We
earth." the of interior the into miles--down hundred a leagues--above

now are "we map, the on distance the measuring after I, said "So,"
lofty the heads our over have and Highlands, Scottish the beneath
Hills." Grampian

very sounds "it laughing; Professor, the said right," quite are "You
vast this supports which vault the heavy--but being weight the alarming,
the of Architect mighty the safe; and solid is rock and earth of mass
highest his in even Man, materials. solid of it constructed has Universe
things! such of thought never imagination, poetic and vivid of flights
our of roofs vaulted the what bridges, our of arches finest the are What
an floats which beneath and us, above dome mighty that to cathedrals,
tides!" and calms and storms its with ocean

our that fear no have and Uncle, can, you as much as all it admire "I
discussed have we that now But heads. our upon fall will sky granite
Are intentions? future your are what discovery, and science of matters
earth?" beautiful our of surface the to back getting of thinking not you

success. of hope any with than feeler a as more said was This

not are "you alarm, of tone a in uncle my cried nephew," back, "Go
is intention my No, cowardly. or absurd so anything of thinking surely
singularly been yet as have We journey. our continue and advance to
so." more be shall we hope I henceforth and fortunate,

plain?" liquid yonder cross to we are "how I, said "But,"

swim to even or foremost, head it into leap to intention my not is "It
after are, oceans as But Hellespont. the over Leander like it, across
does so land, by surrounded are they as inasmuch lakes, great only all,
granite by circumscribed is sea central this that reason, to stand it
surroundings."

reply. natural my was "Doubtless,"

we end, other the reach we once when that think not you do then, "Well,
journey?" our continuing of means some find shall

ocean?" internal this to allow you do extent what but "Probably,

or leagues--more fifty or forty about extend to it fancy should I "Well,
less."

then?" one--what correct a be to approximation this supposing even "But
asked. I

embark shall We discussion. further for time no have we boy, dear "My
tomorrow."

in nothing see could I incredulity. and surprise with around looked I
vessel. or boat of shape the

and sea; unknown an upon out launch to about are "we cried, I "What!"
us?" carry to vessel the is ask, may I if where,

vessel. a call would you what exactly be not will it boy, dear my "Well,
raft." solid and good a with content be must we present the For

impossible as is raft a here down "but incredulously, cried, I raft," "A
imagine--" to loss a at am I vessel--and a as construction of

you much, so talking of instead listen to were you Harry--if good "My
impatient. little a waxing uncle, my said hear," would

hear?" should "I

to employing now is Hans which hammer, the with knocks "Yes--certain
hours." many for work at been has He raft. the make

raft?" a "Making

"Yes."

construction?" a such for suitable trees found he has where "But

our see shall you and Come, hand. his to ready all trees the found "He
work." at guide excellent

like uncle my followed I saw, and heard I what at amazed more and More
dream. a in one

the on work at Hans saw I hour, an of quarter a about of walk a After
few A port. natural our formed which promontory the of side other
sandy the on surprise, great my To him. beside was I and more minutes
very a of beams from made was It raft. half-finished a lay shore
pieces and boughs, joints, limbs, of number great a and wood, peculiar
boats. and ships of fleet a constructed have to sufficient about, lay

awe. and astonishment with silent uncle, my to turned I

it?" is wood "what cried; I from?" come wood this all did "Where

regions, northern the of palms the and fir, pinewood, is there "Well,
sententiously. replied, he sea," the of action the by mineralized

possible?" be it "Can

wood." fossil called is see you "what Professor, learned the said "Yes,"

lignites, the "like moment, a for reflecting after I, cried then," "But
certainly will therefore and iron, as heavy as and hard as be must it
float." not

true become have woods these of Many case. the is that "Sometimes
only have you, before see you those like again, others but anthracites,
like proof no is there But transformation. fossil of phase one undergone
precious these of two or one picking uncle, my added demonstration,"
sea. the into them casting and waifs

the to came moment, a for disappeared having after wood, of piece The
and wind by produced oscillation the with about floated and surface,
tide.

smile. self-satisfied a with uncle, my said convinced?" you "Are

incredible." is see I what "that cried, I convinced," am "I

rapidly was earth the of interior the into journey my that was fact The
the for me preparing day by day and notions, preconceived all changing
marvelous.

canoes native of fleet a seen have to surprised been have not should I
sea. silent that upon afloat

the Hans, of ability and industry the to thanks evening, next very The
The wide. feet five and long feet ten about was It finished. was raft
once and firm, and solid were ropes, stout with together bound beams
tranquilly floated vessel improvised the efforts, united our by launched
Sea. Central the named well had Professor the what of waters the upon




29 CHAPTER

VOYAGE RAFT WATERS--A THE ON


be to time no was There betimes. up were we August of thirteenth the On
would which locomotion, of kind new a inaugurate to had now We lost.
fatiguing. not and rapid being of advantage the have

additional give to together, fastened wood of pieces two of made mast, A
our from sheet linen a sail the one, another from made yard a strength,
trial on whole the and cordage, of want no in fortunately were We bed.
seaworthy. and solid appeared

Professor enthusiastic and eager the when morning, the in o'clock six At
our all luggage, the victuals, the embark, to signal the gave
we which water, sweet of supply goodly a and weapons, our instruments,
raft. the on placed were rocks, the in springs from collected had

enabled which rudder, a contrived ingenuity, considerable with had, Hans
a as tiller, the took He ease. with apparatus floating the guide to him
guide a was he as sailor a good as was man worthy The course. of matter
shore, the to us held which painter the go let then I hunter. duck and
offing. rapid a made we and wind, the to brought was sail the

for making were we more once and commenced; length at had voyage sea Our
regions. unknown and distant

been had raft the where port little the leave to about were we as Just
geographic to as strong very was who uncle, my constructed,
suggested others, among and name, a it give to wanted nomenclature,
mine.

propose." to another have I decide you "before I, said "Well,"

it." with out "Well;

well very sound will Gretchen Port Gretchen. it call to like should "I
map." future our on

Professor. the said be," it let Gretchen Port then, "Well

our to attached was girl dear my of memory the that was it thus And
expedition. memorable and adventurous

and northward the from blowing was wind the shore the left we When
than speed greater much a at wind the before directly went We eastward.
at atmosphere of layers dense The raft. a from expected been have might
with sail the upon acted and power propelling great had depth that
force. considerable

careful taking been had who uncle, my hour, an of end the At
moved. we which with rapidity the of judge to enabled was observations,
world. upper the in seen anything beyond far was It

shall we rate, present our at advance to continue "we said, he "If,"
mere a With hours. twenty-four in leagues thirty least at traveled have
velocity." incredible almost an is this raft

forward went reply any making without and surprised, was certainly I
of edge the on away fading was shore northern the Already raft. the upon
leaving more, and more separate to appeared shores two The horizon. the
nothing see could I me Before departure. our for space open and wide a
floated--the we which sea--upon limitless apparently and vast the but
sight. in objects living only

seemed which below--shadows shadows grey their cast clouds dark and Huge
more Anything weight. their by water sullen and colorless that crush to
beheld. never I darkness nether of regions of and gloom of suggestive
small some upon there and here reflected light, electric of rays Silvery
our of wake long the in sparkles luminous up brought water, of spots
a not land; of sight of out wholly were we Presently bark. cumbrous
So going. were we where of indication any nor seen, be could vestige
our fix to point distant any without seem we did motionless and still
I raft the of wake the at light phosphoric the for but that on eyes
motionless. and still were we that fancied have should

rate. rapid very a at advancing were we that knew I But

were seaweed of collections vast day, the in o'clock twelve About
extraordinary the of aware was I sides. all on us surrounding discovered
along creep to known been have which plants, these of power vegetative
But ships. large of advance the stop and ocean, great the of bottom the
the of those as wonderful and gigantic so seen, ever seaweeds were never
and tossing distance, a at seen how, imagine well could I Sea. Central
been have algae of lines long the billows, the of summit the on heaving
the of sources fertile been have thus and things, living for taken
serpents. sea in belief

to three from seawrack, or fucus of specimens great past swept raft Our
like looking long, incredibly immense, length, in feet thousand four
great me afforded It horizon. our beyond far out stretched that snakes
Hour lengths. endless ribbon-like variegated their on gaze to amusement
these of termination the to coming our without passed hour after
well-nigh was patience my increased, astonishment my If weeds. floating
exhausted.

and abnormal such produced have possibly could force natural What
globe, the of aspect the been have must What plants? extraordinary
combined the under when formation, its of centuries first the during
vast its occupied kingdom vegetable the humidity, and heat of action
else? everything of exclusion the to surface

and geologist the for interest never-ending of considerations were These
philosopher. the

night length at and journey; our on advancing were we while this All
of state luminous the before, evening the remarked had I as but came;
was it cause, the was Whatever diminished. nothing in was atmosphere the
with calculate could we which of duration the upon phenomenon a
certainty.

speculative little some and of, disposed been had supper our as soon As
mast, the of foot the at myself stretched I in, indulged conversation
sleep. to went presently and

and rise to raft the allowing tiller, the at motionless remained Hans
had he all square, sail the and aft, being wind The waves. the on fall
centre. the in oar his keep to was do to

Port named newly the from departure our taken had we since Ever
our of log regular a keep to me directed had uncle worthy my Gretchen,
minute most the even down put to instructions with navigation, day's
of direction the phenomenon, curious and interesting every particulars,
every word, a in went; we distance the sailing, of rate our wind, the
voyage. extraordinary our of incident

Central the on voyage our of story the tell I therefore, log, our From
Sea.


Raft northwest. the from breeze steady A 14th. August Friday,
Coast straight. perfectly going and rapidity, extreme with progressing
seen be to Nothing leeward. to leagues thirty about visible dimly still
light the of intensity extraordinary The front. in horizon the beyond
The stationary. singularly is It diminishes. nor increases neither
very ascended have clouds the say, to is that fine; remarkably weather
atmosphere an by surrounded and fleecy, and light are and high,
fusion. in silver resembling

centigrade. degrees +32 Thermometer,

and prepared having Hans guide our day the in o'clock twelve About
he bait The waters. subterranean the into line his cast hook, a baited
hook. his concealed he which of means by meat, of piece small a was used
Were disappointment. to doomed time long a for was I was, I as Anxious
question. important the was That not? or fish with supplied waters these
tug. hard rather and sudden a came there Then answer. decided my No--was
to violently struggled which fish, a it with and in, it drew coolly Hans
escape.

uncle. my cried fish!" "A

sturgeon." small a "certainly cried, I sturgeon!" a is "It

characteristic; every noting carefully, fish the examined Professor The
round head, flat a had fish The opinion. my in coincide not did he and
was mouth its scales; bony with covered extremities lower the and body,
developed, highly were which fins, pectoral the teeth, without wholly
The tail. no had speaking properly which body, the from direct sprouted
the class naturalists which in order the to belonged certainly animal
particulars. essential many in fish that from differed it but sturgeon,

patient and long a After mistaken. not was all, after uncle, My
said: he examination,

for extinct been has which family a to belongs boy, dear my fish, "This
fossil except earth, on found been ever has trace no which of and ages,
strata." Devonian the in remains

live a captured have we "that cried, I say," to mean not do "You
before existed that stock primitive the to belonging fish a of specimen
deluge?" the

his continuing was time this all who Professor, the said have," "We
fossil these that examination careful by see may you "and observations,
hand, one's in hold To species. existing with identity no have fish
a make to enough is order, the of specimen living a therefore,
life." for happy naturalist

belong?" it does family what "to I, cried "But,"

scales, angular having fish of order Ganoides--an of order the "To
the of family the of one enamel--forming bright with covered
genus--" the of Cephalaspides,

conclude. to hesitated uncle my noticed I as remarked, I sir," "Well,

am I though Still, it. of certain am I Pterychtis--yes, genus the "To
our to offers fish this surmise, my of correctness the of confident
fish other any in exist to known never peculiarity, remarkable a notice
in lakes, wells, waters, subterranean of natives the are which those but
pools." hidden suchlike and caverns,

be?" that may what "And

blind." is "It

surprised. much cried, I "Blind!"

without absolutely "but Professor, the continued blind," only "Not
sight." of organs

sure, be to singular, was It myself. for discovery our examined now I
I instance, solitary a be might however, This, fact. a really was it but
the into thrown more once and again baited was hook The suggested.
supplied well tolerably been have must ocean subterranean This water.
as Pterychtis, of number large a took we hours two in for fish, with
family--the extinct supposed another to belonging fish other as well
the whence only, fins two with furnished fish, of genus (a Dipterides
without All, exactly. it class not could uncle my though name),
to us enabled capture unexpected This blind. were however, exception,
way. satisfactory very a in provisions of stock our renew

fish only contained sea subterranean this that convinced now were We
all were alike reptiles and fish specimens--and fossil as us to known
origin. their dated they back farther the perfect more the

which saurians those of some find should we that hope to began We
cartilage. or bone of bits from reconstructing in succeeded has science

over horizon--looked the examined carefully and telescope the up took I
were we Doubtless deserted. entirely and utterly was it sea; whole the
coast. the near too still

strange the towards upward, looked I ocean, the of examination an After
the by reconstructed birds the of one not should Why sky. mysterious and
of strata dull the in aloft wings stupendous his flap Cuvier immortal
from food sufficient quite find course, of would, It air? subterranean
was It above. void the upon time some for gazed I sea. the in fish the
left. lately but had we shores the as deserted as and silent as

my anything, discover nor see neither could I though Nevertheless,
of kind a in was I hypotheses. wild into away me carried imagination
enormous those water the of surface the on saw I thought I dream. waking
and dull those Upon islands. floating as big as turtles antediluvian
the days, early of mammifers the of row spectral a passed shores somber
hills, Brazilian the of hollow cavernous the in found Liptotherium great
Siberia. of regions glacial the of native a Mesicotherium, the

which tapir, gigantic that Lophrodon, pachydermatous the on, Farther
the with prey its for battle do to ready rocks, behind itself concealed
the of nature the of partaking animal singular a Anoplotherium,
camel. the and hippopotamus the horse, the rhinoceros,

trunk, horrid his turning and twisting Mastodon, giant the was There
the while powder, to shore the of rocks the crushed he which with
claws enormous his passion, a in cat a like raised back Megatherium--his
he that time same the at food, for earth the into dug out, stretched
roar. terrible his with place whole the of echoes sonorous the awoke

globe the of face the on seen ever monkey first the still, up Higher
farther Still hills. granite the up playing and gamboling clambered,
rather or gliding hand, winged the with Pterodactyl, the ran away,
bat. huge a like air compressed and dense the through sailing

more birds, immense were sky, granitic leaden the near all, Above
mighty their spread which ostrich, the and cassowary the than powerful
sea. inland the of vault stone huge the against fluttered and wings

whole this saw I that imagination, my of effect the was such thought, I
long ages, far to back myself carried I creatures. antediluvian of tribe
a imperfect too in was earth the fact, in existed--when, man before
it. upon live to him for state

The man. of existence the before ages countless of was dream My
of reptiles the then birds, mighty the then disappeared, first mammifers
mollusks, the crustacea, the fish, the presently period, secondary the
in transition of period the of zoophytes The vertebrata. the finally and
annihilation. into sank turn their

period, historic the before life world's the of panorama whole The
that heart human only the was mine and again, over born be to seemed
no were there seasons; more no were There world! unpeopled this in beat
and unceasingly, increased world the of heat natural the climates; more
Sun. radiant great the of that neutralized

a like passed I manner. extraordinary an in exaggerated was Vegetation
of trees giant the as lofty as brushwood of midst the in shadow
a with reeking soil, humid and moist the underfoot trod and California,
vegetation. varied and rank

which to trees, giant of trunks column-like huge the against leaned I
hundreds upon hundreds passed, ages Whole ferns. as were Canada of those
day. single a into concentrated were years of

wondrous and great the came panorama, a like me before unrolled Next,
granitic the disappeared; Plants transformations. terrestrial of series
suddenly was state liquid the solidity; of trace all lost rocks
by caused was This existed. before had which that for substituted
waters The earth. the of matter organic the on acting heat intense
were they boiled; they globe; the of surface whole the over flowed
the wrapped cloud steam of kind a vapor; into turned or volatilized,
huge one but nothing last at becoming itself globe the earth, whole
as red, and heat white between color, in indescribable gas, of sphere
sun. the as brilliant as and big

thousand hundred fourteen mass, prodigious this of centre very the In
brought and space, in round whirled was I globe, our as large as times
or subtilized, was body My planets. the with conjunction close into
with vapor, atomic of state a in commingled and volatile, became rather
into comet mighty a like forward rushed which clouds, prodigious the
space! infinite

feverish My me? take finally it would Where dream! extraordinary an What
the like more details--details marvelous the down write to began hand
this during had I real. and sober anything than lunatic a of imaginings
guide, the Professor, everything--the forgotten hallucination of period
of state a in was mind My floating. were we which on raft the and
semioblivion.

suddenly. uncle my said Harry?" matter, the is "What

fixed were somnambulist, a of those like opened wide were which eyes, My
anything out make clearly I could nor him, see not did I but him, upon
me. around

sea." the into fall will "you uncle, my cried again boy," my care, "Take

the by side other the on seized myself felt I words, these uttered he As
mind of presence the for been not it Had guide. devoted our of hand firm
drowned. been and waves the into fallen have infallibly must I Hans, of

side. other the on me shaking uncle, my cried mad?" gone you "Have

myself. to coming last, at said I matter?" the is "What--what

tone. anxious an in Professor the continued Henry?" ill, you "Are

passed has however, It, dream. extraordinary an had have I but "No--no;
strangely with me around looking added, I well," seems now All away.
eyes. puzzled

are We sea. splendid a breeze, beautiful "a uncle; my said right," "All
we calculations my in out not am I if and rate, rapid a at along going
limits narrow the exchange to sorry be not shall I land. see soon shall
ocean." subterranean the of strand mysterious the for raft our of

the scanned carefully and rose I words, these uttered uncle my As
lowering the with confounded still was water of line the But horizon.
edge the touch to appeared distance the in and aloft, hung that clouds
water. the of




30 CHAPTER

COMBAT SAURIAN TERRIFIC


The monotony. uniform its retains still sea The 15th. August Saturday,
of indication No above. from glare eternal same the hue, leaden same
and more us, before retreat to appears horizon The sight. in being land
advance. we as more

extraordinary my of effects the from heavy and dull still head, My
mind. my from banish yet as cannot I which dream,

morose his of one in however, is, dreamed, not has who Professor, The
at horizon, the scanning in time his Spends humors. unaccountable and
his to moment every raised is telescope His compass. the of point every
he whereabouts, our to clue any give to nothing finds he when and eyes,
anxiously. walks and attitude Napoleonic a assumes

resume to tendency strong a had Professor, the uncle, my that remarked I
this of note a make but not could I and character, impatient old his
had it that clearly saw I journal. my in circumstance disagreeable
from extract to suffering, and danger my of influence the all required
recovered, quite was I that Now feeling. humane of scintillation one him
hand. upper the obtained and conquered had nature original his

than more now about, annoyed and angry be to he had what all, after And,
most the under accomplished being journey the not Was time? other any at
most the with progressing raft the not Was circumstances? favorable
rapidity? marvelous

I hems, preliminary two or one After matter? the be could then, What,
inquire. to determined

he time hundredth the about for when I, said Uncle," uneasy, seem "You
himself. to muttering down, and up walked and telescope his down put

means." no "by tone, harsh dry a in replied he uneasy," not am I "No,

force the softening replied, I impatient," said have should I "Perhaps
remark. my of

think." I so, me make to "Enough

I raft," a by attained seldom rate a at advancing are we yet "And
remarked.

go we rate the at vexed not am "I uncle. my cried that?" matters "What
expected." I than vaster much so sea the find to annoyed am I but at,

had departure, our before Professor, the that recollected then I
thirty about most at as ocean subterranean this of length the estimated
without distance that thrice over least at traveled had we Now leagues.
my understand to began I shore. distant the of trace any discovering
anger. uncle's

not are "We Professor. the exclaimed suddenly down," going not are "We
time. of loss utter is this All discoveries. great our with progressing
pleasure. of party a undertake to home from come not did I all, After
me." wearies and annoys pond a over raft a on voyage This

great this and pleasure, of party a journey adventurous this called He
pond! a sea inland

great the by indicated route the followed have we "if I, argued "But,"
wrong." far going be cannot we Saknussemm,

it. has Shakespeare, immortal the great, the as question,' the is "'That
Did sage? wondrous that by indicated route the following we Are
did did, he If water? of sheet great this with in fall ever Saknussemm
has guide a for adopted we rivulet the that fear to begin I it? cross he
wrong." us led

the worth is It far. thus come having regret never can we case, any "In
is spectacle--it magnificent this enjoyed have to journey whole
seen." have to something

came I spectacles. magnificent about nor seeing, about nothing care "I
I object that and object, an with earth the of interior the into down
other any or scenery, admiring about me to talk Don't attain. to mean
trash." sentimental

Professor the allow and tongue, my hold to well it thought I this After
remark. further without came, blood the until lips his bite to

for asked Hans, guide, matter-of-fact our evening, the in o'clock six At
them put rix-dollars, three his receiving and salary, week's his
satisfied. and contented perfectly was He pocket. his in carefully


before. as weather same The record. to new Nothing 16th. August Sunday,
an of signs with up, freshen to tendency slight a has wind The
to regard in was observation first my awoke, I When gale. approaching
the that day, after day fearing, on keep I light. the of intensity the
then and obscured, first become should phenomenon electric extraordinary
the of however, Nothing, darkness. total in us leaving out, wholly go
clearly is sails, and mast its raft, the of shadow The occurs. kind
water. the of surface the on distinguished

be must It extent. its in infinite all, after is, sea wondrous This
great the as even perhaps Mediterranean--or the as wide as quite
so? be not it should all, after Why, Ocean. Atlantic

He soundings. deep-sea tried occasion, one than more on has uncle My
a of extremity the to crowbars heaviest our of one of cross the tied
fathoms. hundred two of extent the to out run to allowed he which cord,
lead. of kind novel our in hoisting in difficulty greatest the had We

attention my called Hans board, on dragged finally was crowbar the When
if as looked iron of piece The surface. its upon marks singular some to
substances. hard very two between crushed been had it

glance. inquiring an with guide worthy our at looked I

he. said "Tander,"

my towards round turned I understand. to loss a at was I course Of
him disturb to wish little had I reflections. gloomy in absorbed uncle,
worthy our towards more once turned accordingly I reverie. his from
Icelander.

as twice, or once mouth his opened significantly and quietly very Hans
meaning. his understand me made way this in and biting, of act the in if

with iron of bar the examined I as stupefaction, with I, cried "Teeth!"
attention. more

bar the on indentations The matter. the about doubt no be can There Yes.
molars such of owner the must jaws What teeth! of marks the are iron of
species, unknown of monster a upon come then, we Have of! possessed be
more monster waters--a of waste vast the within exists still which
am I whale? the than bulky and terrible more shark, a than voracious
crushed! half actually iron, of bar the from eyes my withdraw to unable

reality? terrible and dread true--a come to about dream my then, Is,

my and speculations, these upon bent were thoughts my day All
of power and calmness of degree a regained scarcely imagination
hours. many of sleep a after until reflection

pious and rest of day a as observed we Sundays, other on as day, This
meditation.


the memory from realize to trying been have I 17th. August Monday,
secondary the of animals antediluvian those of instincts particular
the to and crustacea, the to mollusca, the to succeeding which period,
generation The mammifers. of race the of appearance the preceded fish,
monsters hideous These earth. the upon supreme reigned then reptiles of
the formed which period, secondary the of seas the in everything ruled
them endowed had Nature composed. are mountains Jura the which of strata
what theirs; was structure gigantic a What organization. perfect with
possessed! they strength prodigious and vast

lizards, as reptiles such all include which saurians, existing The
of formidable most and largest the even alligators, and crocodiles,
the sires, mighty their of imitations feeble but are class, their
there old, of days the in giants were there If ago. long ages of animals
animals. gigantic also were

these of recollection and idea the mind my from evolved I as shuddered I
took They flesh. the in them seen had man of eye No monsters. awful
before ages of thousands earth the of face the upon abroad walks their
the in discovered bones, fossil their and existence, into came man
to thus and anatomically, them reconstruct to us allowed have limestone,
formation. colossal their of idea faint some get

of skeleton the Hamburg of Museum great the in seeing once recollect I
feet thirty than less no measured It saurians. wonderful these of one
the of earth the of inhabitant an then, I, Am tail. the to nose the from
representative a with face to face myself find to destined day, present
can I possible; it believe scarcely can I family? antediluvian this of
the upon teeth powerful of marks these yet And true. it believe hardly
the is bite the that shape their from doubt a be there Can iron! of bar
crocodile? a of bite

Every sea. subterranean the upon terror with and wildly stare eyes My
cavernous vast its from rise to monsters these of one expect I moment
depths.

if notions, my shares measure some in Professor worthy the that fancy I
he crowbar, the of examination attentive an after for, fears, my not
ocean. mysterious and mighty the over rapidly eyes his cast

depth the if "as thought, I land," the leave to him possess could "What
disturbed has he doubt No us. to importance any of was water this of
dearly pay may we perhaps and home, watery his in monster terrible some
temerity." our for

saw and weapons, our examined I worst, the for prepared be to Anxious
and me at on looked uncle My use. for state fit a in were they that
fear. to have we what noticed has too, He, approvingly. head his nodded

that indicates surface the on waters the of uplifting the Already
and nearer comes It approaches. danger The below. motion in is something
watch. the on be to us behooves It nearer.


for desire the when hour the last, at came Evening 18th. August Tuesday,
properly not, is there Night heavy. be to eyelids our caused sleep
arctic the in summer in is there than more any place, this in speaking,
a snatches he When rudder. the at immovable is however, Hans, regions.
to vigilance his of advantage take I say. cannot really I rest of moment
repose. little some take

shock. awful an by sleep heavy a from awakened was I after hours two But
right lifted was It rock. sunken a upon struck have to appeared raft The
started then and power, mysterious and wondrous some by water the of out
distant. fathoms twenty off

or shipwrecked, we "Are up. starting uncle my cried it?" is what "Eh,
what?"

off, yards hundred two about where, to pointed and hand his raised Hans
down. and up moving was mass black large a

realized. were fears worst My awe. with looked I

hands. my clasping cried, I monster!" colossal a is "It

sea huge a is yonder there "and Professor, agitated the cried "Yes,"
shape." and size terrible of lizard

jaws, hideous his at Look crocodile. prodigious a behold on farther "And
gone." has he Ha! teeth. monstrous of row that and

fins. enormous her see can "I Professor, the shouted whale!" a whale! "A
water!" and air blows she how see, See,

sea, the of level the above height vast a to rose columns liquid Two
that of echoes the up waking crash, terrific a with fell they which into
at terror-stricken stupefied, still--surprised, stood We place. awful
the in hideous more monsters, marine fearful of group this of sight the
very the dimensions; supernatural of were They dream. my in than reality
and raft our crushed have ease with could party whole the of smallest
bite. single a with ourselves

hard it puts hand, his of out flown had which rudder the seizing Hans,
sooner no but vicinity; dangerous such from escape to order in aweather
To Charybdis. to Scylla from flying is he finds he than so, do he does
long, as quite serpent a and wide, feet forty about turtle a is leeward
waters. the out from peering head hideous and enormous an with

fearful The fly. to us for impossible is it will, we way which Look
with raft the about twisted and turned they us; upon advanced reptiles
of series a vessel devoted our around formed They rapidity. awful
effect what But desperation. in rifle my up took I circles. concentric
of bodies the which with scales armor the upon produce ball rifle a can
covered? are monsters horrid these

nearer us, upon advance They horror. utter from dumb and still remain We
side one On terrible. and fearful certain, appears fate Our nearer. and
of rest The serpent. sea great the other the on crocodile, mighty the
briny the beneath plunged have prodigies marine of crowd fearful the
disappeared! and waves

the Hans, shot. a of effect the try and risk any at fire to about am I
and hideous two The me. check to sign a by interfered however, guide,
made then and raft, the of fathoms fifty within passed monsters ravenous
seeing from them preventing rage and fury another--their one at rush a
us.

two the of action every out made distinctly We commenced. combat The
monsters. hideous

take to about appeared animals other the imagination excited my to But
the whale, the monster, struggle--the deadly and fierce the in part
pointed I moment. every them saw distinctly I turtle. the and lizard,
head. his shook only he But Icelander. the to out them

said. he "Tva,"

tone a in cried I mistaken," is he Surely say. he does only "What--two
wonder. of

philosophically, and coolly uncle my replied right," quite is "He
he if as speaking and telescope his with duel terrible the examining
room. lecture a in were

be?" that can "How

a of snout the has monsters hideous these of first The so. is it "Yes,
this is it and crocodile; a of teeth the lizard, a of head the porpoise,
antediluvian all of fearful most the is It us. deceived has that
lizard." fish great or Ichthyosaurus world--renowned the reptiles,

other?" the "And

vaulted hard the under concealed serpent, monstrous a is other "The
the rival, fearful its of enemy terrible the turtle, the of shell
crocodile." sea or Plesiosaurus,

of surface the disturbed only, monsters two The right. quite was Hans
sea! the

primitive great the of reptiles two upon gazed eyes mortal have last At
or big, as each Ichthyosaurus, the of eyes red flaming the see I ocean!
this gifted had wisdom infinite its in Nature head. man's a than bigger
power, extreme of apparatus optical an with animal marine wondrous
which water of layers heavy the of pressure the resisting of capable
has It fed. usually he where ocean the of depths the in him over rolled
it for race, saurian the of whale the called been truly authors some by
one This seas. the of king our as motions its in quick and big as is
some form can I and length, in feet hundred a than less not measures
the of out tail prodigious his lift him see I when girth his of idea
the to according and strength, and size awful of is jaw His waters.
and hundred a than less contain not does it naturalists, best-informed
teeth. eighty-two

cylindrical a with serpent a Plesiosaurus, mighty the was other The
a in oars of bank a like fins with tail, stumpy short a with trunk,
galley. Roman

flexible as neck, its and shell, or carapace a by covered body whole Its
tower a waves, the above feet thirty than more rose swan, a of that as
flesh! animated of

a Such fury. inconceivable with another one attacked animals These
it, see did who us to and eyes, mortal by before seen never was combat
than dream a of creation phantasmagoric the like more appeared it
spray in dashed which water, of mountains raised They else. anything
we times Twenty waves. the by fro and to tossed already raft, the over
waves. the into headlong hurled and upset being of point the on seemed
mighty that of roof granite gloomy the shake to appeared hisses Hideous
combatants awful The hearts. our to terror carried which cavern--hisses
the from one out make not could I embrace. tight a in other each held
us, unto woe and forever; last not could combat the Still other.
victor. the became whichsoever

decisive any without away, passed hours three hours, two hour, One
but tenacity, deadly same the with continued struggle The result.
drew now approached, now opponents deadly The result. apparent without
us leave to about were they fancied we twice or Once raft. the from away
nearer. and nearer came they that, of instead but altogether,

poor notice, moment's a at them at fire to ready raft the on crouched We
were we Still was. them terrifying or hurting of prospect the as
struggle. a without perish to not determined

the beneath disappeared Plesiosaurus the and Ichthyosaurus the Suddenly
were We sea. the of midst the in maelstrom a them behind leaving waves,
water! the of indraft the by down drawn nearly

this Was seen. again was anything before elapsed minutes Several
of act last the Was ocean? the of depths the in end to combat wonderful
spectators? without place take to drama terrible this

say. to us for impossible was It

of out rises mass enormous an us, from distance great no at Suddenly,
is monster terrible The Plesiosaurus. great the of head waters--the the
All body. enormous his of now nothing see can I death. unto wounded now
twisted he which neck, serpent-like his was distinguished be could that
it with waters the struck he Now death. of agonies the all in curled and
worm a like wriggled again then and whip, gigantic a been had it if as
all in distance great a to up spurted was water The two. in cut
blinded nearly and raft our over swept it of portion great A directions.
his nearer; and nearer approached beast the of end the soon But us.
last at and ceased; almost contortions his visibly; slackened movements
of surface the on mass dead inert, an lay snake mighty the of body the
waters. placid and calm now the

under cavern mighty his to down gone he has Ichthyosaurus, the for As
us? destroy to reappear he will or rest, to sea the

time. breathing had we And unanswered. remained question This




31 CHAPTER

MONSTER SEA THE


present the for which wind, the Fortunately 19th. August Wednesday,
the of scene the from escape to us allowed has violence, some with blows
usual his with Hans struggle. extraordinary and unparalleled
time short a for who uncle, My helm. the at remained calm imperturbable
of incidents novel the by reveries absorbing his from withdrawn been had
eyes His study. brown a into apparently again back fell fight, sea this
ocean. widespread the on impatiently fixed were

I become, has it as Dull uniform. and monotonous became now voyage Our
and perils the of repetition any by broken it have to desire no have
yesterday. of adventures


very blows and E., N. N. now is wind The 20th. August Thursday,
is temperature The gusts. fitful to changed has It irregularly.
about of rate average the at progressing now are We high. exceedingly
hour. per half a and miles ten

I ears. our upon fell thunder of as sound distant a o'clock twelve About
its to as suggestion a venturing even without fact the of note a make
rocks. mighty over falling sea a of as roar continued one was It cause.

is "there dogmatically, Professor the said distance," the in off "Far
the by fury to lashed sea the which against island some or rock some
violently." breaking is wind,

could but mast, the of top the to clambered word, a saying without Hans,
the as far as direction every in level was ocean The nothing. out make
reach. could eye

be might what indicate to sign any without away passed hours Three
cataract. mighty a of that assume to began sound The us. before

merely He uncle. my to strongly point this on opinion my expressed I
I that conviction a by impressed strongly am however, I, head. his shook
shall which waterfall mighty some towards advancing we Are wrong. not am
abyss the into descending of mode this Probably abyss? the into us cast
like something be would it because Professor, the to agreeable be may
very a entertain I make. to eager so is he descent vertical the
opinion. different

there distant leagues many not that certain is it truth, the be Whatever
roar the advance we as for phenomenon, extraordinary very some be must
the in or water, the in it Is stupendous. and mighty something becomes
air?

to seek I and vapors, suspended the at aloft glances hasty cast I
The tranquil. is above vault the But depths. mighty their penetrate
still utterly appear summit, very the to elevated now are which clouds,
electric of irradiation the in lost completely and motionless, and
this of cause the for seek to therefore, necessary, is It light.
elsewhere. phenomenon

haze. all from free and pure, calm, perfectly now horizon, the examine I
proceeds noise awful this if But unchanged. remains still aspect Its
interior vast this English, plain in speak to so cataract--if, a from
are roars tremendous these basin--if lower a into precipitated is ocean
in increase would current the waters, falling of noise the by produced
the of idea some me give would swiftness increasing its and activity,
It current. the consult I menaced. are we which with peril the of extent
into cast bottle empty An thing. such no is there exist: not does simply
motion. without leeward to lies water the

the reaches and mast, the up clambers rises, Hans o'clock four About
around. cast are looks his position elevated this From itself. truck
remain eyes his last, At ocean. the of circumference vast a in take They
dilate. slightly eyes his but astonishment, no expresses face His fixed.

uncle. my cried last," at something seen has "He

replied. I so," think "I

the to hand right his with pointed and us, beside stood down, came Hans
south.

said. he nere," "Der

uncle. my replied "There,"

for attention great with it at looked he telescope, his seizing And
or think to what not knew I age. an appeared me to which minute, a about
expect.

is." it "there surprise, considerable of tone a in cried he yes," "Yes,

asked. I "What?"

waves." the of out rising water of spurt tremendous "A

alarmed. already cried, I monster," marine other "Some

"Perhaps."

to have we what know we for westward, the to more steer us let "Then
reply. eager my was animals," antediluvian from expect

uncle. my said ahead," "Go

usual his with steering tiller the at was Hans Hans. towards turned I
calm. imperturbable

this from us separated which distance the from if Nevertheless,
dozen a than less not at estimated be must which distance a creature,
blow-hole the from spurting water of column the see could one leagues,
To preternatural. something be must dimensions his animal, great the of
But prudence. ordinary by suggested be to course the therefore, is, fly
my is Such prudent. be to world the of part that into come not have we
determination. uncle's

loftier the come, we nearer The advance. to continued accordingly, We,
huge such with himself fill can monster What water. spouting the is
lofty such in out them spout unceasingly then and water, of volumes
jets?

there where ground, above as reckoning evening, the in o'clock eight At
mighty the from leagues two than more not are we night, and day is
of top the on lies body, mountainous enormous, black, long, Its beast.
gone have to said been have sailors then But island. an like water the
or illusion, it Is land. for them mistaking whales, sleeping on ashore
What, fathoms. thousand a than less be cannot length Its fear? it is
thought? ever Cuvier no which of monster cetaceous this is then,

sea The sleep. of appearance the presents and motionless quite is It
on break which waves the rather is it upwards; him lift to unable seems
five of height a to rising waterspout, The frame. gigantic and huge his
roar. sullen dull, a with spray in breaks feet, hundred

mass. mighty this towards lunatics, senseless like advance, We

would I that declared I afraid. abjectly was I that confess honestly I
I sail. the of sheet the cut to terror my in threatened I farther. no go
him calling acrimony, considerable with Professor the attacked
answer. no made He what. not know I mad, foolhardy,

the to finger his pointed more once Hans imperturbable the Suddenly
object: menacing

"<i>Holme</i>!"

uncle. my cried island!" "An

at attempt poor this at shoulders my shrugging replied, I island?" "An
deception.

joyous and loud a into bursting uncle, my cried is," it course "Of
laugh.

waterspout?" the "But

Hans. said "Geyser,"

geyser "a laughing, still uncle, my replied geyser," course--a of "Yes,
of wonders great the are this like Jets Iceland. in common those like
country." the

What deceived. grossly so been had I that allow not would I first At
marine a for island an taken have to than ridiculous more be could
was I and evidence, to yield must one may, one as kick But monster?
natural a but all, after nothing, was It error. my of convinced finally
phenomenon.

sheaf liquid the of dimensions the nearer, and nearer approached we As
a at had, island The stupendous. and grand truly became waters of
rose head whose whale, enormous an of appearance the presented distance,
pronounce Icelanders the word a geyser, The waters. the above high
summit. its from majestically rose fury, signifies which and geysir,
jet, enormous the and then, and now every heard are detonations Dull
bounds and vapor, of plume its shakes fury, sudden with were it as taken
vapor of spurts Neither alone. is It clouds. the of layer first the into
region that of power volcanic whole the and it, surround springs hot nor
mix light electric of rays The column. sublime one in concentrated is
prismatic the assuming falls it as drop every sheaf, dazzling this with
rainbow. the of colors

silence. of minutes some after Professor, the said shore," on go us "Let

avoid to order in precaution, great take to however, necessary, is It
in founder to raft the cause would which waters, falling of weight the
other the to us brings and admirably, steers however, Hans, instant. an
island. the of extremity

the while followed, uncle My rock. the on leap to first the was I
sources childish any above man a like still, remained hunter eider-duck
siliceous with mixed granite on walking now were We astonishment. of
in boilers of sides the like feet our under shivered soil the sandstone;
soon We burning. is It confined. forcibly is steam over-heated which
I geyser. the rose which from basin central little the of sight in came
centre, the from bubbling ran which water the into thermometer a plunged
degrees! sixty-three and hundred a of heat a marked it and

intense. was heat the where place some from came therefore, water, This
Professor of theories the with contradiction in singularly was This
subject. the on opinion my him telling help not could I Hardwigg.

doctrine?" my against prove this does what "and sharply, he said "Well,"

a against head my running was I that seeing dryly, I replied "Nothing,"
conclusion. foregone

most been have we now until that confess to compelled am I Nevertheless,
most in accomplished being is voyage this that and fortunate, remarkably
fact, in evident, appears it but temperature; of conditions favorable
regions those of one at arrive later or sooner shall we that certain,
far go will and limits, utmost its reach will heat central the where
thermometers. of gradations possible the all beyond

of centre the in be to believed ancients, the of Hades the of Visions
imagination. my through floated earth, the

Professor's the is That see. shall we what see however, shall, We
name the by island volcanic the christened Having now. phrase favorite
the gave and away turned expedition the of leader the nephew, his of
embarkation. for signal

magnificent the upon gazing minutes, some for however, still, stood I
the of tendency upward the that perceive to able was soon I geyser.
suddenly, then, and intensity, in diminished it now irregular; was water
the of variation the to attributed I which vigor, new regained it
reservoir. its in vapors accumulated the of pressure

and projecting, the round carefully going departure, our took we last At
advantage taken had Hans side. southern the of rocks dangerous, rather
raft. the repair to halt brief this of

some made I however, island, the from departure final our took we Before
them put I and over, gone had we distance the calculate to observations
two traveled had we Gretchen, Port left we Since journal. my in down
this miles--on hundred eight than leagues--more seventy and hundred
leagues twenty and hundred six therefore, were, we sea; inland great
England. under exactly and Iceland, from




32 CHAPTER

ELEMENTS THE OF BATTLE THE


wholly had geyser magnificent the morning This 21st. August Friday,
the leaving fast were we and up, freshened had wind The disappeared.
mighty the of sound roaring the Even Island. Henry's of neighborhood
ear. the to lost was column

expression, an such use may we circumstances, the under if, weather, The
gradually being is atmosphere The suddenly. very change to about is
the by formed electricity the them with carry which vapors, with loaded
but slowly are clouds the waters; saline the of evaporation constant
texture; dark-olive a assuming are and sea, the towards falling sensibly
which curtain opaque the through pierce scarcely can rays electric the
stage the on theater, wondrous this before scene drop a like fallen has
it time This enacted. be to soon is drama terrible and another which of
elements. the of battle fearful the is it animals; of fight no is

on are creatures all as influenced, peculiarly very am I that feel I
place. take to about is deluge a when land

south, the upon piled cloud, of kind oval perfectly a cumuli, The
aspect pitiless the with appearance, sinister and awful most a presented
is sea the heavy; extremely is air The storm. a before seen often
calm. comparatively

enormous of appearance the assumed have clouds the distance, the In
in other the above one piled pods, rather or cotton, of balls
and break, out, swell to appear they degrees, By confusion. picturesque
great so is heaviness their grandeur; in lose they what number in gain
the under but horizon; the from themselves lift to unable are they that
up, broken gradually are they air, of currents upper the of influence
layer single one of appearance the present then and darker, much become
up lit still cloud, lighter a then and now character; formidable a of
opaque the in lost is and carpet, grey this upon rebounds above, from
mass.

with saturated is atmosphere entire the that doubt no be can There
stand literally hairs my impregnated; wholly myself am I fluid; electric
my of one If battery. galvanic a of influence the under if as end on
a rather receive would he think I me, touch to ventured companions
shock. unpleasant and violent

more became storm the of symptoms the morning, the in o'clock ten About
take to if as down soften to appeared wind the decisive; and thorough
like looked us above pall funereal vast the attack; renewed a for breath
collecting was storm the which in AEolus, of cave the bag--like huge a
attack. the for forces its

and sky, the of signs menacing the in believe to not could I all tried I
involuntarily: were it as saying, avoid not could I yet

weather." bad have to going are we believe "I

detestable a in horrible, a in was He answer. no me made Professor The
On eyes. his before interminably stretching ocean the see humor--to
shoulders. his shrugged simply he words my hearing

the to pointing again, said I storm," tremendous a have shall "We
if as sea, the upon lower and lower falling are clouds "These horizon.
it." crush to

dead a assumed Nature ceased. wholly wind The prevailed. silence great A
of sort a noticed I where mast, the Upon breathe. to ceased and calm,
is raft The folds. heavy loose in hangs sail the fatuus, ignis slight
without undulation, sea--without heavy dark a of midst the in motionless
what progress, no making are we as But glass. as still as is It motion.
our of cause the be may which sail, the up keeping of use the is
warning. without us strike suddenly should tempest the if perdition

prudence." common of act an only is "it said, I sail," the lower us "Let

no. times, hundred "a tone, exasperated an in uncle, my cried "No--no,"
away us sweep storm the let worst, its do and us strike wind the Let
rocky some coast--of some of glimmer the see me let will--only it where
up keep No! pieces. thousand a into raft our dash they if even cliffs,
happens." what matter sail--no the

a underwent horizon southern the when uttered scarcely were words These
resolved were vapors accumulated long The change. violent and sudden
a became produced void the up fill to required air the and water, into
tempest. raging and wild

raged It cavern. mighty the of corners distant most the from came It
with shrieked it yelled; it roared; It compass. the of point every from
indeed became and increased darkness The loose. let demons of as glee
visible. darkness

My waves. the over bounded and storm, the with fell and rose raft The
dragged difficulty great with I deck. the upon headlong cast was uncle
of end the to main and might with on holding was He him. towards myself
spectacle the at delight and pleasure with gaze to appeared and cable, a
elements. unchained the of

by thither and hither driven hair long His muscle. a moved never Hans
a him gave face, motionless his over wildly scattered and tempest the
by illuminated was hair single every appearance--for extraordinary most
sprigs. sparkling little

antediluvian an of appearance extraordinary the presents countenance His
Megatherium. the of contemporary true a man,

and out spreads sail The storm. the against good holds mast the Still
pace a at on rushes raft The burst. to about bubble soap a like fills
water of body the than swiftly less still but estimate, to impossible
lines the by seen be may which of rapidity the it, beneath displaced
wake. the in left and right fly which

then and hands, my of trumpet a making cried, I sail!" the sail, "The
it. lower to endeavoring

ever. than exasperated more uncle, my said alone!" it "Let

head. his shaking gently Hans, said "<i>Nej</i>,"

of horizon this before cataract roaring a formed rain the Nevertheless,
madmen. like rushing were we which to and search, in were we which

of veil mighty the us, reached waters of wilderness this before But
the and wildly; foam to began sea the twain; in torn was cloud
in action chemical extraordinary and vast some by produced electricity,
of claps fearful the To play. into brought is cloud, of layer upper the
never had I as such lightning, of flashes dazzling added are thunder
the while side; every from hurled another, one crossed flashes The seen.
becomes vapor of mass The echo. an like pealing came thunder
our and boots our of metal the strike which hailstones the incandescent;
be to appear rise they as waves the luminous; actually are weapons
their fire, intense an seethes which beneath monsters, fire-eating
flame. of combs by surmounted crests

are ears my light, of intensity the by blinded dazzled, are eyes My
onto hold to compelled am I elements. the of roar awful the by deafened
to storm, the of violence the beneath reed a like bends which mast, the
resemblance. any bore mariners by seen before ever none which

* * * * *

have I vague. and loose incomplete, very become notes traveling my Here
down jotted observations, fugitive two or one out make to able been only
obscurity, their even brevity, their even But way. mechanical mere a in
me. overcame which emotions the show

* * * * *

we are region what In to? got we have Where 23rd. August Sunday,
rapidity. inconceivable with forward carried still are We wandering?

storm The described. be to not something fearful, been has night The
which uproar an of midst the in exist We cessation. of signs no shows
ears Our incessant. are artillery of as detonations The name. no has
other each hear or word, a exchange to unable are We bleed. literally
speak.

the see can I instant. single a for flash to ceases never lightning The
of mightiest this of roof arched the strike dart rapid a after zigzags
lightnings Other us! upon fall and way give to were it If vaults. mighty
of form the take and direction, every in streaks forked their plunge
city. beleaguered a over bombshells like explode which fire, of globes
already has it increase; apparently not do roar and crash general The
powder the all If appreciate. can ear human what beyond far gone
impossible be would it together, explode to were world the in magazines
noise. worse hear to us for

the clouds; storm the from light of emission constant a is There
gaseous the evidently released; incessantly is matter electric
water of columns innumerable order; of out are air the of principles
in ocean the of surface the upon back fall and waterspouts, like up rush
foam.

raft, the upon length full at lies still uncle My going? we are Whither
time. of note any taking speaking--without without

it surprise my to thermometer, the at look I increases. heat The
manuscript.</i> my in out rubbed here is figure exact indicates--<i>The


not should Why end. never will storm terrible This 24th. August Monday,
again modified, once murky, and dense so atmosphere, the of state this
definitive? remain

as just remains Hans fatigue. by harassed and broken utterly are We
already now have We invariably. southeast the to runs raft The usual.
island. discovered newly the from leagues hundred two run

obliged are We ever. than worse became storm the o'clock twelve About
or raft, the of deck the on tightly cargo of bit every fasten to now
man each too, fast, ourselves make We away. swept be would everything
are we times several that so us, over drive waves The other. the lashing
water. under actually

for speech from abstaining of necessity painful the under been had We
lips, our moved we mouths, our opened We nights. three and days three
ears other's each to mouths our placed we when Even came. sound no but
same. the was it

away. voice the carried wind The

several after mine to close head his get to contrived once uncle My
to senses exhausted nearly my to appeared He endeavors. vain almost
anything than intuition from more notion, a had I word. some articulate
lost." are "We me, to said he that else,

desperate most the under which from notebook, my out took I
I as legibly as words few a wrote and parted, never I circumstances
could:

sail." in "Take

acquiesced. and head his nodded he sigh deep a With

he which from position the in back fall to time scarcely had head His
the on appeared fire of ball or disk a than it raised momentarily had
sail and mast The craft. doomed our devoted, raft--our the of edge very
prodigious a to away swept them see I and bodily, away carried are
kite. a like height

half fire, of ball The terror. with shivered actually frozen, were We
moved bombshell, ten-inch a of size the about azure-colored, half white,
ran It storm. the of leeward to rapidity prodigious with turning along,
bulwarks the of one up clambered it everywhere, and there, here, about
finally then and provisions, of sack the upon leaped it raft, the of
barrel. powder our on landed and football a like fell lightly, descended

inevitable. now was course of explosion An situation. Horrible

so. not was it mercy, heaven's By

at looked who Hans, approached it side, one on moved disk dazzling The
himself cast who uncle, my approached it then fixity; singular with it
and pale stood I as me, towards came it it; avoid to knees his on
feet, my round pirouetted it heat; and light dazzling the in shuddering
withdraw. to endeavored I which

the to penetrated it air; whole the filled gas nitrous of odor An
choke. to ready felt I lungs. the to throat,

the to riveted they Are feet? my withdraw cannot I that it is Why
raft? the of flooring

No.

into board on iron the all turned has globe electric the of fall The
together clanging are arms the tools, the instruments, loadstones--the
adhere boots heavy my of nails the noise; horrible and awful with
withdraw cannot I wood. the in incrustated iron of plate the to closely
foot. my

adamant. of mountain the of again story old the is It

just away it tear I effort, superhuman almost and violent a by last, At
to about is motions gyratory its executing still is which ball the as
it--if-- with me drag and it round run

are bursts--we fire of globe The light! stupendous intense what Oh,
with around space the flood which fire, living of cascades in enveloped
matter. luminous

just had I deep! the upon fell more once darkness and out went all Then
flooring the on senseless apparently cast more once uncle my see to time
of influence the under fire" "spitting helm, the at Hans raft, the of
him. through gone have to seemed which electricity the

Whither? answers, echo and ask? I going, we are Whither

.............

The fit. fainting long a of out come just have I 25th. August Tuesday,
in increased has lightning the continues; still storm hideous and awful
let serpents of brood a like wrath fiery its out pours and vividness,
atmosphere. the in loose

incredible with along carried being and Yes, sea? the upon still we Are
velocity.

probably France, under Channel, the under England, under passed have We
Europe. of extent whole the under

* * * * *

the that certain is it time This distance. the in clamor awful Another
Then-- distance. great no at rocks the upon breaking is sea

..............

..............




33 CHAPTER

REVERSED ROUTE OUR


raft, the board on voyage our of Journal" "My call I what ends Here
my with proceed I wreck. the from saved happily was journal which
notes. daily my commenced I before did I as narrative

cast was raft the when place, took shock terrible the when happened What
felt I say. to now me for impossible be would it shore, rocky the upon
escaped I if and waves, boiling the into violently precipitated myself
determination the to owing wholly was it death, cruel and certain a from
the from me saved arm, the by me clutching who, Hans, faithful the of
abyss. yawning

out far arms, powerful his in me carried then Icelander courageous The
of expanse burning a upon down me laid and waves, the of reach the of
my of company the in afterwards time some myself found I where sand,
Professor. the uncle,

the which against rocks, fatal the towards returned quietly he Then
the from waifs stray any save to order in beating, were waves furious
a utter not could I thoughtful. and practical always was man This wreck.
and broken was body whole my emotion; with overcome quite was I word;
myself. like anything was I before hours took it fatigue; with bruised

the to us drenching rain, of deluge fearful a fell there Meanwhile,
the of end approaching the proclaimed however, violence, very Its skin.
the from protection slight a us afforded rocks overhanging Some storm.
torrents.

was I however, which, food, some prepared Hans shelter, this Under
of nights and days weary three the by exhausted and, touch; to unable
fearful, were dreams My sleep. painful and deep a into fell we watching,
slumbered. I and supremacy, her asserted nature exhausted last at but

was weather The magical. was change the awoke I when day Next
their regained had consent, mutual by if as sea, and Air magnificent.
disappeared. had faintest, the even storm, the of trace Every serenity.
from heard had I tones joyous first the by awakening my on saluted was I
something was indeed, gaiety, His day. a many for Professor the
terrible.

slept you "have together, hands his rubbing cried, he lad," my "Well,
soundly?"

the on house old the in were we that supposed been have not it Might
and breakfast; my to quietly down come just had I that Konigstrasse;
My day? very that place take to was Gretchen with marriage my that
exasperating. was coolness uncle's

easterly an in us driven had tempest the how considering Alas,
of city the under Germany, of whole the under passed had we direction,
contained which street very the under happy, so been had I where Hamburg
world. the in for cared and loved I all

distance a by her from separated only was I that fact positive a was It
impenetrable hard, of were leagues forty these But leagues. forty of
granite!

mind, my through passed reflections miserable and dreary these All
question. uncle's my answer to attempted I before

have you whether say you "Cannot cried. he matter?" the is what "Why,
not?" or well slept

body my in bone every "but reply, my was well," very slept have "I
nothing." to lead will that suppose I aches.

the of fatigue the of result the only is It boy. my all, at "Nothing
all." is days--that few last

this jolly very be so--to say to allowed be may I appear--if "You
said. I morning,"

We life. my in happier never Was delighted. boy, dear my "Delighted,
port." wished-for the reached last at have

considerable of tone a in I, cried expedition?" our of end "The
surprise.

never would fear to began I which sea that of confines the to but "No;
our resume tranquilly now will We world. whole the round go but end,
the of centre the into dive to endeavor again once and land, by journey
earth."

ask to me "allow way, of kind hesitating a in began, I uncle," dear "My
question." one you

proper." think you if dozen a Harry; "Certainly,

asked. I back?" getting about How suffice. will "One

yet as not have We ask. to question a What back? getting about "How
journey." our of end the reached

the manage shall we propose you how is know to want I All that. know "I
voyage?" return

imperturbable the said world," the in manner simple most the "In
we either sphere, this of centre exact the reach we "Once Professor.
shall we or surface, the to ascend to which by road new a find shall
to reason every have I came. we way the by back go and round turn simply
behind close not will it forward, traveling are we while that believe
us."

raft," the repair to be will to see to matters first the of one "Then
response. melancholy rather my was

the continued things," all above that to attend must We course. "Of
Professor.

we "Have urged. I provisions," of question all-important the comes "Then
such great, such accomplish to us enable to left enough like anything
out?" carrying contemplate you as designs amazing,

Hans affirmative. the in is answer my and matter, the into seen have "I
saved has he that believe to reason have I and fellow, clever very a is
scruples your satisfy to way best the But cargo. the of part greater the
yourself." for judge and come to is

we which in grotto open of kind the of out way the led he which, Saying
rather should I which that hope to begun almost had I shelter. taken had
leaving shipwreck a such of impossibility the was this and feared, have
was, I freight. as carried had it what of signs slightest the even
mistaken. thoroughly however,

Hans found I sea, inland this of shores the reached I as soon As
in out laid things of number large a of midst the in gravely standing
gratitude. silent and deep with hands his wrung uncle My order. complete
speech. for full too was heart His

never only not I employers his to devotion superhuman whose man, This
we time the all work at hard been had equaled, even nor surpassed, saw
most the saving in succeeded had life his of risk the at and slept,
cargo. our of articles precious

several experienced necessarily we circumstances, the under course, Of
had experience But vanished. wholly had weapons Our losses. severe
however, had, powder of provision The them. without do to us taught
atoms to all us blowing escaped narrowly having after intact, remained
storm. the in

of best the make to ready now was who Professor, the said "Well,"
all up give to is do to have we all guns, no have we "as everything,
hunting." of idea

our all about what but them, without do can we sir, dear my "Yes,
instruments?"

gladly I which and all, of useful most the manometer, the is "Here
as depth the calculate can I alone it With rest. the of lieu in accept
have we when decide to able be shall I alone means its by proceed; we
instrument little this for but ha! Ha, earth. the of centre the reached
the at out coming of risk the run and mistake, a make might we
antipodes!"

laughter. unnatural of bursts amid said was this All

do?" we can what that "without cried, I compass," the "But

here and ah, "ah, joy, real with cried, he sound!" and safe is, it "Here
indeed is hunter the Hans thermometers. the and chronometer the have we
man!" invaluable an

other and nautical the as far As fact. this deny to impossible was It
further on Then wanting. was nothing concerned, were instruments
shovels, and crowbars, pickaxes, cords, ladders, found I examination,
shore. the on about scattered all

that and all, of question important most the finally however, was, There
provisions. was,

asked. I food?" for do to we are what "But

gravely. uncle my replied department", commissariat the to see us "Let

placed were voyage the for food of supply our contained which boxes The
preservation; of state capital a in were and strand, the along row a in
one in up sum to and contents, their respected case every in had sea the
and Schiedam meat, salt biscuits, consideration, into taking sentence,
months' four about having on calculate still could we fish, dried
caution. and prudence with used if supply,

shall we "Then glee. high in Professor sanguine the cried months," "Four
I remains what with and come, to and go to both time of plenty have
Johanneum." the of colleagues my to dinner grand a give to undertake

of temperament the to used become have time this by should I sighed. I
was He day. every more and more me astonished man this yet and uncle, my
known. had ever I enigma human greatest the

fresh of stock a in lay must we else, anything do we "before he, "Now,"
the of hollows the filled and abundance, in fallen has rain The water.
of fear no have we and water, of supply rich a is There granite.
last the of is circumstances our in which thirst, from suffering
the to it repair to Hans recommend shall I raft, the for As importance.
shall we believe to reason every have I though abilities; his of best
again." it require not

of style uncle's my at ever than amazed more cried, I that?" is "How
reasoning.

we fact; simple this than other none is it boy; dear my idea, an have "I
entered." we which by that as opening same the by out come not shall

than more had idea An suspicion. vague with uncle my at look to began I
And mad. going was he that was, this and me; of possession taken once
to doomed were words his prophetic and true how think I did little yet,
be.

to detail, of matters these all to seen "having said, he now," "And
breakfast."

last his given had he after cape, projecting of sort a to him followed I
meat, dried with position, original this In guide. our to instructions
may meal--I satisfactory a made we tea, of cup delicious a and biscuit,
Exhaustion, remember. ever I pleasant and welcome most the of one say
all agitation, much so after calm of state the atmosphere, keen the
contributed it Indeed, appetite. excellent an me give to contributed
mind. of state cheerful and pleasant a producing to much very

asked I tea, warm of sips the between and hand, in was breakfast While
world the to relation in stood now we how of idea any had he if uncle my
above.

to difficult rather be will it think "I added, I part," my "For
determine."

"it uncle, my said spot," exact the fix to compelled were we if "Well,
I tempest awful that of days three the during since difficult, be might
the of or pace, our of quickness the of either account no keep could
to endeavor will we Still, going. was raft the which in direction
out." far very so be believe, I not, shall We truth. the to approximate

was observation last "our replied, I rightly," recollect I if "Well,
island." geyser the at made

of honor the decline not Do Island. Harry's boy! my Island, "Harry's
the us, by discovered island an to name your given it; named having
world!" the of creation the since it trod who beings human first

two over gone already had we Island Harry's At then. so, be it "Let
six about believe, I were, we and sea, of leagues seventy and hundred
Iceland." from less, or more leagues, hundred

from start us Let well. so remember you that see to glad am I "Good.
rate our which during storm, of days four count us let and point, that
velocity our that say should I great. very been have must traveling of
hours." twenty-four the to leagues eighty about been have must

three then were There calculation. fair a this thought I that agreed I
total. grand the to added be to leagues hundred

from leagues hundred six least at extend must Sea Central the and "Yes,
an discovered have we that Harry, boy, my know, you Do side. to side
Mediterranean?" the than larger lake inland

be may It way. one in extent its of know only we and "Certainly,
length." in miles of hundreds

likely." "Very

your "if minutes, some for some for calculating after I, said "Then,"
the under exactly moment this at are we right, are previsions
itself." Mediterranean

so?" think you "Do

distant leagues hundred nine not we Are it. of certain almost am I "Yes,
Reykjavik?" from

my traveled, have we road of bit famous a and true, perfectly is "That
Turkey under than more Mediterranean the under be should we why But boy.
having not of sure are we when known be only can Ocean Atlantic the or
nothing." know we this of and course; our from deviated

wind the course; our from far very driven were we think not do "I
that is opinion My same. the about always been have to me to appears
Gretchen." Port of southeast the to situated be must shore this

by matter the decide to easy be however, will, It so. hope "Good--I
Come compass. the of means by departure our from bearings the taking
invention." invaluable that consult will we and along,

the where rock the of direction the in eagerly walked now Professor The
was uncle My safety. in instruments the placed had Hans indefatigable
of sorts all assumed and hands, his rubbed he lighthearted; and gay
had I Since man. young a more once appearance all to was He attitudes.
him, followed I pleasant. and amiable so been he had never him, known
estimation my in mistake any made had I whether know to curious rather
position. our of

it placed compass, the took uncle my rock, the reached had we as soon As
needle. the at keenly looked and him, before horizontally

oscillated it vivacity, it give to it shaken first at had he As
the under position right its assumed slowly then and considerably,
power. magnetic the of influence

A instrument. wondrous the over curiously eyes his bent Professor The
emotion. his of extent the showed immediately start violent

survey. keener a and another took and them, rubbed eyes, his closed He

his on depicted stupefaction me, to round slowly turned he Then
countenance.

alarmed. be to beginning I, said matter?" the is "What

pointed simply He words. for overwhelmed too was He speak. not could He
instrument. the to

cry loud a and directions, mute his to according eagerly it examined I
due pointed compass the of needle The lips. my escaped surprise of
south! the was expected we direction the north--in

seas. high the to of instead shore the to pointed It

It eye. anxious and curious a with it examined I compass; the shook I
the explained way any in blemish No perfection. of state a in was
returned it into, needle the forced we position Whatever phenomenon.
point. unexpected same the to invariably

truth. fatal the ourselves from conceal to attempting useless was It

during that fact, the was as unwelcome it, about doubt no be could There
been had we which of wind, of slant sudden a been had there tempest, the
the to back us carried had raft the thus and account, any take to unable
before! days many so forever, apparently left, had we shores




34 CHAPTER

DISCOVERY OF VOYAGE A


utter the of idea any give to me for impossible altogether be would It
extraordinary this making on Professor the overcame which astonishment
way a such in blended were rage and incredulity, Amazement, discovery.
me. alarm to as

so first at man a seen never had I Life my of course whole the During
indignant. furiously so then and chapfallen;

had we dangers fearful the voyage, sea our of fatigues terrible The
all them begin to had We nothing. for gone all, all, had through, passed
again. over

so of voyage a during expected, fondly we as progressing, of Instead
raft the on expedition our of hour Every retreated. had we days, many
time! lost much so been had

every overcame uncle my of energy indomitable the however, Presently,
consideration. other

these me play will "fatality teeth, set his between said, he "So,"
with me overwhelm to conspire themselves elements The tricks. terrible
to efforts united their combine water and fire, Air, mortification.
a of will earnest the what see shall they Well, passage. my oppose
one even retreat not will I yield, not will I do. can man determined
or contest--man great this in triumph shall who see shall we and inch;
nature."

Hardwigg, Professor menacing, and irritated rock, a on upright Standing
upon took however, I, fates. the defy to seemed Ajax, ferocious the like
such upon check of sort some impose to and interfere, to myself
enthusiasm. insensate

voice, of tone temperate but firm a in said, I Uncle," me, to "Listen
useless utterly is It below. here ambition to limit some be must "there
are We reason. to listen Pray impossible. the against struggle to
of think to madness simply is it voyage; sea a for unprepared utterly
of pile wretched a upon leagues hundred five of journey a performing
a and mast, a for stick paltry a sail, a for counterpane a with beams,
our steering of incapable totally are we As with. contend to tempest
is it and storm, the of plaything mere the become shall we craft, frail
this upon risk any run time, second a we, if madmen of part the acting
Sea." Central treacherous and dangerous

put I arguments and reasons the of few a only are These
was I unanswerable. appeared me to which arguments and together--reasons
The minutes. ten about for interruption without on go to allowed
even not was Professor The discovered. soon I this to explanation
eloquence. my all of word a hear not did and listening,

reply. a for paused I when voice, hoarse a in cried he raft!" the "To

I will. iron his resist to effort strenuous my of result the was Such
had I but passion; a into got I him; implored and begged I again; tried
like feel to seemed I own. my than determined more will a with deal to
at granite of mass huge the against battled and fought which waves the
puny their at ages many so for grimly smiled had which feet, our
efforts.

been had discussion, our in part taking without meanwhile, Hans,
instinctively he that supposed have would One raft. the repairing
uncle. my of projects further the at guessed

raft the made again had he cordage, of fragments some of means By
seaworthy.

the sail, and mast new a hoisted had he speaking, been had I While
breeze. the in waving and fluttering already latter

who guide, imperturbable our to words few a spoke Professor worthy The
our for prepare to and board on baggage our put to began immediately
the and pure, and clear tolerably now was atmosphere The departure.
last to likely appeared It serenely. and steadily blew wind northeast
time. some for

two of will iron the resist to undertake I Could do? I could then, What,
support the for hoped have could I even if impossible simply was It men?
that me to appeared It question. the of out was however, This, Hans. of
a was He identity. and will personal all aside set had Icelander the
abnegation. of picture

his to devoted and with infatuated so one from nothing for hope could I
stream. the with swim to was therefore, do, could I All master.

my take to about was I resignation, sullen and stolid of mood a In
my upon hand his placed uncle my when raft the on place accustomed
shoulder.

until start not shall "we said, he boy," my hurry, no is "There
tomorrow."

fate. of will dire the to resignation of picture the looked I

precautions. no neglect to ought "I said, he circumstances," the "Under
having without leave not shall I shores, these upon me cast has fate As
them." examined completely

had we though that explain must I remark, this understand to order In
very a at landed had we shore, northern the to back driven been
point. starting our been had which that from spot different

westward. the to much very be calculated, we must, Gretchen Port
should we that than reasonable and natural more was therefore, Nothing,
landed. unexpectedly so had we which upon shore new this reconnoiter

cried. I discovery," of journey a on go us "Let

our on started we operation, important his to Hans leaving And
the and water high at foreshore the between distance The expedition.
hour's an half about take would It considerable. was rocks the of foot
other. the to one from get to walking

shape every of shells innumerable crushed feet our along, trudged we As
of period every of animals of place dwelling the size--once and
creation.

and (turtle shells--carapaces enormous some noticed particularly I
feet. fifteen exceeded which of diameter the species) tortoise

the of Glyptodons gigantic those to belonged ages past in had They
In specimen. minute a but is turtle modern the which of period, Pliocene
relics, stony of quantity vast a by covered was soil whole the addition,
and waves, the of action the by worn flints of appearance the having
conclusion the to came I other. the above one layers successive in lying
the Upon district. whole the covered have must sea the ages past in that
of waves mighty the reach, its beyond far lying now rocks, scattered
passage. their of marks evident left had ages

of existence the explain to partially me to appeared this reflection, On
earth's the of surface the below leagues forty ocean, remarkable this
liquid this theory, fanciful, perhaps and new, my to According crust.
also had I earth. the of bowels deep the in lost gradually be must mass
ocean the of infiltration by fed was sea mysterious this that doubt no
fissures. imperceptible through above,

must fissures these that admit to not impossible was it Nevertheless,
immense the rather or cavern, the not, if for up, choked nearly be now
short a in filled completely been have would reservoir, stupendous and
the against contend to having water, this even Perhaps time. of space
become had earth, the of interior the of fires subterraneous accumulated
clouds heavy those of explanation the Hence vaporized. partially
that of display superabundant the and heads, our over suspended
and deep this in storms terrible such occasioned which electricity
sea. cavernous

me to appeared witnessed had we phenomena the of explanation lucid This
may nature of marvels the mighty and great However satisfactory. quite
reasons. physical by explained be to always are they us, to seem
nature. of law great some to subordinate is Everything

sedimentary of kind a upon walking were we that clear appeared now It
the on frequent so period, that of soils the all like formed soil,
Professor, The waters. the of subsidence the by globe, the of surface
Let fissure. rocky every examined carefully element, his in now was who
to him to important became directly it and opening an find only him
depth. its examine

when Sea, Central the of windings the followed we mile whole a For
It soil. the of aspect the in place took change important an suddenly
a by were, it as convulsionized, up, cast rudely been have to seemed
and here hollows places, many In strata. lower the of upheaving violent
the of period other some at dislocations great attested there hillocks
mass. terrestrial

granite of masses broken the over difficulty great with advanced We
field, large a when deposits, alluvial and quartz, flint, with mixed
our before suddenly appeared bones, of plain a field, a than even more
after generation where cemetery, immense an like looked It eyes!
dust. mortal their mingled had generation

to away undulated They intervals. at rose remains early of barrows Lofty
brown and thick a in lost were and horizon distant the of limits the
fog.

the accumulated was extent, in miles square three some spot, that On
the upon creature one life--scarcely animal of history whole
there not had world inhabited and upper the of soil modern comparatively
existed.

impatient and all-absorbing an by forward drawn were we Nevertheless,
remains the sound crackling and dry a with crushed feet Our curiosity.
cities great of museums the which for fossils, prehistoric those of
thousand A morsels. curious and rare only obtain they when even quarrel,
the recompose to sufficed have not would Cuvier as naturalists such
osseous magnificent this in lay which beings organic the of skeletons
collection.

arms his with minutes some for stood uncle My confounded. utterly was I
a for us served which vault granite thick the towards high on raised
his behind wildly sparkled eyes his open; wide was mouth His sky.
down and up bobbed head his saved), fortunately had he (which spectacles
expressed mien and attitude whole his while side, to side from and
astonishment. unbounded

rich inexhaustibly and wondrous, endless, an of presence the in stood He
and private own his for up piled monsters, antediluvian of collection
satisfaction. peculiar

very the into suddenly carried books of lover enthusiastic an Fancy
sacrilegious the by burned Alexandria of library famous the of midst
Such splendor! pristine its to restored had miracle some which and Omar,
now was Hardwigg Uncle which in mind of state the of something was
placed.

his of magnitude the at aghast literally thus, stood he time some For
discovery.

mass this over wildly darting when, excitement greater a even was it But
a in me addressed and skull naked a up caught he dust, organic of
voice: quivering

head!" human a is boy--Harry--this my "Harry,

than stupefied and amazed less no said, I Uncle!" head, human "A
himself.

you are Quatrefages--why De Mr. Milne-Edwards--ah! Mr. Ah! nephew. "Yes,
Hardwigg!" Professor am--I, I where here not




35 CHAPTER

DISCOVERY UPON DISCOVERY


his and uncle, my by made exclamation the understand to fully order In
to necessary be will it men, learned and illustrious these to allusions
the of circumstance a to regard in explanations certain into enter
which life, fossil of science the or paleontology, to importance highest
regions upper the from departure our before time short a place taken had
earth. the of

M. of direction the under navigators some 1863, March, of 28th the On
of quarries great the in work at were Perthes, de Boucher
in Somme, the of department the in Abbeville, near Moulin-Quignon,
jawbone human a upon came unexpectedly they work, at While France.
first the was It soil. the of surface the below feet fourteen buried
Near day. of light the to brought been ever had that kind the of fossil
flints, carved and hatchets stone found were relic human unexpected this
verdigris. of tint brilliant uniform one in time by clothed and colored

not spread discovery unexpected and extraordinary this of report The
men learned Many Germany. and England over but France, over all only
others, among noteworthy and bodies, scientific various to belonging
to much very affair the took Quatrefages, De and Milne-Edwards Messrs.
in bone the of authenticity incontestable the demonstrated heart,
England--the in recognized then phrase the use became--to and question,
question." "jawbone the of supporters ardent most

fact the upon looked who Kingdom United the of geologists eminent the To
soon others--were and Carpenter, Buck, Falconer, certain--Messrs. as
rank, first the in those among and Germany, of men learned the united
Professor uncle, worthy my was enthusiastic, most the eager, most the
Hardwigg.

then seemed period Quaternary the of fossil human a of authenticity The
most the by admitted be to even and demonstrated, incontestably be to
skeptical.

bitter a true, is it had, will, you what it call theory, or system This
a such holds who man, learned This Beaumont. de Elie M. in adversary
of soil the that holds world, scientific the in place high
less much a to but diluvium the to belong not does Moulin-Quignon
he respect, this in Cuvier with accordance in and, stratum, ancient
the with contemporary was species human the that admit means no by would
in Hardwigg, Professor uncle, worthy My epoch. Quaternary the of animals
had firm, held had geologists, of majority great the with concert
and talking considerable after finally, and discussed, disputed,
his in alone left well pretty been had Beaumont de Elie M. writing,
opinions.

far were but discussion, this of details the all with familiar were We
entered had matter the departure our since that then aware being from
to belonging though jawbones, similar Other phase. new a upon
found been had natures, different very and types varied of individuals
Switzerland, France, in grottoes certain of sands grey movable the in
of children, of bones tools, utensils, arms, with together Belgium; and
the in men of existence The men. old of and life, of prime the in men
day. every positive more therefore, became, period Quaternary

Pliocene the from up dug remains, New all. being from far was this But
among audacious or far-seeing more the enabled had deposits, Tertiary or
the to antiquity of degree greater far a even assign to men learned
is, that men; of those not were true, is it remains, These race. human
human the served having decidedly objects but men, of bones the not were
out, scooped regularly animals, fossil of thighbones shinbones, race:
human of signs unmistakable the sculptured--bearing fact in and
handiwork.

ascended man discoveries, unexpected and wondrous these of means By
the preceded fact, in he, time; of scale the in centuries endless
meridionalis</i>--the <i>Elephas the of contemporary the became mastodon;
thousand hundred a over of antiquity an acquired elephant; southern
to geologists eminent most the by given date the is that since years,
of state the then was Such earth. the of period Pliocene the
our explain to sufficed knew moreover we what and science, paleontologic
Ocean. Hardwigg the of plains the of cemetery great this before attitude

astonishment mingled Professor's the understand to easy be now will It
the in himself found he yards, twenty about advancing on when, joy and
race human the of specimen a with, face to face say may I of, presence
period! Quaternary the to belonging actually

very of soil a Had recognizable. perfectly skull, human a indeed was It
Bordeaux, at Michel St. of cemetery the of that like nature, peculiar
asked I question the was This ages? countless during it preserved
with head this But answer. to unable wholly was I which but myself,
abundant, hair the whole, teeth the with skin, parchmenty and stretched
life! in as eyes our before was

dread this before awe and wonder with paralyzed almost mute, stood I
a was occasion every almost on who uncle, My age. another of apparition
full too was He dumfounded. completely time a for remained talker, great
raised we however, while, a After possible. be to speech for emotion of
seemed, It end. on it stood We belonged. skull the which to body the up
hollow terrible its with us at look to imaginations, excited our to
eyes.

Professor. the by vanquished was man the silence, of minutes some After
Professor exultation. and pride scientific to succumbed instincts Human
circumstances the all forgot enthusiasm, his by away carried Hardwigg,
the placed, were we which in position extraordinary the journey, our of
no be can There heads. our over away far stretched which cavern immense
his addressing Institution the at himself thought he that doubt
his waved style, doctorial most his on put he for pupils, attentive
began: and hand,

to present to occasion auspicious this on honor the have I "Gentlemen,
have men learned Many globe. our of period Quaternary the of man a you
even of perhaps persons, able other while existence, very his denied
life. his of reality the in belief their affirmed have authority, higher
would they present, were paleontology of Thomases St. the If
existence, his in believe and fingers their with him touch reverentially
be should science that know I heresy. obstinate their acknowledging thus
without not am I nature. this of discoveries all to relation in careful
trade a made have who quacks other and Barnums many the of heard having
the of heard course, of have, I discoveries. pretended suchlike of
body the of finding pretended the of Ajax, of kneebones the of discovery
spans ten Asterius, of body the of and Spartiates, the by Orestes of
Pausanias. in read we which feet--of fifteen long,

Trapani, of skeleton the to relation in everything read have "I
to chose persons many which and century, fourteenth the in discovered
during up dug giant the of history the and Polyphemus, of that as regard
as aware well are You Palmyra. of environs the in century sixteenth the
near made analysis celebrated the of existence the of gentlemen, am, I
Felix Doctor celebrated the which bones great the of 1577, in Lucerne,
have I high. feet nineteen about giant a to belonged declared Plater
memoirs, those all and Cassanion, of treatises the all devoured
skeleton the to reference in published replies and speeches, pamphlets,
a of out dug Gaul, of invader the Cimbri, the of king Teutobochus, of
have should I century eighteenth the In 1613. in Dauphine, in pit gravel
of preadamites the of existence the Campet, Peter with denied,
Gigans--" called writing the hands my in had have I Scheuchzer.

him prevented which infirmity natural the by afflicted was uncle my Here
exactly not was It public. in words difficult pronouncing from
hesitation. constitutional of sort strange a but stuttering,

repeated. he Gigans--" named writing "The

further. no get could however, He,

"Giganteo--"

have would There out. come not would word unfortunate The Impossible!
there. happened mistake the had Institution, the at laughter great been

two between Hardwigg Professor exclaimed last at "Gigantosteology!"
growls. savage

excited-- more and more getting and difficulty, our over got Having

know, and matters, these all with acquainted well am I gentlemen, "Yes,
the bones these in recognized fully Blumenbach and Cuvier that also,
what after But period. Quaternary the of mammoths of remains undeniable
is There inquiry. scientific insult to is doubt a allow to see, now we
is it skeleton, a not is It it. touch can you it; see can you body; the
anthropological an with preserved body, uninjured and complete a
object."

assertion. astounding and singular this controvert to attempt not did I

acid," sulphuric of solution a in corpse this wash but could I "If
earthy the all remove to undertake would "I uncle, my continued
over all incrusted are which shells, resplendent these and particles,
medium. dissolving precious this without am I But body. this
history." own its tell will body this is, it as such Nevertheless,

rare with it exhibited and body, fossil the up held Professor the Here
activity. more shown have could showman professional No dexterity.

about only is "it continued, uncle my see," will you examination on "As
of giants pretended the from way long a is which length, in feet six
is it belonged, it which to race particular the to As days. early
own. our of is, that race, white the of is It Caucasian. incontestably
remarkable any without ovoid perfect a is being fossil this of skull The
projection any without and cheekbones, the of development prominent or
modifies which prognathism the of indication no presents It jaw. the of
find will you and yourselves, for angle the Measure angle.[4] facial the
the on farther still advance will I But degrees. ninety just is it that
human this that say to venture dare I and deduction, and inquiry of road
the over spread which family, Japhetic the to belongs specimen or sample
no is There Europe. western of limits uttermost the to India from world
remarks." my at smile to gentlemen, occasion,

vertical less or more planes--one two by formed is angle facial The [4]
the incisors; the and forehead the with line straight a in is which
the and hearing, of organs the through passes which horizontal, other,
that means language, anthropological in Prognathism, bone. nasal lower
angle. facial the modifies which jaw the of projection particular

accustomed so was Professor excellent the But smiled. nobody course Of
his all saw he believed he that lectures, his at countenances beaming to
dissertation. learned his of delivery the during laughing audience

a man, fossil a is "this animation, renewed with continued, he "Yes,"
whole this which of bones the with mastodons, the of contemporary
to came he how explain to on called am I if But covered. is amphitheater
fallen have covered is he which by strata various these how place, this
explanation. no you give to undertake can I cavity, vast this into
shall we epoch, Quaternary the to back ourselves carry we if Doubtless,
the of crust the in place took convulsions mighty and great that find
to had earth the which through operation, cooling continually the earth;
large a which through chasms, and landslips, fissures, produced pass,
but conclusion, absolute no to come I way. its made earth the of portion
and hatchets his hands, his of works the by surrounded man, the is there
only the and period; stony the to belong which flints, carved his
the of centre the visited he myself, like that, is, supposition rational
there events, all At science. of pioneer a tourist, traveling a as earth
oldest the of one being his of and age, great his of doubt no be can
beings." human of race

forth burst I and oration, his ceased words these with Professor The
was uncle my all, after Besides, applause. "unanimous" and loud into
rather it found have would nephew his than men learned more Much right.
arguments. and facts his refute to hard

not was body fossilized This itself. presented soon circumstance Another
extinct an of cemetery bones--the of plain vast this in one only the
uncle my and plain, dusty the trod we as found, were bodies Other world.
to order in specimens these of marvelous most the choose to able was
incredulous. most the convince

of remains successive the spectacle, surprising a was it truth, In
in together confounded animals and men of generations and generations
our to itself presented now question great a But cemetery. vast one
its all in contemplate to afraid actually were we one and notice,
bearings.

by soil the beneath far so buried been beings animated once these Had
earth to earth been had they after nature, of convulsion tremendous some
subterranean this in below, here lived they had or ashes, to ashes and
marriage, in given and married, borne, sky, factitious this under world,
earth? the of inhabitants ordinary like just last, at died and

animals suchlike and fish, monsters, marine moment, present the to Up
alive! seen been alone had

Were one. pertinent a was uneasy, rather us rendered which question The
of shores deserted the about wandering abyss the of men these of any
earth? the of centre the of sea wondrous this

uncomfortable. and uneasy very me rendered which question a was This
from men us receive they would existence, in be really they should How,
above?




36 CHAPTER

IT? IS WHAT


We bones. of bed great this over tramped we hour weary and long a For
What curiosity. ardent by on drawn everything, of regardless advanced
wondrous other contain--what cavern great this did marvels other
any for prepared quite were eyes My man? scientific the for treasures
something of expectation in lived imagination my surprises, of number
wonderful. and new

disappeared time some for had Ocean Central great the of borders The
the by occupied ground the over scattered were that hills the behind
not did who Professor, enthusiastic and imprudent The bones. of plain
advanced We forward. me hurried not, or himself lost he whether care
fluid. electric of waves in bathed silently,

its to thanks and explain, cannot I which phenomenon a of reason By
sides the equally illumined light the complete, now diffusion, extreme
no in nowhere, be to appeared seat Its rock. and hill every of
whatever. shade no produced and force, determined

in midday at country tropical a of that was presented appearance The
vertical the under and regions equatorial the of midst the summer--in
sun. the of rays

mountains, distant the rocks, The disappeared. had vapor of signs All
mysterious and weird a assumed forests, far-off of masses confused some
fluid! luminous the of distribution equal this under aspect

of one in personage mysterious the extent, certain a to resembled, We
shadow. his lost who man tales--the fantastic Hoffmann's

vast a of edge the to came we farther, mile a about walked had we After
discovered had we forests mushroom vast the of one however, not, forest
Gretchen. Port near

all in period, Tertiary the of vegetation wild and glorious the was It
superb unknown, now species a of palms, Huge magnificence. superb its
formation--pines, coal the from palms fossil of genus palmacites--a
bound whole the trees, cone-bearing or conifers and cypress, yews,
plants. creeping of mass complicated and inextricable an by together

Pleasant trees. the beneath grew ferns and mosses of carpet beautiful A
name, this of worthy little boughs, umbrageous beneath murmured brooks
treelike small grew borders their Upon give. they did shade no for
inhabited own our on countries hot the in seen are as such shrubs,
globe.

trees--was these shrubs, these plants, these in wanting thing one The
were they sun, the of warmth vivifying the of deprived Forever color!
brown a of tint, uniform one in lost was shade All colorless. and vapid
the and verdure, of devoid wholly were leaves The character. faded and
birth, them gave which period Tertiary the during numerous so flowers,
discolored paper like something perfume, without and color without were
atmosphere. the to exposure long by

though him, followed I groves. gigantic the beneath ventured uncle My
shown had nature Since apprehension. of amount certain a without not
why supplies, vegetable stupendous such producing of capable herself
dangerous? therefore and large, as just mammals with meet not we might

fallen had that trees by left clearings the in remarked, particularly I
shrubs, (beanlike) leguminous many time, by consumed partially been and
animals. ruminating to dear trees, eatable other and maple the as such
of trees the intermixed, and together confounded appeared there Then
the of part every of vegetation the of specimens lands, varied such
eucalyptus, Australian the tree, palm the near oak the was there globe;
tall the against Myrtaceae--leaning order the of class interesting an
those with branches its mixing north, the of poplar the pine, Norwegian
ingenious most the drive to enough was It kauris. Zealand New the of
his all upset to and mind, his of out regions upper the of classifier
botany. about ideas received

uncle. my restrained and short stopped I Suddenly

smallest the see to me enabled light the of diffuseness extreme The
see did really I saw--no, I thought I copses. distant the in objects
the under about moving animals gigantic eyes--immense, own my with
of herd whole a animals, gigantic truly were they Yes, trees. mighty
in discovered those like exactly and living, but fossils, not mastodons,
America. North in Ohio, great the of banks marshy the on 1801,

tearing were trunks whose elephants, enormous these see could I Yes,
of legion a like trees the out and in working and boughs, large down
huge uprooting tusks mighty the of sounds the hear could I serpents.
trees!

branches green and leaves of masses whole the and crackled, boughs The
monsters! terrible these of throats capacious the down went

revivified, times antehistorical the saw I when dream, wondrous That
now was me, before passed periods Quaternary and Tertiary the when
realized!

the at earth, the of bowels the in down far alone, were we there And
inhabitants! ferocious its of mercy

astonishment. and wonder of full paused, uncle My

along, "Come over, was surprise first his when last, at said he "Come!"
nearer." them see us let and boy, my

are "we forward, me drag to efforts his restraining I, replied "No,"
of flock that of midst the in do we should What arms. without wholly
creature human No you. implore I Uncle, away, Come quadrupeds? gigantic
monsters." these of anger ferocious the brave impunity with can

a to voice his lowering suddenly uncle, my said creature," human "No
yonder! look Look! Henry. dear my mistaken, are "you whisper, mysterious
ourselves--a like being being--a human a behold I that me to seems It
man!"

its to incredulity push to decided shoulders, my shrugging looked, I
compelled was I wish, my been have might whatever But limits. last very
demonstration. ocular of weight the to yield to

of trunk the against leaning off, mile a of quarter a than more Yes--not
subterranean these of Proteus being--a human a was tree, enormous an
of herd innumerable this keeping Neptune of son new a regions,
mastodons.


ipse![5] immanior custos, pecoris Immanis



gigantic! more still himself cattle, gigantic of keeper The [5]

the from raised had we corpse whose fossil a longer no was Yes--it
driving and guiding of capable giant a but cemetery, great the in ground
head, His feet. twelve above was height His monsters. prodigious these
It hair. matted of mane a in lost was buffalo, a of head the as big as
of elephants the to belonged which those like mane, huge a indeed was
world. the of ages earlier the

this for crook a as served which tree, a of branch a was hand his In
shepherd. antediluvian

surprise. with speechless still, profoundly remained We

but us for remained Nothing him. by seen be moment any at might we But
flight. instant

time, first the for and, along; uncle my dragging cried, I come!" "Come,
wishes. my to resistance no made he

monster! terrible that from away far were we later hour an of quarter A

it upon reflect I that and calmly, matter the of think I that Now
strange this since passed have years, months, that now dispassionately;
to I am what think, to I am us--what befell adventure unnatural and
believe?

our and us, deceived have must ears Our impossible! utterly is it No,
No seen. had we believed we what seen not have we us! cheated have eyes
subterranean that in existed have possibility any by could being human
globe the of caverns lower the inhabit could men of generation No world!
without surface, the peopled who those of note taking without
else! nothing folly! folly, folly, was It them. with communication

in resembling animal some of existence the admit to inclined rather am I
epochs, geological first the of monkey some race--of human the structure
Sansan. of deposit ossiferous the in Lartet M. by discovered that like

all height in surpassed was, it whichsoever being, or animal, this But
be, may it unlikely However mind. Never science. modern to known things
a him with and man, living a man, a monkey--but a been have might it
the of entrails the in buried animals, gigantic of generation whole
believed! be to monstrous too was earth--it




37 CHAPTER

DAGGER MYSTERIOUS THE


far forest transparent and bright the left had we time, this During
feeling of kind a by overcome astonishment, with mute were We us. behind
It ourselves. of spite in running kept We apathy. to door next was which
we sensations horrible those of one resembled which Right, perfect a was
dreams. our in with meet sometimes

now cannot I and Sea, Central the towards way our made we Instinctively
I follies what of nor mind, my through passed thoughts wild what tell
which preoccupation serious very a for but guilty, been have might
life. practical to back me brought

I, us, to new quite soil a on treading were we that aware was I Though
the rock, of aggregations certain noticed then and now every however,
Gretchen. Port near those of me reminded forcibly which of shape

our and compass the of indications the moreover, confirmed, This
the to return involuntary, as well as unlooked-for, and extraordinary
that point, starting our like so was It Sea. Central great this of north
cascades and Streams position. our of reality the doubt scarcely could I
rocks. the of projections numerous the over hundreds in fell

the and Hans monotonous and faithful our see could I thought actually I
tremendous my after life to back come had I which in grotto wonderful
fall.

the cliffs, the of position the farther, still advanced we as Then,
again me threw rock, a of profile unexpected the stream, a of appearance
doubt. bewildering of state a into

uncle. my to indecision mental of state my explained I time, some After
unable totally was He hesitation. of feeling similar a to confessed He
uniform but extraordinary this of midst the in mind his up make to
panorama.

at exactly landed not have we "that insisted, I doubt," no be can "There
has tempest the but departure; our took first we whence place the
we if that therefore, think, I point. starting our above us brought
Gretchen." Port find more once shall we coast the follow

our continue to useless is "it uncle, my cried case," that "In
to back way our make to is do can we thing best very The exploration.
mistaken?" not are you that Harry, sure, quite you Are raft. the

these all for decision, any to come "to reply, my was difficult," is "It
At them. between difference marked no is There alike. exactly are rocks
the recognize I that is mind my on impression the time, same the
We raft. the constructed Hans worthy our which of foot the at promontory
I it," not be this if port: little the near convinced, nearly am I are,
to familiar singularly appeared which creek a examining carefully added,
mind. my

own our of traces find should we case, the were this Harry--if dear "My
to nothing see really can I and passage; our of signs some footsteps,
way." this passed having our indicate

I as voice, of tone impetuous an in cried, I something," see I "But
sand the in shone which something up picked eagerly and forward rushed
feet. my under

Professor. bewildered and astonished the cried it?" is "What

reply. my was "This,"

shape. singular of dagger, rusty a relative startled my to handed I And

"It exclaimed. he weapon?" a useless so you with bring you made "What
yourself." hampering needlessly was

sure you before--are it saw never I me. to new quite is It it? bring "I
collection?" your of out not is it

no have "I puzzled. Professor, the said of," know I that "Not
property." my never was It circumstance. the of recollection

singular and novel the over musing said, I extraordinary," very is "This
incident.

Icelanders The Harry. explanation, simple very a is There all. at "Not
must this and weapons, antiquated these of use the up keep to known are
it." knowing without fall it let has who Hans, to belonged have

the of possession the in been never had dagger That head. my shook I
well. too habits his and him knew I Hans. taciturn and pacific

antediluvian some of weapon the be it be--unless it can what "Then
that of contemporary a man, living some "of continued, I warrior,"
upon no--mystery But escaped? just have we whom from shepherd mighty
bronze the of even nor epoch, stony the of weapon no is mystery--this
steel--" excellent of made is It period.

entering from short me stopped uncle my sentence, my finish could I Ere
decided and cold most his in spoke and theories, of train whole a upon
voice. of tone

This reason. your use to endeavor and boy, dear my yourself, "Calm
<i>dague</i>, true a is unexpectedly, so fallen have we which upon weapon,
sixteenth the during belts their in gentlemen by worn those of one
the to blow, final the grace</i>, de <i>coup the give to was use Its century.
It workmanship. Spanish of clearly is It surrender. not would who foe
any to nor hunter, eider-down the nor me, to nor you, to neither belongs
interior the in marvelously so exist still may who beings living the of
earth." the of

surmises. of host a in lost now said, I Uncle?" mean, you can "What

made never were edges jagged "these continued; he it," at closely "Look
a with covered is blade The bone. and blood human of resistance the by
a not old, day a not is which rust, and mold iron of coating regular
more--" much but old, century a not old, year

was and custom, to according excited, quite get to began Professor The
could I imagination. fertile his by away carried be to himself allowing
me. stopped He something. said have

This discovery. great a of verge the on now are "we cried, he "Harry,"
being after discovered, marvelously so have you dagger a of blade
three even hundred, two hundred, a than more for sand the upon abandoned
an carve to endeavoring someone by indented been has years, hundred
rocks." these on inscription

not could "it exclaimed, I itself," of here got never poniard this "But
the upon us preceded have must therefore, Someone, itself. twisted have
sea." extraordinary this of shores

man." a "Yes,

thing?" a such do to desperate sufficiently been has man what "But

man dagger--a very this with name his written somewhere has who man "A
interior the to road right the indicate to more once endeavored has who
of importance the not know You boy. my around, look us Let earth. the of
discovery." happy and singular your

the examining rock, of wall the along walked we interested, Prodigiously
wished--for much the into expand finally might which fissures, smallest
shaft. or gully

The narrow. extremely became shore the where spot a reached last at We
and lofty very here were which rocks, the of foot the bathed almost sea
At point. any at yards two than wider path a scarcely was There steep.
a of entrance the discovered we rock, over-hanging huge a under last,
tunnel. gloomy and dark

rubbing by smoothed been had which granite, of tablet square a on There,
worn much and mysterious, two see could we stone, another with it
had who traveler extraordinary and bold the of initials two the letters,
journey. adventurous our on us preceded

Glyph] Runic [Illustration:

always Saknussemm, Arne right. was I see, "You uncle. my cried S.!" "A.
Saknussemm!" Arne




38 CHAPTER

ROCK THE OUTLET--BLASTING NO


experienced had I journey, marvelous our of commencement the since Ever
was I that thought I illusions. many from suffered had surprises, many
hear nor see neither could and surprises all against case-hardened
again. me amaze to anything

wholly himself finds world, the round been having who, many a like was I
marvelous. the against proof and blase

three engraven been had which letters, two these saw I however, When,
surprise. mute of attitude an in fixed stood I before, years hundred

enterprising and learned the of signature the there was only Not
identical very the hand my in held I but rock, the in written alchemist
it. engraved laboriously had he which with instrument

scarcely incredulity of amount an showing without impossible, was It
the and traveler, the of existence the deny to man, sane a becoming
a been have to along all believed I which voyage that of reality
brain. fertile some of mystification myth--the

the uncle, my mind, my through passing were reflections these While
excitement. poetical and feverish of access an to way gave Professor,

have "you cried, he Saknussemm," great genius, glorious and "Wonderful
mortals other to show to omitted, resource no unturned, stone no left
creatures fellow your and globe, mighty our of interior the into way the
hundred three footsteps, illustrious your by left trail the find can
have You abodes. subterranean obscure these of bottom the at ago, years
and wonders these of contemplation the others for secure to careful been
your of stage important every at engraved name Your creation. of marvels
and great the to direct traveler hopeful the leads journey glorious
The courage. and energy such devoted you which to discovery mighty
will last, the to footsteps your follow shall who traveler, audacious
centre the upon hand own your with engraved initials your find doubtless
my sign will too, traveler--I, audacious that be will I earth. the of
this of stone granite central the upon spot, same very the upon name
your to devotion, your to justice in But Creator. the of work wondrous
this let road, the indicate to first the being your to and courage,
be you, by discovered sea this of shores the upon you by seen cape,
Saknussemm." Cape time, all of called,

of pitch the to roused be to began I and heard, I what is This
I me. roused excitement fierce A words. those by indicated enthusiasm
the of perils the and voyage the of dangers The everything. forgot
nothing! as now were journey return

I again; done be felt, I could, past ages in done had man another What
had man that nothing now and myself, it do to determined was
impossible. me to appeared accomplished

enthusiasm. hearty and genuine of burst a in cried I "Forward--forward,"

gallery gloomy and somber the of direction the in started already had I
the he, hasty, and rash so man the he, me; stopped Professor the when
and me, checked enthusiasm, of pitch highest the to roused easily so man
calm. more show and patient be to me asked

bring then will "we said; he Hans," friend, good our to return us "Let
place." this to down raft the

was it request, uncle's my to yielded once at I though that say must I
that of rocks the along hastened I and dissatisfaction, without not
coast. wonderful

have we "that along, walked we as said, I uncle," dear my know, you "Do
to up right circumstances, of concurrence a by helped singularly been
moment." very this

a with Professor the said Harry?" you, do it, see to begin you "So
smile.

has tempest the even enough, strangely "and responded, I "Doubtless,"
the on Blessings road. right the on us putting of means the been
fine which from spot very the to back safely us brought It tempest!
in succeeded had we Supposing forever. us driven have would weather
what sea, extraordinary this of shores distant and southern the reaching
have never would Saknussemm of name The us? of become have would
an upon away cast been have should we moment this at and us, to appeared
outlet." an without probably coast, inhospitable

that in providential something certainly is there boy, my Harry, "Yes,
come have we south: the towards waves and wind of mercy the at wandering
great this upon fall we still, better is what and north; exactly back
than more is it that say, to mean I Saknussemm. Cape of discovery
my beyond far is which it in something is there surprising;
marvelous!" of, unheard is coincidence The comprehension.

best the make to but facts, explain to duty our not is It matter! "What
them." of use possible

really the said me--" allow will you if but boy; my "Doubtless,
Professor. delighted

the take shall we be; will it how exactly see I but sir, me, "Excuse
Europe, of regions northern the under pass shall we route; northern
where--instead knows who and Siberia, under Russia, under Sweden, under
or Africa, of deserts and plains burning the under ourselves burying of
of stage this at all, is that and ocean; the of waves mighty the beneath
our be will Heaven and advance, us Let know. to care I that journey, our
guide!"

us Let best. the for is all right; quite right, are you Harry, "Yes,
anything to led have never could which sea, horizontal this abandon
Do descend. everlastingly and descend, descend, shall We satisfactory.
have we earth the of interior the reach to that boy, dear my know, you
travel!" to miles thousand five only

is distance "the enthusiasm, of burst a by away carried cried, I "Bah!"
start." a make to is thing The about. speaking worth scarcely

our rejoined we until continued speeches incoherent and mad, wild, My
an for prepared found, we was, All guide. phlegmatic and patient
its in was what but parcel single a not was There departure. immediate
being sail the and raft, the on posts our up took all We place. proper
towards bark frail the guided and directions, his received Hans hoisted,
it. named definitely had we as Saknussemm, Cape

close sail to unable was that craft a to unfavorable very was wind The
were We blast. the before go to constructed was It wind. the to
On poles. of means by forward ourselves pushing to reduced continually
were we and water deep into out far ran rocks the occasions several
weary and long three after last, At round. long a make to compelled
evening, the in o'clock six about say, to is that navigation, of hours
land. could we which at place a found we

and excitement of state present my In first. shore on jumped I
The followed. Icelander the and uncle My first. always was I enthusiasm,
me. calmed means no by had sea the of point this to port the from voyage
our burn to proposed even I effect. opposite the produced rather had It
our off cut completely to order in raft, our destroy to is, that vessel,
to began I project. wild this opposed sternly uncle my But retreat.
unenthusiastic. and lukewarm particularly him think

delay." without start us "let said, I uncle," dear my rate, any "At

the in But, be. can you as so do to eager as quite am I boy, my "Yes,
if find to order in gallery, mysterious this examine us let place, first
ladders." our mend and prepare to need shall we

which coil, Ruhmkorff our of efficiency the to see to began now uncle My
rock, a to fastened securely raft, the needed; be soon doubtless would
not was gallery new the into opening the Moreover, alone. left was
the at myself with troop, little Our spot. the from distant paces twenty
advanced. head,

about of diameter a presented circular, almost was which orifice, The
on coated and rock, living the in cut was tunnel somber the feet; five
in it through passed once had which material different the by inside the
so water, the with level about was part lower The fusion. of state a
difficulty. without interior the to penetrate to able were we that

a about of end the at when, direction; horizontal almost an followed We
an of interposition the by checked was advance further our paces, dozen
rock. granite of block enormous

stopped were we that perceiving on furiously, cried I stone!" "Accursed
obstacle. insurmountable an seemed what by

vain in left; the to looked we vain in right, the to looked we vain In
any of sign no passage, no existed There below. and above it examined
disappointment. painful and bitter most the experienced I tunnel. other
I obstacle. any of reality the admit not would I that I was enraged So
no hole, No stone. of mass the under looked I knees; my to stooped
with Hans, granite! of barrier same The above. looked then I interstice.
direction. every in tunnel the of sides the examined lamp, the

passing of hope all renounce to necessary was It vain! in all But
through.

and angrily walked uncle My ground. the upon myself seated had I
desperate. evidently was He down. and up hopelessly

Arne about "what thought, moments' some after cried, I "But,"
Saknussemm?"

a by checked been have never can "he uncle, my replied right," are "You
rock." of lump

huge "This vivacity. extreme with cried, I no," times thousand "No--ten
process, or concussion, singular some of consequence in rock, of lump
the shaken often so have which phenomena magnetic those of one
passage. the up closed way unexpected some in has crust, terrestrial
and Saknussemm, of return the since away passed have years many and Many
that evident quite not it Is granite. of block huge this of fall the
the in lava pent-up the for outlet the formerly was gallery this
circulated then matters eruptive these that and earth, the of interior
is it roof; granite the in fissures recent these at Look freely?
the by if as here placed stone, enormous of pieces of formed evidently
arch. substantial and strong a make to worked had who giant, a of hand
in stands which rock vast the shock, strong unusually an after day, One
through fell arch, of kind a of key the doubtless was which and way, our
are We progress. further our barred has and soil the with level a to
which with obstacle, unexpected an is this that thinking in then, right,
are we way, some in it upset not do we if and meet; not did Saknussemm
and discoverer; great the of footsteps the in following of unworthy
earth!" the of centre the to way our finding of incapable

his Professor, the of zeal The uncle. my addressed I way wild this In
I being. my of parcel and part become had success, for longing earnest
existed Nothing future. the despised utterly I past; the forgot wholly
was I which of bosom the in spheroid this of surface the upon me for
even not Koenigstrasse, no Hamburg, no country, no towns, no engulfed,
the in lost utterly me believe would time this by who Gretchen, poor my
earth! the of interior

to go us "Let words, my by enthusiasm to roused uncle, my cried "Well,"
hand--but to comes that anything with crowbars, with pickaxes, with work
walls." terrible these with down

or pickax a by destroyed be to big too and tough too far is "It
replied. I crowbar,"

then?" "What

by difficulty a such overcoming of think to useless is it said, I "As
tools." ordinary of means

then?" "What

the up blow us Let mine? subterranean a gunpowder, but else "What
way." our in stands that obstacle

"Gunpowder!"

obstacle." paltry this of rid get to is do to have we all "Yes;

Professor. the cried work!" to Hans, work, "To

huge a with returned soon and raft, the to back went Icelander The
to was which rock, the in hole a dig to began he which with crowbar,
for necessary was It task. slight a means no by was It mine. a as serve
of pounds fifty hold to enough large cavity a make to purpose our
as times four is which of power expansive the cotton, gun fulminating
gunpowder. ordinary of that as great

excitement. of state miraculous almost an to myself roused now had I
long a prepare to uncle my assisted actively I work, at was Hans While
in enclosed finally we which of mass the gunpowder, damp from made wick,
linen. of bag a

enthusiastically. cried, I through," go to bound are "We

the on me tapping Professor, the responded through," go to bound are "We
back.

of charge the finished; completely was miners as work our midnight, At
we which match, the and hollow, the into thrust was cotton fulminating
ready. was length, considerable of made had

blow to and engine, formidable this ignite to sufficient now was spark A
atoms! to rock the

tomorrow." until rest now will "We

consent to and fate, my to myself resign to necessary absolutely was It
hours! weary six for explosion the for wait to




39 CHAPTER

RESULTS ITS AND EXPLOSION THE


date a was August, of twenty-seventh the was which day, next The
it of think never I journey. subterranean wondrous our in celebrated
very the at wildly beats heart My horror. with shudder I but now, even
day. awful that of memory

ingenuity, human our judgment, our reason, our forward, time this From
the become to about are We events. of course the with do to nothing have
earth! the of phenomena great the of plaything

arriving was moment dreaded The ready. and up all were we o'clock six At
by earth the of interior the into opening an seek to about were we when
through breaking of consequences the be would What gunpowder. of means
earth? the of crust the

upon looked I mine. the to fire set to duty my be might it that begged I
upon friends my rejoin could I performed, once task This honor. an as it
we ready, all were we as soon As unloaded. been not had which raft, the
the of consequences the avoid to distance some to away sail to were
in concentrated be not certainly would which of effects the explosion,
earth. the of interior the

or more minutes, ten about for burn to calculated we match slow The
powder of body great the which in chamber the reached it before less,
raft the reach to time of plenty have therefore should I confined. was
distance. safe a to off put and

confessed, be must it task--not, self-allotted my execute to prepared I
emotion. considerable without

board on embarked hunter-guide the and uncle my repast, hearty a After
shore. desolate the upon alone remained I while raft, the

the to fire set to me enable to was which lantern a with provided was I
machine. infernal the of wick

as back come But you. with be Heaven "and uncle, my said boy," my "Go,
impatience." all be shall I can. you as soon

on delaying my of fear no is "there replied, I matter," that on easy "Be
road." the

gallery. somber the of opening the toward advanced I this, said Having
of extremity the seized and lantern my opened I wildly. beat heart My
wick. the

hand. his in chronometer his held on, looking was who Professor, The

he. cried ready?" you "Are

ready." "Quite

away!" fire then, "Well,

sparkled, and crackled which wick, the to light the put to hastened I
I could, I as fast as running then, serpent; a like spitting and hissing
shore. the to returned

uncle. my cried off," shove Hans, you, and lad, my board, on "Get

the over flying us sent Hans pole his of application vigorous a By
distant. fathoms twenty quite was raft The water.

the uncle, My anxiety. deep of interest, palpitating of moment a was It
chronometer. the off eyes his took never Professor,

only four, "only tone, low a in said he more," minutes five "Only
three."

beating. heart my hear could I minute. the to hundred a went pulse My

the beneath crumble granite, of mountains then, Now, one! two, "Only
man!" of power

do I explosion, the of roar terrific the to As that? after happened What
my in changed completely rocks the of form the But it. heard I think not
fathomless, a saw I curtain. a like aside drawn be to seemed eyes--they
sea, The waves. turgid the beneath yawned which abyss, bottomless a
great one became then mad, gone have to suddenly seemed which
perpendicularly. rose raft the which of top the upon mass, mountainous

to place gave light the second a than less In down. thrown all were We
not way give support solid all felt I Then obscurity. profound most the
a down bodily going was it thought I itself. raft the to but feet, my to
could Nothing uncle. my question to speak, to tried I well. tremendous
utter in together clung We waves. mighty the of roaring the but heard be
silence.

the surprise, the noise, the despite darkness, awful the Despite
happened. had what understood thoroughly I emotion,

abyss. mighty a existed there up, blown been had which rock the Beyond
by broken soil, this in earthquake of kind a caused had explosion The
to about was open, thrown suddenly thus gulf, The rents. and fissures
was torrent, mighty a into transformed which, sea inland the swallow
it. with us dragging

lost! completely and utterly were We mind. my filled idea one Only

We manner. this in passed say, cannot I more hours--what two hour, One
held We knee! touching knee elbow, touching elbow together, close sat
to subjected were We raft. the off thrown be to not hands another's one
wooden frail a dependence, sole our whenever shocks, violent most the
us, for Fortunately channel. the of sides rocky the against struck raft,
fancy me made which frequent, less and less became concussions these
no now be could There wider. and wider getting was gallery the that
but Saknussemm, by followed once road the upon chanced had we that doubt
own our through had, we manner, proper a in down going of instead
us! with sea whole a drawn imprudence,

obscure and vague very a in mind my to themselves presented ideas These
only together ideas my put I reasoned. than rather felt I manner.
To waterfall. a down going man a like along spinning while confusedly,
been have must we face, my whipped were, it as which, air the by judge
rate. lightning perfectly a at rushing

simply was torch a light to circumstances these under attempt To
our of machine, electric our of remains last the and impossible,
explosion. fearful the during destroyed been had coil, Ruhmkorff

shining light bright a last at see to confused much very therefore was I
me. upon gleam to seemed guide the of countenance calm The me. to close
and lantern; the lighting in succeeded had hunter patient and clever The
and flickered flame the draft, thorough and keen the in though,
the dissipate to partially served it out, put nearly was and vacillated
obscurity. awful

therefore, was, I wide. very was entered had we which into gallery The
did light insufficient The conjecture. my of part that in right quite
of slope The time. same the at walls the of both see to us allow not
the of that than greater far was away, us carrying was which waters,
to seemed stream the of surface whole The America. of river rapid most
and violence extreme with forward darted arrows, liquid of composed be
me. upon made it impression the of idea no give can I power.

forward, rushed and whirlpools, certain in caught times, at raft, The
be never shall I upset not did it How time. the all itself on turned yet
took I gallery, the of sides the approached it When understand. to able
to able was I and lantern, the of light the them upon throw to care
of masses projecting the at looking by motion of rapidity the of judge
our was rapid So invisible. again were seen as soon as which rock,
the from one distance considerable a at rock of points that progress
a in us enclosed which lines, transverse of portions like appeared other
wires. telegraphic of line a of that like net, of kind

miles hundred a than less not of rate a at going now were we believe I
hour. an

we eyes; haggard and wild with another one at looked I and uncle My
when moment the at which, mast, the of stump the to convulsively clung
backs our turned We off. short snapped had place, took catastrophe the
a by stifled be to not order in wind, the to possible as much as
live. and face could human nothing which motion of rapidity

not did situation The on. went hours monotonous long the still And
to seemed made suddenly I discovery a though least, the in change
much. very it complicate

examine to proceeded I equilibrium, our recovered slightly had we When
greater the that discovery unsatisfactory the made then I cargo. our
disappeared. utterly had it of part

My resources. our were what discover to determined and alarmed, became I
what on know to necessary absolutely was it but idea, the at beat heart
around. looked and lantern the took I view, this With depend. to had we

instruments, philosophical and nautical of collection former our all Of
and ladders The compass. the and chronometer the only remained there
the of stump the to fastened rope of piece small a to reduced were ropes
than worse far and, hammer, a not crowbar, a not pickax, a Not mast.
day! one for enough food--not no all,

death. horrible and certain a to prelude a was discovery This

mast the of stump the clasping raft, the on gloomily Seated
from sufferings to as read had I all of thought I mechanically,
starvation.

I and subject, the on me taught had history that everything remembered I
endured. be to agonies the of remembrance the at shuddered

I starvation, of miseries the enduring of prospects the at Maddened
the in cracks the examined I mistaken. be must I that myself persuaded
possible every examined I beams; and joints the between poked I raft;
nothing! was--simply result The corner. and hole

and meat dry of piece a but nothing of consisted provisions of stock Our
biscuits. half-moldy and soaked some

the understand not could I frightened. and scared me around gazed I
new any to regard in it was consequence what of yet And truth. awful
for even and months, for provisions had had we that Supposing danger?
were we which into abyss awful the of out get ever we could how years,
loose? let had we torrent irresistible the by hurled being

be to tortures and sufferings the about ourselves trouble we should Why
other many so under face the in us stared death when hunger from endured
forms? horrid more even perhaps and swifter

placed, were we which in circumstances the under doubtful, very was It
inanition. of die to time have should we if

constituted. singularly is frame human the But

the of hallucination singular some from but, was; it how not know I
were we which to danger immediate and serious, real, the forgot I mind,
us before appeared which future, the of menaces the of think to exposed,
perhaps Hope, suggested all, after Besides, terror. naked their all in
more once and torrent, raging the of fury the escape finally might we
Mother beautiful our of surface the on moon, the of glimpses the revisit
Earth.

to we were Where idea. remotest the not had I done? be to it was How
did. we that so matter, No out? come

hunger from death while chance, a always is thousand a in chance One
the to left It hope. of glimpse faintest the even not us gave
of chance faintest the without horror, blank but nothing imagination
escape!

the him to explain to uncle, my to all reveal to mind greatest the had I
order in reduced, were we which to position wretched and extraordinary
space exact the to as calculation a make might we two, the between that,
live. to us for remained which time of

the had I But done. be to thing only the me, to appeared it was, It
boy. Spartan the like entrails my at gnaw to tongue, my hold to courage
coolness. his all him leave to wished I

went last at and fell, slowly lantern the of light the moment, this At
out!

It absolute. became obscurity The end. an to burnt wholly had wick The
There darkness! impenetrable the through see to possible longer no was
like Then, alight. it keep to impossible was it but left, torch one was
darkness. the see not might I that eyes, my shut I child, a

I increased. journey our of rapidity the time, of lapse great a After
waters the of slope The face. my upon air of rush the by it feel could
a down going longer no were we that feel to began I excessive. was
down going dream, a in does one as felt I falling. were we slope;
falling! falling; bodily--falling;

my clasping vigorously were Hans and uncle my of hands the that felt I
arms.

something felt I appreciable, scarcely time of lapse a after Suddenly,
been suddenly had but body, hard a struck not had raft The shock. a like
upon fell water, of column liquid a waterspout, A course. its in checked
drowned. being was I suffocating. felt I us.

myself felt I seconds few a In last. not did inundation sudden the Still
the and arms, my pressed Hans and uncle My breathe. to able more once
away. three all us carried raft




40 CHAPTER

GIGANS APE THE


should I but time, real the was what determine to me for difficult is It
night. at ten been have must it that calculation, after by suppose,

of visions saw I which during dream, half a stupor, a in lay I
the with side by side were deep the of Monsters character. astounding
form to seemed animals and fish Gigantic shepherd. elephantine mighty
conjunctions. strange

tunnel--this another entered round, whirled turn, sudden a took raft The
porous of formed was roof The manner. singular most a in illumined time
its casting pass, to appeared vapor moonlit a which through stalactite,
increased light The figures. haggard and gaunt our upon light brilliant
once were we last, at until ascended; roof the while advanced, we as
a in disappeared which of dome lofty the cavern, water of kind a in more
cloud! luminous

our to place halting a offer to appeared extent small of cavern rugged A
bodies. weary

waken to afraid was I dream. a in men as moved guide the and uncle My
beside myself seated I start. sudden a such of danger the knowing them,
watch. to them

which distance, the in moving something of aware became I so, did I As
the upon apparently, floating, was It eyes. my fascinated once at
appeared first at what of means by advancing water, the of surface
was it that me told glance One eyes. glaring with looked I paddles.
monstrous. something

what? But

geology. on writers early the of "shark-crocodile" great the was It
gigantic two and jaws hideous with whale, ordinary an of size the About
Some sternness. terrible with me on fixed eyes Its advanced. it eyes,
own. its for me marked had it that me told warning indefinite

shook knees my but where, matter no escape, rise--to to attempted I
And senses. my lost almost I violently; trembled limbs my me; under
effort no made guide the and uncle My advanced. monster mighty the still
themselves. save to

came beast the heard, ever had I other none like noise, strange a With
mouth distended his and apart, feet seven least at were jaws His on.
men. of boatful a swallowed have to enough large looked

body his as much that discovered I when distant feet ten about were We
shark. a of that wholly was mouth his crocodile, a of that resembled

it mouthful a at up us snatch To apparent. became now nature twofold His
necessarily motion which back, his on turn to him for necessary was
air. the in helplessly up kick to legs his caused

death! of jaws very the in even laughed actually I

the of interior the into away darted I cry, wild a with minute, next But
deep was cavern This fate! their to comrades unhappy my leaving cave,
around. looked and paused I yards, hundred a about After dreary. and

bones, with strewn was malachite, and sand of composed floor, whole The
mammalia. of mixture a with fish, and reptiles of bones gnawed freshly
truly, had I horror. with shuddered body my as sick grew soul very My
the into pan frying the of out fallen proverb, old the to according
shark-crocodile the than even ferocious more and larger beast Some fire.
den. this inhabited

ferocious one by guarded was cave the of mouth The do? I could What
to hideous too something by inhabited was interior the monster,
impossible! was Flight contemplate.

place hiding small some find to was that and remained, resource one Only
gazed I penetrate. not could cavern the of denizens fearful the which to
I which to rock, the in fissure a discovered last at and around, wildly
senses. scattered my recovering of hope the in rushed

in brave is man No fit. ague an in as shivering waited I down, Crouching
exploding an or boiler, bursting a or earthquake, an of presence
the of presence in courage much feel to expected be not could I torpedo.
me. await to appeared that fate fearful

the outside rumbling strange a time the all heard I passed. hour An
cave.

to me for impossible was It companions? unhappy my of fate the was What
of. think could I all was existence wretched own My inquire. to pause

my upon fell fight, a in bears fifty of as groaning, a Suddenly
saw-- I then hear--and to hideous moaning, spitting, ears--hisses,

horrible the forget I shall head, my over pass to ages were Never,
apparition.

Gigans! Ape the was It

the brown, blackish a of hair, coarse with covered high, feet Fourteen
pointing joints, elbow the to shoulder the from arms, the on hair
it upwards, pointed elbow the to wrist the from that while downwards,
were legs its while body, its as long as were arms Its advanced.
a teeth--like pointed sharply and long, thick, had It prodigious.
saw. mammoth

me reminding sniffing, and smelling on came it as breast its struck It
the ate who giants of childhood early our in read we stories the of
boys! little and men of Flesh

that, conscious was I for wildly, beat heart My stopped. it Suddenly
peering was and out me smelled had monster fearful the other, or somehow
whereabouts. my discover and try to eyes hideous his with about

occasion, this on which but blessing, a is rule a as which reading, My
the was It truth. real the me told curse, a prove to momentarily seemed
gorilla. antediluvian the Gigans, Ape

the of interior the to fortune good by confined monster, awful This Yes!
Africa. of monster hideous the of progenitor the was earth,

gave I myself. something--doubtless seeking about, wildly glared He
remain. to seemed escape or safety of hope No lost. for up myself

a came there death, in close to appeared eyes my as just moment, this At
gorilla the turning, and cave; the of entrance the from noise strange
and size prodigious his worthy more enemy some recognized evidently
disposed having perhaps which shark-crocodile, huge the was It strength.
prey. further of search in coming was friends, my of

some bone a clutching and defensive, the on himself placed gorilla The
at blow deadly a aimed club, perfect a length, in feet eight or seven
weight its all with fell and upwards reared which beast, hideous the
adversary. its upon

now give, to impossible is it which of details the combat, terrible A
wait not did however, I, ferocious, and awful was struggle The ensued.
I contention, of object the as myself Regarding result. the witness to
from down slid I victor. the of presence the from remove to determined
wall, the against gliding and ground, the reached place, hiding my
cavern. the of mouth open the gain to strove

be to ceased, clamor fearful the when steps many taken not had I But
of indicative be to appeared which groaning and mumbling a by followed
victory.

me after coming blood, with gory ape, huge the saw and back looked I
of columns two forth gave that nostrils dilated with eyes, glaring with
with and neck; my on breath fetid and hot his feel could I vapor. heated
sleep. nightmare my from jump--awoke horrid a

the and uncle my with raft the on still was I dream. a all was Yes--it
guide.

hideous the of influence the under for instantaneous, not was relief The
my however, while, a After numbed. become had senses my nightmare
returned which perceptions my of first The tranquilized. were feelings
attentive and acute with listened I hearing. of that was force full in
the To silence. was comprehended I All death. as still was All ears.
awful with gallery the filled had which waters, the of roaring
peace. perfect succeeded reverberations,

audible scarcely and low a in spoke, uncle my time little some After
you?" are where boy, "Harry, tone:

rejoinder. faint my was here," am "I

upwards." going are We happened? has what see you don't "Well,

reply. half-delirious my was mean?" you can what uncle, dear "My

quite is journey downward Our rapidly. ascending are we you tell I "Yes,
checked."

in succeeded difficulty, little some after and, hand, my out held I
The blood. with covered instant an in was hand My wall. the touching
extraordinary with ascending were We flesh. the from torn was skin
rapidity.

be must "it wildly; Professor, the cried torch!" torch--the "The
lighted."

lighting in succeeded last at efforts, vain many after guide, the Hans,
a shed burning, its prevent to nothing now having flame, the and it,
of idea approximate an form to enabled were We light. clear tolerably
truth. the

of two or moment a after uncle, my said thought," I as just is "It
square. fathoms four about well narrow a in are "We attention. silent
the of bottom the reached having sea, inland great the of waters The
natural a As shaft. mighty the up themselves forcing now are gulf
waters." the of summit the upon cast being are we consequence,

shaft this will where "but reply; lugubrious my was see," can I "That
exposed?" be to likely we are fall what to and end,

be should we that is, know I All yourself. as ignorant as am I that "Of
As rate. rapid fearfully a at up going are We worst. the for prepared
a fathoms two of rate the at ascending are we judge, can I as far
than more rather or minute, a fathoms twenty and hundred a of second,
a be soon will fate our rate, this At hour. an leagues half a and three
certainty." of matter

however, now, have I concern great "The reply. my was it," of doubt "No
granite a in end may It issue. any has shaft this whether know to is
dashed or air, compressed by suffocated be shall we case which roof--in
to beginning is air the that already, fancy, I top. the against atoms to
breathing." in difficulty a have I condensed. and close be

but motion, rapid our of effect the be might it or fancy, be might This
chest. the of oppression great a felt certainly I

a to is situation the that believe do "I Professor, the said "Henry,"
of chances many however, remain, There desperate. extent certain
over, them revolving been mind, own my in have, I and safety, ultimate
logical this to come have I sleep. agitated but heavy your during
may we moment any at so perish, moment any at may we conclusion--whereas
up turn may whatever for ourselves prepare therefore, need, We saved! be
accidents." of chapter great the in

helpless?" utterly not we "Are cried. I do?" us have you would what "But

one is there events, all At hope. is there life is there While "No!
or victory face to strength obtain thus and do--eat, can we thing
death."

off put had I glance. haggard a with uncle my at looked I spoke, he As
me, upon forced now was It possible. as long as communication fatal the
truth. the him tell must I and

hesitated. I Still

hurry. no were there if as tone deprecating a in said, I "Eat,"

rubbing said, he prisoner," starving a like feel I once. at and "Yes,
together. hands shivering and yellow his

words, cheering hearty, some spoke he guide, the to round turning And,
terribly a in head his shook Hans Danish. in tone, his from judged I as
unconcerned. look to tried I manner. significant

our all that say to mean not do "you Professor, the cried "What!"
lost?" are provisions

hand, my in something out held I as reply, spoken lowly my was "Yes,"
three." us for remains that all is meat dried of morsel "this

of meaning the appreciate fully not could he if as me at gazed uncle My
to him allowed I severity. its by him stun to seemed blow The words. my
moments. some for reflect

there Is now? think you do "what pause, short a after I, said "Well,"
Are dangers? subterranean horrible our from escaping our of chance any
the of centre the of hollows great the in perish to doomed not we
earth?"

me heard either uncle My answer. no brought questions pertinent my But
so. do to not appeared or not,

For speak. to cared us of Neither passed. hour whole a way this in And
My hunger. devouring and fearful most the feel to began I myself,
of neither but tortures, horrible same the felt doubtless, companions,
lay It remained. that meat of morsel wretched the touch would them
and mad the for preparations great our all of remnant last a there,
journey! senseless

that, aware I was Fully folly. own my to wonderment, with back, looked I
Saknussemm, of scroll ever-to-be-hated the and enthusiasm, his despite
memories What voyage. perilous his on started have never should uncle my
my filled now future, horrible the of previsions what past, happy the of
brain!




41 CHAPTER

HUNGER


without work at is brain The madness! temporary is prolonged, Hunger,
mind. the fill notions fantastic most the and food, required its
to likely was I meant. really hunger what known never had I Hitherto
now. it understand

of story terrible my tell could I before months three yet, And
excursions frequent make to used I boy a As it. thought I as starvation,
house. Professor's the of neighborhood the in

to addition in that, believed he and system, on acted always uncle My
In recreation. of day a be should there worship, and rest of day the
Wednesday. a on liked I as do to free always was I consequence,

my agreeable, the and useful the combine to notion a had I as Now,
collections best the of one had I nesting. birds' was pastime favorite
cases. glass under and classified, were They town. the all in eggs of

the taking and morn, early at rising by which, wood, certain a was There
would I Here morning. the in eleven at reach could I train, cheap
specimens of glad always was uncle My will. my at geologize or botanize
I wallet, my filled had I When examine. to stones and herbarium, his for
nests. for search to proceeded

to stream a by down sat day, one I, work, hard of hours two about After
spiced the of remembrance the How lunch. copious but humble my eat
I now! water mouth my made beer, the and loaf, wheaten the sausage,
But meal. a such for wealth worldly of prospect every given have would
story. my to

old an of ruins the at up looked I leisure, my at thus seated While
historical an of remains the was It distance. great no at castle,
pieces. to falling now and ivy-clad, dwelling,

lofty a of summit the about circling eagles two saw I looking, While
my all in Now, nest. a was there that satisfied became soon I tower.
owl. large the and eagle native the of eggs lacked I collection,

perish or tower, that of summit the reach would I up. made was mind My
old The ruins. the surveyed and nearer, went I attempt. the in
however, were, walls outer The in. fallen had before, years staircase,
solely ivy the to looked I unless way, that chance no was There intact.
futile. out, found soon I as was, This support. for

once had and top, the to up went still which chimney, the remained There
tower. the of story every from smoke the off carry to served

the therefore and rough, narrow, was It venture. to determined I this Up
chimney. the into crept and coat my off took I climbed. easily more
the of summit the proclaiming opening, light small, a saw I up, Looking
chimney.

fashion the after knees, and hands my using time some for went, I Up--up
continual being there but, work, slow was It sweep. chimney a of
reached I way, this In easy. comparatively was task the projections,
and, close, was atmosphere The narrower. became now chimney The halfway.
higher. no ascend could I fast. stuck I matter, the end to last, at

to but resource no remained there and this, of doubt no be could There
and fate to yielded I despair. in prey glorious my up give and descend,
mysterious and unseen Some move. not could I But descend. to endeavored
my of horror full the instant an In me. stopped and intervened obstacle
me. seized situation

and terrible a to doomed was and way, either move to unable was I
is there however, mind, boy's a In starvation. of that death, horrible
of think to began I and hope, and elasticity of amount extraordinary an
fate. gloomy my escape to plans of sorts all

an had having present, at just food no required I place, first the In
first My reflection. for time allowed therefore was and meal, excellent
a possessed I Had hand. my with mortar the move and try to was thought
had I instrument useful that but done, been have might something knife,
pocket. coat my in left

and useless, and vain were kind this of efforts all that found soon I
downwards. wriggle to was do to hope could I all that

in all was it turn, to strove and struggled, and jerked I though But
flew time And other. the or way one inch, an move not could I vain.
felt I that fact the to contributed probably rising early My rapidly.
drowsiness. of sensation the to way gave gradually and sleepy,

hungry. ravenously darkness, in awoke and slept, I

did and bound, tight was I move. not could I still and come, had Night
Never aloud. groaned I inch. an position my changing in succeed not
from go to hardship a was it when childhood, happy my of days the since
The hunger. experienced really I had eating, without meal to meal
head my lose to now began I painful. was it as novel as was sensation
by startled appeared, Something agony. my in out cry and scream to and
loathsome a me to appeared it but lizard, harmless a was It noise. my
finally and cries, my with resound ruins old the made I Again reptile.
fainted. I that myself exhausted so

again when but say, cannot I sleep or trance of kind a in lay I long How
still hunger how felt, I ill How day. was it consciousness recovered I
far now, scream to weak too was I say. to hard be would it me, at gnawed
struggle. to weak too

roar. a by startled was I Suddenly

my there, you "are uncle; my of voice the said Henry?" there, you "Are
boy?"

to effort desperate a made also I but respond, faintly only could I
the When discovered. being my owed I this To fell. mortar Some turn.
of pieces small and mortar that seen easily was it place, took search
cry. uncle's my Hence above. from fallen recently had stone

be shall you ruin, whole the down pull we "if cried, he calm," "Be
saved."

hope. little had I but words, delicious were They

me, above voice a heard I later hour an of quarter a about however, Soon
fireplaces. upper the of one at

above?" or below you "Are

reply. my was "Below,"

My egg. an and biscuit, a milk, with lowered was basket a instant an In
the drank I food. of supply his with ready too be to fearful was uncle
much then, I hunger. deadened nearly had thirst for first, milk
egg. hard and bread my ate refreshed,

to Wishing pickax. a hear could I wall. the at work at now were They
struggle, desperate a made I weapon terrible this from danger all escape
a on hitched been had which and waist my surrounded which belt, the and
rapid a by down falling escaped only and free, was I way. gave stone,
knees. and hands my of motion

and days two being after arms, uncle's my in was I more minutes ten In
from me prevented delirium occasional My prison. horrible that in nights
time. counting

yet and adventure; starvation awful that from recovering weeks was I
endured? now I sufferings hideous the to that was what

I matters, other and this of thinking and time, some for dreaming After
fearful with ascending still were We me. around looked more once
respiration our check to appeared air the then and now Every rapidity.
too is balloon the of ascension the when aeronauts of that does it as
elevation the to proportion in cold of degree a feel they if But rapid.
effect. contrary a quite experienced we atmosphere, the in attain they
manner. exceptional and threatening most a in increase to began heat The
one reached have must it think I but mean, the exactly tell cannot I
Fahrenheit. degrees twenty-two hundred

As temperature? the in change extraordinary this of meaning the was What
and Davy of theories the proved had facts gone, hitherto had we as far
of conditions peculiar the all now, Until correct. be to Lidenbrock of
general the modified had magnetism, of electricity, of rocks, refractory
the for temperature; moderate a us for created had and nature, of laws
explainable only the eyes, my in remained, fire, central the of theory
one.

were phenomena these which in position a reach to going then, we, Were
reduce would heat the which in and rigor, their all in out carried be to
fusion? of state a to rocks the

my from fact the conceal not did I and fear, unnatural not my was Such
not could I but heartless, and cold be might so doing of way My uncle.
it. help

die not do we if and pancakes, into smashed or drowned, not are we "If
be must we that knowing of satisfaction the have we starvation, of
alive." burned

his shrugged simply attack, brusque this of presence in uncle, My
be. might they reflections--whatever his resumed and shoulders,

the in increase slight a was there that except and away, passed hour An
situation. the modified incident no temperature

silence. broke accord, own his of last, at uncle My

our up make must "we way, cheerful a in said, he boy," my Henry, "Well,
minds."

surprise. considerable in asked, I what?" to minds our up "Make

physical our recruit risk whatever at must We something. "Well--to
remnant little our husbanding of mistake fatal the make we If strength.
hours--but few a existence wretched our prolong probably may we food, of
end." the to weak remain shall we

long us keep not will however, That, end. the "to growled, I "Yes,"
waiting."

a that allow itself--only present safety of chance a let only "Well,
action of means the find we shall necessary--where be action of moment
inanition?" by weakness physical to reduced be to ourselves allow we if

remain there will hope what Uncle, devoured, is meat of piece this "When
us?" unto

it devour to good any you do it will But none. Henry, dear my "None,
or will without one like reason to me to appear You eyes? your with
energy." without being a like decision,

be to scarcely is which degree a to exasperated I, cried "Then,"
not you--have you--that me--that tell to mean not do "you explained,
hope." all lost

coolness. consummate with Professor the replied not," "Certainly

monstrous this of out get shall we that Uncle, me, tell to mean "You
shaft?" subterranean

long as that Henry, assert, to beg I hope. is there life is there "While
allow not do I quivers, flesh man's a as long as beats, heart man's a as
despair." to himself allow can will and thought with gifted being a that

must occupied we that like position a in placed man The nerve! a What
this. like speak to brave very been have

do?" to mean you do "what cried, I "Well,"

the swallow us let hands; our in have we food the of remains what "Eat
never Well, repast. last our willing, Heaven bel will It crumb. last
men." be shall we skeletons, exhausted being of mind--instead

fill." our take us "let tone, despairing a in I muttered "True,"

will." you what it "call sigh, deep a with uncle, my replied must," "We

of crusts some and remained, that meat the of piece a took uncle My
three into whole the divided He wreck. the escaped had which biscuit
parts.

the in remained he as long as him last to food of pound one had Each
earth. the of interior

character. private own his with accordance in acted now Each

appetite, without evidently but greedily, ate Professor, the uncle, My
my inside food the put I motion. mechanical some from simply eating
and pleasure, without morsel my chewed was, I as hungry and lips,
satisfaction. without

swallowed hunting, eider-down been had he if as just guide, the Hans,
man a like looked He affair. usual a were it though as mouthful, every
want. total or superfluity enjoy to prepared equally

ourselves, than starvation to used more no was probability, all in Hans,
As sufferings. many for him prepared had nature Icelandic hardy his but
was he night, Saturday every rix-dollars three his received he as long
anything. for prepared

money. his except much about himself troubled never Hans was, fact The
no and week, per much so at man certain a serve to undertaken had He
fault found never he himself, or employer his befell evils what matter
paid. duly were wages his as long so grumbled, or

our of face the on smile a seen had He himself. roused uncle my Suddenly
out. it make not could I guide.

uncle. my said matter?" the is "What

fluid. precious this of bottle a producing guide, the said "Schiedam,"

we hence that day dying our to own will myself and uncle My drank. We
precious That moment. bitter last the until exist to strength derived
the under but, full; half only reality in was Hollands of bottle
nectar. was it circumstances,

opinion decided a form to uncle my and myself for minutes some took It
did and pint a half about swallowed Professor worthy The subject. the on
more. any drink to able seem not

left. was that all nearly swallowing Hans, said "<i>Fortrafflig</i>,"

had he if as gusto much as with uncle, my said good," "Excellent--very
Hamburg. at club the of steps the left just

all Now hope. of gleam one been had there if as feel to begun had I
vanished! future the of thought

the in o'clock five was it and food, of ounce last our consumed had We
morning!




42 CHAPTER

SHAFT VOLCANIC THE


negative a purely is health his that peculiar so is constitution Man's
becomes it than appeased hunger of rage the is sooner No matter.
you when only is It starvation. of meaning the comprehend to difficult
understand. really you that suffer

the of notion any having privation endured not has who anyone to As
absurd. simply is it matter,

little a meat, and bread of mouthfuls some fast, long a after us, With
and gloomy previous our all over triumphed beef salt and biscuit moldy
thoughts. saturnine

I reflections. own his to way gave each repast this after Nevertheless,
was who north, extreme the of man Hans--the of those were what wondered
But character. Oriental of resignation fatalistic the with gifted yet
the realize to me allow not would imagination the of stretch utmost the
anything be to ceased had thoughts my self, individual my for As truth.
world upper that with connected all were and past, the of memories but
in house beautiful the now, all it saw I left. have should never I which
passed all they Martha; good the Gretchen, poor my Konigstrasse, the
the of any time Every past. the of visions like mind my before
hollows the in distinguished be to were which groanings lugubrious
the of murmur distant the heard I fancied I ears, my upon fell around
head. my above cities great

nature the examined he science, his of thinking always uncle, my for As
different the examined closely He torch. a of means by shaft the of
by situation his recognize to order in other, the above one strata
by could estimation, this rather or calculation, This theory. geological
philosopher, a man, learned a But approximate. but anything be means no
and calm ideas his keeps he when philosopher, a not if nothing is
to quality this possessed Professor the certainly and collected;
perfection.

science. geological of words murmuring silence, in sat I as him, heard I
interest but not could I meaning, his and object his understood I As
hour. terrible that in preoccupation my despite myself

primitive the in still are "we himself, to said he granite," "Eruptive
Who knows? who But up. going still up, up--going going are we But epoch.
knows?"

with shaft the of sides vertical the along felt He hoped. still he Then
the in again on go would he later, minutes few some and hand, his
style: following

again; Good mineral. schist--siliceous mica is This gneiss. is "This
to close are we events, all at transition, of epoch the is this
then--" and then, them--and

means, conceivable any by he, Could mean? Professor the could What
our above suspended earth the of crust the of thickness the measure
to approximation any making of means possible any possess he Did heads?
No. calculation? this

the take could estimation summary no and wanting, was manometer The
it. of place

most the in increased temperature the progressed, we as yet, And
hot a in bathed were I if as feel to began I and degree, extraordinary
I it. like anything felt I had before Never atmosphere. burning and
the when foundry, iron an from vapor hot the to it compare only could
and degrees, By over. runs and ebullition of state a in is iron liquid
coats our off taken had myself and uncle, my Hans, other, the after one
not was garment slightest the Even unbearable. were They waistcoats. and
suffering. extreme of cause the but uncomfortable, only

and horror my to when, cried; I fire?" living a to ascending we "Are
before. than greater became heat the astonishment,

impossible." quite impossible, simply is "it uncle, my said no," "No,

hand, naked my with shaft the of side the touching I, said yet," "And
burning." literally is wall "this

extraordinary this of sides the that did I as feeling moment, this At
I them. cool to water the into hands my plunged I hot, red were wall
despair. of cry a with back them drew

cried. I boiling!" is water "The

and rage of gesture a than other reply no made Professor, the uncle, My
despair.

imagination. his struck probably had truth the like very Something

his in or on, going was what either in share no take could I But
and brain my of possession taken had dread invincible An speculations.
a such catastrophe, immediate an to forward look only could I soul.
thought have could imagination vivid most the even not as catastrophe
changed being gradually was uncertain, and vague first at idea, An of.
certainty. into

by me upon itself forced it but first, at it rejected tremulously I
I that idea an terrible so was It obstinacy. extreme with degrees
myself. to it whisper to dared scarcely

observations involuntary were, it as and certain, while the all yet And
could I torch, the of glare doubtful the By convictions. my determined
and strange a strata; granitic the in changes singular some out make
electricity which in produced, be to about was phenomenon terrible
part. a played

determined I heat? excessive and terrible this water, boiling this Then
compass. the examine to resource last a as

mad! gone had compass The

with pole to pole from jumped needle The mad. staring stark wholly Yes,
the boxed said, is it as or round, ran jerks, surprising and sudden
vertigo. the had it if as again back suddenly ran then and compass,

a was it theories, acknowledged best the to according that, aware was I
never and never, is globe the of crust mineral the that notion received
repose. complete of state a in been, has

the by caused modifications the undergoing perpetually is It
the on consequent agitation the matter, internal of decomposition
magnetism of action excessive the currents, liquid extensive of flowing
the even when time a at incessantly, it shake to tends which
process seething the suspect not do surface its on beings multitudinous
on. going be to

have not would it alone; me alarmed have not would phenomenon this Still
idea. awful an terrible, a mind my in aroused

last. to self-delusion my allow not could facts other But

multiply to began artillery, Heaven's like detonations, Terrible
the with them compare only could I intensity. fearful with themselves
over driven madly being chariots laden heavily of hundreds by made noise
thunder. heavy of roll continuous a was It pavement. stone a

phenomena, electric wild the by shaken compass, mad the then And
about was crust mineral The opinion. formed rapidly my in me confirmed
was fissure the rejoin, to about were masses granite heavy the burst, to
to atoms poor we and up, filled be to about was void the close, to about
embrace! awful its in crushed be

lost!" irretrievably wholly, are "we cried, I Uncle!" "Uncle,

he alarm?" and terror of cause new your is friend, young my then, "What,
now?" you fear "What manner. calmest his in said

see not you "Do tones. angry and fierce in cried I now!" fear I do "What
solid the that see not you Do motion? in are shaft the of walls the that
heat? torrid terrible, the feel not you Do cracking? are masses granite
not you Do float? we which on water boiling awful the observe not you Do
earthquake!" awful an of portent and sign Every needle? mad this remark

head. his shook coolly uncle My

tone. provoking and calm most the in replied he earthquake," "An

"Yes."

continued. he mistaken," utterly are you that you tell I nephew, "My

symtons--" well-known the all recognize not, you can not, you "Do

more far something expecting am I means. no By earthquake? an "Of
important."

I mean?" you do what endurance--what, beyond strained is brain "My
cried.

Harry." eruption, "An

a of shaft volcanic the in then, are, "We gasped. I eruption," "An
vigor." and action full in crater

tone, smiling a in Professor the said so," think to reason every have "I
could that thing fortunate most the is it that you tell to beg I "and
us." to happen

What mad? gone truly and really uncle my Had thing! fortunate most The
terrible this by mean he did words--what awful these by mean he did
smile? solemn this calm,

to way the on are "we exasperation, my of height the in I, cried "What!"
and burning of well a into us cast has Fatality we? are eruption, an
with filled word, a in water, boiling of fire, on rocks of lava, boiling
up, thrown expelled, be to about are We matter? eruptive of kind every
huge with common in earth, the of interior the of out spit vomited,
wild a in scoriae, and cinders of showers with granite, of blocks
could which thing fortunate most say--the you and flame, of whirlwind
us." to happen

his under from calmly me at looking Professor, the replied "Yes,"
escaping ever of us to remains which chance only the is "it spectacles,
day." of light the to earth the of interior the from

strange, thousand the paper on put can I that impossible quite is It
announcement. extraordinary this followed which thoughts wild

so me to appeared he had never and right, quite right, was uncle my But
and face the in calmly me looked he when as convinced so and audacious
Earth Mother upon cast being our eruption--of an of chances the of spoke
volcano! a of crater gaping the through more once

passed we ascending; still were we speaking were we while Nevertheless,
an in scientifically, more speak to or up, going night whole the
to ready was I redoubled; noise fearful The motion. ascensional
and approaching, was hour last my that believed seriously I suffocate.
childish some was of thought I all imagination, is strange so yet,
own your choose not do you circumstances such In other. or hypothesis
you. overcome They thoughts.

matter; eruptive by upwards cast being were we that evident quite was It
a was this under and water, boiling of mass a was there raft the under
the reaching on which, rocks of aggregate an and lava, of mass heavier
direction. every in dispersed be would water, the of summit

be longer no could there volcano a of chimney the inside were we That
conceived! be could terrible more Nothing doubt. a of shadow the

volcano, extinct and old an Sneffels, of instead occasion, this on But
I times Several activity. full in fire of mountain a inside were we
world the of part what on and it, was mountain what asking, myself found
consequence! any of were it if As out. shot be should we

that. about doubt reasonable no be could there regions, northern the In
slightest the made never had compass the mad, decidedly went it Before
the to away swept been had we Saknussemm, of cape the From mistake.
once we were was, question the Now leagues. of hundreds many northward
through earth the to on forth belched be we Iceland--should under more
the of one through reappear we should or Hecla, Mount of crater the
a vision mental my in Taking island? the of funnels fire seven other
this under see could I westward, the to leagues hundred five of radius
of coast northwest the of volcanoes little-known the only parallel
America.

of degree eightieth the about somewhere existed only one east the To
frozen the from far not Mayen, Jan of island the upon Esk, the latitude,
Spitsbergen. of regions

enough big were them of many and wanting, were that craters not was It
one particular the was know to wished I all army; whole a vomit to
velocity. fearful such with making were we which towards

to expected have ever should I if as folly: my of now think often I
escape!

the If greater. and greater became motion ascending the morning, Towards
the approached we as decreasing, of instead increased heat of degree
and local were causes the because simply was it earth, the of surface
in left locomotion of style very Our influence. volcanic to due wholly
several of force a force, enormous An subject. the upon doubt no mind my
long and accumulated vapors the by produced atmospheres of hundreds
with upwards us hoisting was earth, the of interior the in compressed
power. irresistible

dangers fearful what to day, of light the approaching were we though But
exposed? be to about we were

or expect could we which fate only the appeared death Instant
contemplate.

which gallery, vertical the penetrated light sepulchral dim, a Soon
dark long left and right the to out make could I wider. and wider became
vapors horrid and awful which from tunnels, immense like corridors
to about appeared crackling, and sparkling fire, of Tongues out. poured
up. us lick

come! had hour The

cried. I look!" Uncle, "Look,

common more Nothing flames. sulphurous great the are see you what "Well,
eruption." an with connection in

replied. angrily I round!" us lap they if "But

answer. serene and quiet his was round," us lap not will "They

cried. I us," stifle they if end the in same the all be will it "But

and wider becoming rapidly is gallery The stifled. be not shall "We
take and raft the leave presently will we necessary, be it if and wider,
rock." the in fissure some in refuge

I ascending?" continually is which water, the water, the "But
replied. despairingly

lava of kind a "but answered, he Harry," water, any longer no is "There
of mouth the to itself, with company in up, us heaving is which paste,
crater." the

give to disappeared wholly had water of column liquid the truth, In
was temperature The matter. eruptive boiling of masses dense to place
this to exposed thermometer a and insupportable, utterly becoming
one and eighty-nine and hundred one between marked have would atmosphere
Fahrenheit. degrees ninety hundred

rapidity extraordinary the for But pore. every from rushed Perspiration
stifled. been have should we ascent our of

of proposition his out carry not did Professor the Nevertheless,
beams ill-joined few Those wisely. quite did he and raft; the abandoning
have must elsewhere which support surface--a solid a anyway, offered,
us. failed utterly

The us. startled incident new a morning the in o'clock eight Towards
and still became raft The ceased. suddenly movement ascensional
motionless.

by startled much very querulously, said, I now?" matter the is "What
change. this

uncle. my replied halt," simple "A

asked. I fail?" to about eruption the "Is

not." hope "I

the Perhaps me. around look to tried I rose. I reply, any making Without
to resistance momentary a opposed rock, projecting some by checked raft,
release to necessary absolutely was it case, this In mass. eruptive the
possible. as quickly as it

of scoriae, of cinders, of column The occurred. had kind the of Nothing
ascend. to ceased wholly had earth, and rocks broken

oracular my was stopped," has eruption the that Uncle, you, tell "I
decision.

in be not Do wrong. are You boy. my so, think "you uncle, my said "Ah,"
be long, last not will calm of moment sudden this alarmed; least the
many are we before and minutes, five endured already has It assured.
the of mouth the to journey our continuing be shall we older minutes
crater."

his consult to continued Professor the speaking was he time the All
raft the Soon prognostics. his in right probably was he and chronometer,
two lasted which way, disorderly and rapid very a in motion, its resumed
before. as suddenly as stopped it again then and thereabout; or minutes

start shall we ten "in hour, the observing uncle, my said "Good,"
again."

minutes?" ten "In

is which of eruption the volcano, a with do to have We "Yes--precisely.
does." it as just breathe to compelled are We intermittent.

we indicated, had he minute exact the At true. more be could Nothing
off cast be to Not rapidity. extreme with high on launched again were
again hoist the Then beams. the to on hold to necessary was it raft, the
ceased.

without phenomenon singular this of thought I have since times Many
it Nevertheless, explanation. satisfactory any it for find to able being
of chimney principal the in not were we that me, to clear quite appeared
counter the felt we where conduit, accessory an in but volcano, the
lava. burning by filled tunnel principal and great the of shock

was maneuver this times many how say to me for impossible is It
motion, ascensional every on that is, remember can I that All repeated.
been had we if as velocity, increasing ever with up hoisted were we
nearly were we halts sudden the During projectile. huge a from launched
our away took air hot the projection of moments the during stifled;
breath.

myself finding suddenly of joy voluptuous the of moment a for thought I
zero! below degrees thirty cold the with regions hyperborean the in

the of plains snowy vast the itself to pictured imagination exalted My
of carpet icy the on myself roll to impatient was I and regions, arctic
Pole. North the

emotions, violent of series a by overcome utterly head, my degrees By
for been not it Had delirious. was I hallucination. to way give to began
head my broken have should I guide, the Hans, of arms powerful the
shaft. the of masses granite the against

hours. many for followed what of account no kept consequence, in have, I
the of detonations, continual of remembrance confused and vague a have I
a like round going raft the of and mass, granitic huge the of shaking
falling a amidst lava, hot of stream the on floated It top. spinning
around. us wrapped roaring, flames huge The cinders. of cloud

immense an from forth cast be to appeared which wind of storm A
hot, a was It earth. the of fires interior the up roused ventilator
blast! incandescent

of halo huge the in enveloped if as Hans of figure the saw I last At
dread sinister that but me to remained sense other no and blaze, burning
mouth the to led when feel to supposed be may victim condemned the which
limbs his and fired is shot the when moment supreme the at cannon, a of
space. empty into dispersed are




43 CHAPTER

LAST AT DAYLIGHT


firmly me clutching guide the of hand the felt I eyes my opened I When
not was I uncle. my supported he hand other his With belt. the by
manner. remarkable most the in over all bruised but wounded, grievously

the on down lying was I that found and around, looked I moment a After
I which into gulf yawning a from yards two not mountain a of slope
saved had Hans step. false slightest the made I had fallen have should
crater. the of flanks the on insensible rolled I while death, from me

be to appeared literally who uncle, my asked dreamily we?" are "Where
earth. to returned having at disgusted

total of mark a as shoulders his shrugged simply hunter eider-down The
ignorance.

interrogatively. but positively not I, said Iceland?" "In

Hans. said "Nej,"

reasons?" your are "no--what Professor; the cried mean?" you do "How

rising. I, said wrong," is "Hans

singular more yet a journey, this of surprises innumerable the all After
by snow, by covered cone a see to expected I us. to reserved was one
of deserts arid the of midst the in glaciers, widespread and extensive
sky, polar a of rays full the beneath regions, northern extreme the
latitudes. highest the beyond

Icelander, the and uncle, my I, expectations, our all to contrary But
a of rays burning the by calcined mountain a of slope the upon cast were
fires. its with us baking literally was which sun

body my affected which heat actual the but eyes, my believe not could I
naked, half crater the of out came We doubting. of chance no me allowed
was months, two for nothing asked had we which from star radiant the and
warmth and light warmth--a and light of us to prodigal be to enough good
with. dispensed have easily could we

long, so of sight lost had we light the to accustomed were eyes our When
happened, Whatever imagination. my of errors the rectify to them used I
to yield to humor no in was I and Spitsbergen, at been have should we
proof. absolute most the but anything

spoke. Professor the delay, some After

look not does really "it way, of kind hesitating a in said, he "Hem!"
Iceland." like

observe. to ventured I Mayen?" Jan of island the were it supposing "But

the of volcanoes the of one not is This boy. my least, the in "Not
snow." of crown its and granite of hills its with north,

"Nevertheless--"

usual. as dogmatically as Professor, the said boy," my look, "Look,

volcano a of crater the opened height, great a at heads, our above Right
a with other, the to hour an of quarter one from escaped, which from
stone, pumice with mingled flame of jet lofty a explosion, loud very
the in nature of convulsions the feel could I lava. and cinders,
to time from up throwing whale, huge a like breathed which mountain,
vents. enormous its through air and fire time

stream the angularity, considerable of slope a along floating and Below,
volcano the give not did which depth a to away spread matter eruptive of
fathoms. hundred three of height a

I which among trees, green of forest perfect a in disappeared base Its
grapes. rich with loaded vines and trees, fig olives, perceived

About regions. arctic the of aspect ordinary the not was this Certainly
doubt. slightest the be not could there that

it expanse, verdant this of glimpse its at satisfied was eye the When
of made which lake, beautiful or sea lovely a of waters the upon fell
extent. in leagues many not of island an land enchanted this

with crowded port, little a seen be to was sun rising the of side the On
were build peculiar of vessels and boats the which near and houses,
waves. azure upon floating

and numerous so plain, liquid the above rose islands of groups Beyond,
beehive. vast a resemble to as together close

the on out made be to were shores distant some sun, setting the Towards
of mountains blue of appearance the presented Some horizon. the of edge
appeared there distant, more much others, upon conformation; harmonious
heavy and dark hung which of summit the above cone, lofty prodigiously a
clouds.

the beneath sparkled water of expanse immense an north, the Towards
the or mast a of extremity the allowing occasionally rays, solar
seen. be to wind, the to bellying sail a of convexity

its to hundredfold a added scene a such of character unexpected The
beauties. marvelous

voice. solemn and low a in speaking asked, I be?" we can "Where

on looked uncle my and indifference, of air an with eyes his shut Hans
understanding. clearly without

is it confess must "I last, at said, he be," may mountain this "Whatever
is it think not do I and off, leave not do explosions The warm. rather
to here remain and volcano a of interior the left have to worthwhile
descend carefully us Let head. one's upon rock of piece huge a receive
the confess To case. the of state real the discover and mountain the
thirst." and hunger of dying am I truth,

For character. reflective truly a longer no was Professor the Decidedly
and fatigues my ignoring necessities, my all forgetting myself,
longer--but hours several for still remained have should I sufferings,
companions. my follow to necessary was it

piles over slid we slippery; and steep very was volcano the of slope The
fiery like about glided which lava hot of streams the avoiding ashes, of
extreme with spoke I advancing, were we while Still, serpents.
words. in explode to not full too was imagination my for volubility,

the in India, of coast the on are "we exclaimed; I Asia!" in are "We
one the crossed have We Oceania. of centre the in islands, Malay great
Europe!" of antipodes the at right out come to globe the of half

me!" to that "explain uncle; my exclaimed compass!" the "But

that grant "I hesitation. considerable with said I compass," "Yes--the
northward." going been always have we it, to According difficulty. a is

lied." it "Then

answer. my was word," harsh a rather is lied it say "Hem--to

Pole--" North the at are we "Then

reply. my was up," it give I Pole--no--well--well "The

could I possible. explanation no was there that was, truth plain The
it. of nothing make

and hunger verdure, beautiful this approaching were we while the all And
a march, hours' long two after Happily, fearfully. me tormented thirst
pomegranates, olives, by covered us, before out spread country beautiful
any In everybody. and anybody to belong to appeared which vines, and
not were we fallen, had we which into destitution of state the in event,
scrupulously. too ponder to mood a in

to and lips, our to fruits delicious these press to was it delight What
vine. the from fresh pomegranates and grapes at bite

shade delicious the under grass, mossy and fresh some near off, far Not
we which in water, fresh of spring a discovered I trees, some of
feet. and hands, faces, our laved voluptuously

a pleasures, new-found of delights the to way giving all were we While
trees. olive tufted two between appeared child little

country." happy this of inhabitant "an I, cried "Ah,"

appeared and suffering, and weak, dressed, poorly was fellow little The
and matted tangled, with Half-naked, appearance. our at alarmed terribly
country the unless and ill-favored; supremely look did we beards, ragged
inhabitants! the alarm to likely not were we land, bandit a was

and him, after ran Hans heels, his to take to about was boy the as Just
kicks. and cries his despite back, him brought

German. in spoke then and possible, as gentle as look to tried uncle My

friend?" my mountain, this of name the is "What

reply. no made child The

are "we conviction, of air positive very a with uncle, my said "Good,"
Germany." in not

an was he language which of English, in demand same the made then He
scholar. excellent

considerably be to began I reply. no made and head its shook child The
puzzled.

polyglot his of proud rather was who Professor, the cried dumb?" he "Is
French. in demand same the made and languages, of knowledge

face. his in stared only boy The

shrug. a with uncle, my said Italian," in him try perforce must "I

siamo</i>?" noi "<i>Dove

eagerly. and impatiently added I are?" we where me tell "Yes,

silent. remained boy the Again

uncle, my cried speak?" to mean not you do or you do fellow, fine "My
the of dialect another spoke and him, shook He angry. get to began who
language. Italian

island?" this of name the is isola</i>?"--"What questa noma si "<i>Come

Hans from away dashing shepherd, little rickety the replied "Stromboli,"
groves. olive the in disappearing and

him. about enough little thought We

produce! words few these did imagination the on effect What Stromboli!
eastern the amidst Mediterranean, the of centre the in were We
where Strongylos, ancient the in memory, mythological of archipelago
blue those And up. chained tempest the and wind the kept AEolus
of mountains the were sun, rising the towards rose which mountains,
Calabria.

the Etna, was horizon southern the on rose which volcano mighty that And
Etna! celebrated and fierce

myself. to repeated I Stromboli!" "Stromboli!

We words. and gestures my to accompaniment regular a played uncle My
chorus. ancient an like together singing were

we Here journey! extraordinary and marvelous a journey--what a Ah--what
another. by out come had we and volcano, one by earth the entered had
from leagues hundred twelve than more situated was other this And
of confines the on away cast Iceland of country drear that from Sneffels
to us transported had expedition this of changes wondrous The earth. the
the abandoned had We lands. earthly of beautiful and harmonious most the
over left had and verdure, infinite of that for snows eternal of region
sky azure the to back come to regions icy the of fog gray the heads our
Sicily! of

continued again we water, fresh and fruits of repast delicious a After
had we how say To Stromboli. of port the reach to order in journey our
superstitious The prudent. been have scarcely would island the reached
have should we and work, at been have would Italians the of character
therefore was It regions. infernal the from vomited demons called been
It travelers. shipwrecked unfortunate and humble for pass to necessary
safer. decidedly was it but romantic, and striking less certainly was

himself: to muttering uncle worthy my hear could I advanced, we As

a is This north. marked certainly most compass The compass. the "But
way." any in explain cannot I fact

not must "we disdain, of air an with I, said is," fact the "Well,
easy." more much be will It anything. explain

is who Institution Johanneum the of professor a see to like should "I
strange." be indeed would phenomenon--it cosmic a explain to unable

his round purse leathern his half-naked, uncle, my thus, speaking And
terrible the more once became nose, his upon spectacles his and loins,
Mineralogy. of Professor

San of fort the reached we olives, of wood the leaving after hour An
of week thirteenth his of price the demanded Hans where Vicenza,
hand. the of shakes warm many very with him, paid uncle My service.

he emotion, natural our share quite indeed not did he if moment, that At
an in indulge to as way give to far so feelings his allowed
him. for expression extraordinary

smiled. and hands our pressed gently he fingers two of tips the With




44 CHAPTER

ENDED JOURNEY THE


probably be will which narrative a of conclusion final the is This
however, am, I nothing. at astonished are who people by even disbelieved
incredulity. human against points all at armed

as us treated who fishermen, Strombolite the by received kindly were We
of delay a After food. and clothes us gave They travelers. shipwrecked
to us took vessel little a September of 30th the on hours, forty-eight
us restored repose complete and delightful of days few a where Messina,
ourselves. to

the of one Volturne, the in embarked we October, of 4th the Friday, On
days three and France; of Messageries Imperial the of packets postal
but minds our on care other no having Marseilles, at landed we later
circumstance inexplicable This compass. erratic but precious our of that
reached we evening, the in October, of 9th the On terribly. me tormented
Hamburg.

will I Gretchen! of joy the what Martha, of astonishment the was What
it. define to attempt not

no is "there said, she hero," a are really you that Harry, then, "Now
again." me leave ever should you why reason

joy. of tears weeping was She her. at looked I

or made Hardwigg Professor of return the if imagined be to it leave I
of indiscretion the to Thanks Hamburg. in sensation a make not did
been had earth the of interior the for departure his of news the Martha,
world. whole the over spread

they safety in back come him saw they when it--and believe would one No
less. the all it believed

degrees by information of scraps stray many and Hans of presence the But
opinion. public modified

which, man, great a of nephew the I and man great a became uncle my Then
A honor. our in festival a gave Hamburg something. is events, all at
the which at held, was Institution Johanneum the of meeting public
the only omitting adventures, his of story whole the related Professor
compass. the with connection in facts

he document the town the of archives the in deposited he day same That
that regret great his expressed he and Saknussemm, by written found had
the follow to him allow not did will, his than stronger circumstances,
was He earth. the of centre very the into track traveler's Icelandic
increased. only reputation his but glory, his in modest

Of enemies. envious many him for created necessarily honor much So
facts, certain by supported theories, his as and existed, they course
he heat, central of question the upon science of system the contradicted
of learned the against speech and pen with both views own his maintained
I heat, central of theory the in believe still I Although country. every
may defined, ill very hitherto circumstances, certain that confess
phenomena. natural such of laws the modify

interest, with discussed being were questions these when moment the At
Hans, much. very felt he that shock--one rude a received uncle my
the Hamburg; quitted contrary, the to say could he everything despite
of debt deep our pay to us allow not would much so owed we whom to man
home. Icelandic his for love a nostalgia; with taken was He gratitude.

he adieu, of word short one this with and day, one he, said "Farval,"
safety. in reached soon he which Reykjavik, for started

will absence His hunter. eider-duck brave our to attached deeply were We
I and saved, he lives whose those by forgotten be to him cause never
again. him see to day, distant not some at hope,

earth the of interior the into journey our that say may I conclude, To
was It world. civilized the throughout sensation enormous an created
journals leading the All languages. many in printed and translated
attacked, discussed, commentated, were which it, from extracts published
its in believed who those by animation equal with supported and
incredulous. utterly were who those by and episodes,

he glory the all lifetime his during enjoyed uncle My Wonderful!
Barnum, Mr. by money, of sum large a offered even was he and deserved;
by informed credibly am I while States; United the in himself exhibit to
Tussaud's! Madame at waxwork in seen be to is he that traveler a

very him rendered which care a mind, his upon preyed care one But
a For compass. the of inexplicable--that remained fact One unhappy.
very was phenomenon inexplicable an such by baffled be to man learned
happy. was uncle my end the in and merciful, was Heaven But aggravating.

in collection his to belonging minerals some put he while day, One
keenly. it examined and compass famous the upon fell I order,

untouched. and unnoticed lain had it months six For

loud a gave I surprise. became soon which curiosity, with it at looked I
me. joined soon hand, at was who Professor, The cry.

cried. he matter?" the is "What

compass!" "The

then?" "What

north." the to not and south the to points needle its "Why

dreaming." be must you boy, dear "My

changed." are poles See--the dreaming. not am "I

"Changed!"

with leaped and instrument, the examined spectacles, his on put uncle My
house. whole the shaking joy,

minds. our upon fell light clear A

his of use the recovered had he as soon as cried, he is!" it "Here
this of needle the Saknussemm, Cape passed once had we "after speech,
northward." the of instead southward the to pointed compass

"Evidently."

owe we do phenomenon what to But explained. easily now is error "Our
needle?" the in alteration this

simple." more "Nothing

thorns." on am I boy. my yourself, "Explain

a made which fire of ball the Sea, Central the upon storm, the "During
topsy-turvy." compass our turned raft, our in iron the of magnet

a was "it laugh, ringing and loud a with Professor, the cried "Ah!"
electricity." inexplicable that of trick

the I and men, learned of happiest the was uncle my hour that From
her abdicating girl, Virland pretty my For mortals. ordinary of happiest
the in Konigstrasse the in house the in place her took ward, as position
wife. and niece of quality double

Professor illustrious the was uncle her that mention scarcely need We
geographical, scientific, the all of member corresponding Hardwigg,
globe. the of parts five the of societies geological and mineralogical,

influential very and new a States United the in war Federal the During
well is It Maryland. Baltimore, of city the in established was club
that amongst developed was instinct military the energy what with known
jumped tradesmen Mere mechanics. and shopkeepers, shipowners, of nation
generals and colonels, captains, extempore become to counters their
soon they Point; West at School Military the passed having without
gained them, like and, continent, old the of colleagues their rivalled
men. and millions, bullets, lavishing of dint by victories

of science the in was Europeans surpassed singularly Americans where But
not engine; an of use the by weapons massive throwing of or ballistics,
of were they but perfection, of degree higher a attained arms their that
The ranges. unknown hitherto of consequently and dimensions, unusual
flank, about learn to nothing have Prussians and French, English,
howitzers, cannon, their but firing; point-blank or enfilading, running,
engines formidable the with compared pocket-pistols mere are mortars and
artillery. American of

mechanicians first the Yankees, The one. no astonish to ought fact This
and musicians are Italians as just engineers, born are world, the in
them see to than natural more nothing Thence metaphysicians. Germans
ballistics. of science the on bear to ingenuity audacious their bring
but sewing-machines, than useful less much cannon, gigantic those Hence
style this of marvels The admired. more much and astonishing, as quite
left nothing was There known. well are Rodman and Dahlgren, Parrott, by
before bow to but Beaulieux de Treuille and Pallisers, Armstrongs, the
rivals. transatlantic their

and Northerners between struggle terrible the during Therefore
newspapers Union the request; great in were artillerymen Southerners,
little no was there and enthusiasm, with inventions their published
night and day head his bother not did who "booby" _naf_ nor tradesman
engines. trajectory impossible about calculations with

it. share to American another seeks he idea an has American an when Now
Given secretaries. two and president a elect they three, are they If
a convoke Five established. is company a and clerk, a elect they four,
Baltimore. at happened thus It formed. is club the and meeting, general
first the partnership into took cannon new a invented who man first The
of nucleus the was Such it. bored that man first the and it cast who man
hundred eighteen numbered it formation its after month One Club. Gun the
and hundred five thousand thirty and members, effective thirty-three and
members. corresponding seventy-five

wished who one every upon non_ qu _sine a as imposed was condition One
a perfected, least at or invented, having of member--that a become to
tell to But, sort. some of firearm a cannon, a of default in or, cannon;
or revolvers, rifles, fifteen-barrelled of inventors mere truth, the
always were Artillerymen consideration. much enjoy not did sword-pistols
circumstance. every in them to preferred

orator learned a day one said held," are they which in estimation "The
in and cannon, their of size the to proportion in "is Club, Gun the of
projectiles!" their by attained distance of square the to ratio direct

applied gravitation of law Newton's been have would it and more little A
order. moral to

the upon effect its imagined easily be can it founded, Club Gun the Once
colossal took War-engines Americans. the of genius inventive
cut distances permitted beyond launched projectiles and proportions,
timid the left inventions these All pieces. to pedestrians inoffensive
estimated be may This them. behind far artillery European of instruments
figures:-- following the by

distance a at pounder, thirty-six a times," old good the "in Formerly,
in attacked horses, thirty-six up cut would feet, hundred three of
infancy. its in then was art The men. sixty-eight and flank,
a sent that gun Rodman The way. their made since have Projectiles
easily could miles seven of distance a ton a half weighing projectile
was There men. hundred three and horses fifty and hundred a up cut have
if But it. with experiment solemn a making of Club Gun the at talk some
were unfortunately men the part, their play to consented horses the
wanting.

at and deadly, very was cannon these of effect the be, may that However
such After scythe. a before ears like fell combatants the discharge each
1587, in Coutras, at which, ball famous the signified what projectiles
1758, in Zorndorff, at which, one the and men; twenty-five disabled
of cannon, Austrian Kesseldorf's 1742, in and fantassins; forty killed
the was What ground? the with enemies seventy levelled shot every which
the of fate the decided which Austerlitz, or Jena at firing astonishing
seen. been had things wonderful more much war Federal the During battle?
a by thrown projectile conical a Gettysburg, of battle the At
the at and Confederates, seventy-three and hundred a up cut rifle-barrel
fifteen and hundred two sent ball Rodman a Potomac the of passage
must mortar formidable A world. better evidently an into Southerners
and member distinguished a Maston, J.T. by invented mentioned, be also
more far was which of result the Club, Gun the of secretary perpetual
and hundred three killed it shot, trial its at that, seeing deadly,
true. is it bursting, persons--by thirty-seven

Nothing. themselves? in eloquent so figures, these to added be can What
will Pitcairn statistician the by obtained calculation following the So
victims of number the dividing by contestation: without admitted be
he Club, Gun the of members the of that by projectiles the under fallen
average an account, own his on killed, had them of one each that found
fraction. a and men seventy-five and hundred three thousand two of

single the that seen be will it result a such considering By
humanity of destruction the was society learned this of preoccupation
as considered firearms of perfecting the and philanthropically,
Angels, Exterminating of company a was It civilisation. of instruments
world. the in fellows best the bottom at

proved ever have they as brave Yankees, these that added be must It
sacrificed but formulae, to themselves confine not did themselves,
of officers counted be might them Amongst theories. their to themselves
of profession the in _dbut_ their made just had who those rank, every
whose Many gun-carriage. their on old grown had who those and arms,
the on remained Club Gun the of honour of book the in figured names
marks bore part greater the back came who those of and battle, of field
arms, articulated legs, wooden Crutches, valour. indisputable their of
noses, platinum craniums, silver jaws, gutta-percha hooks, with hands
Pitcairn above-mentioned the and collection; the to wanting was nothing
arm one quite not was there Club Gun the in that calculated likewise
six. amongst legs two only and persons, four every amongst

matters, small such to heed little paid artillerymen valiant these But
of number the stated battle a of report the when proud justly felt and
expended. projectiles of quantity the tenfold at victims

the by signed was peace day, lamentable and sad a however, day, One
mortars the ceased, gradually firing of noise the war, the of survivors
cannon, the and enough, long for muzzled were howitzers the silent, were
were shots the arsenals, the in stored were depressed, muzzles with
cotton effaced, were reminiscences bloody the parks, the in up piled
garments mourning fields, well-manured the on magnificently grew shrubs
nothing had Club Gun the and sorrow, as well as worn-out, be to began
do. to whatever

their with on went still workers, inveterate hands, old Certain
and bombs gigantic imagined still they ballistics; in calculations
could that theories vain of use the was what But howitzers. unparalleled
slept servants the deserted, were saloons the So practice? in put be not
dark from tables, the on mouldy grew newspapers the antechambers, the in
so formerly Club, Gun the of members the and snores, sad issued corners
sleep the slept peace, disastrous the by silence to reduced now noisy,
artillery! Platonic of

legs wooden his whilst Hunter, Tom brave said distressing," is "This
do! to "Nothing smoking-room. the of fireplace the at carbonising were
time the is Where existence! tiresome a What to! forward look to Nothing
reports?" joyful its with morning every you awoke cannon when

arms the stretch to trying Bilsby, dandy answered over," is time "That
it and howitzer, an invented You then! fun some was "There lost. had he
went you then enemy; the on it try to ran you before cast hardly was
the of shake a or Sherman, from encouragement an with camp the to back
their to back gone have generals the now But MacClellan! from hands
cotton inoffensive expedite they cannon-balls of instead and counters,
America!" to lost is artillery of future the Barb! Saint by Ah, bales!

fine One bad! too is "it Blomsberry, Colonel cried Bilsby," "Yes,
use the in drilled are you occupations, tranquil your leave you morning
yourself conduct you battle-field, the for Baltimore leave you arms, of
are you latest, the at years three years, two in and hero, a like
in sleep to go to fatigues, many so of fruit the leave to obliged
pockets." your in hands your keep and idleness, deplorable

a such give to difficult very it found have would colonel valiant The
were that pockets the not was it though occupation, of want his of proof
wanting.

scratching Maston, J.T. famous the said then," prospect, in war no "And
on cloud a not is "there hook; steel his with cranium gutta-percha his
artillery! of science the in do to much so is there that now horizon the
and basin, plan, with diagram a morning very this finished myself I
warfare!" of laws the change to destined mortar a of elevation

Honourable the of involuntarily thinking Hunter, Tom replied "Indeed!"
essay. last Maston's J.T.

of results good the of use the is what "But Maston. answered "Indeed!"
of waste mere is It conquered? difficulties many so and studies such
and peace, in live to determined seem World New the of people The time.
approaching predict to as far as gone has _Tribune_ bellicose our
population!" of increase scandalous the to due catastrophes

in fighting always are "they Blomsberry, Colonel said Maston," "Yet,
nationalities!" of principle the maintain to Europe

that?" of "What

accepted they if and there, over do to something be might there "Why,
services--" our

the for ballistics at "Work Bilsby. cried of?" thinking you are "What
foreigners!" of benefit

the answered all," at it doing not than better be would that "Perhaps
colonel.

an such but better, be would "it Maston, J.T. said "Doubtless,"
of." thought be cannot expedient

colonel. the asked so?" "Why

our all to contrary be would advancement of ideas their "Because
a be cannot you that think to seem folks Those customs. American
comes which lieutenant, second as served having without general-in-chief
one. cast not has that gun a point can one no that saying as same the to
simply--" is that Now

his with chair his of arms the whittling Hunter, Tom replied "Absurd!"
to but us for left nothing is there so, are things as "and bowie-knife;
whale-oil!" distil or tobacco plant

of years last these employ not we "shall Maston, J.T. shouted "What!"
opportunity fresh a not Will firearms? perfecting in existence our
atmosphere the Will projectiles? our of ranges the try to itself present
some Won't cannons? our of lightning the by illuminated longer no be
war declare to us allow will that up crop difficulty international
our of one down run France Won't power? transatlantic some against
hang nations, of rights the of defiance in England, won't or steamers,
countrymen?" our of four or three up

of one not No, luck! such "no Blomsberry; Colonel answered Maston," "No,
to use no of be would it did, one if and happen; will incidents those
the to going are we and daily, declining is sensitiveness American us.
dogs!"

Bilsby. replied humble," quite growing are we "Yes,

Hunter. Tom answered humiliated!" are we "And

vehemence. fresh with Maston, J.T. replied true," too only is that "All
we still and about, floating fighting for reasons thousand a are "There
folks of profit the to that and arms, and legs economise We fight! don't
any looking without here, Look them. with do to what know don't that
to belong formerly America North not did war, for motive a for farther
English?" the

end the with fire the poking angrily Hunter, Tom answered "Doubtless,"
crutch. his of

belong turn its in England not should "why Maston, J.T. replied "Well,"
Americans?" the to

Blomsberry. Colonel answered justice," but be would "It

J.T. cried States," United the of President the to that propose and "Go
get." would you reception a of sort what see "and Maston,

four the between Bilsby murmured reception," bad a be not would "It
battle. from saved had he teeth

the in vote my upon count not need "they Maston, J.T. cried "I'faith,"
elections." next

invalids. bellicose these accord common with answered ours," upon "Nor

do they if conclude, to "and Maston, J.T. continued meantime," the "In
real a on mortar new my trying of opportunity the with me furnish not
Club, Gun the of member as resignation my in send shall I battle-field,
Arkansas." of backwoods the in myself bury and go shall I and

the of interlocutors the answered there," you follow will "We
Maston. J.T. enterprising

was excited, more getting club, the and pass, that to come had Things
to came event unexpected an when dissolution, approaching with menaced
catastrophe. a regrettable so prevent

club the of member each conversation foregoing the after day very The
terms:-- these in couched circular a received

3rd. October "Baltimore,

colleagues his inform to honour the has Club Gun the of president "The
communication a them make will he ultimo 5th the on meeting the at that
the to they, that begs therefore He nature. interesting extremely an of
the with accordance in attend, will business, other all of suspension
invitation, present

colleague, devoted "Their

P.G.C." BARBICANE, "IMPEY




II. CHAPTER

COMMUNICATION. BARBICANE'S PRESIDENT


saloons the into pressed crowd dense a p.m., 8 at October, of 5th the On
residing club the of members the All Union-square. 21, Club, Gun the of
express The president. their of invitation the on gone had Baltimore at
had meeting-hall the if and hundreds, by members corresponding brought
in room found have not could _savants_ of crowd the large, so been not
and passages, the down rooms, neighbouring the into overflowed they it;
were who populace the against ran they there courtyards; the into even
all rank, front the into get to trying each doors, the against pressing
all Barbicane, President of communication important the learn to eager
to peculiar action of liberty that with crushing squeezing, pressing,
self-government. of idea the in up brought masses the

Baltimore in be to chanced have might who stranger any evening That
was it hall; large the in price any at place a obtained have not could
else one no members; corresponding or residing to reserved exclusively
men select and councillors, common magnates, city the and admitted; was
stray catch to order in inferiors their with mingle to compelled were
interior. the from news

marvellously was it spectacle; curious a presented hall immense The
of formed pillars Lofty built. was it which for purpose the to adapted
fine the supported base, a as mortars huge upon superposed cannon,
lacework. cast-iron arches--real the of ironwork

sorts all carbines, arquebuses, matchlocks, blunderbusses, of Trophies
the against enlaced picturesquely were firearms, modern or ancient of
grouped revolvers thousand a of out came flame, full in gas, The walls.
candelabra and pistols, of candlesticks whilst lustres, of form the in
Models light. of display this completed sheaves, in up done guns of made
shot-marks, with spotted targets bronze, of specimens cannons, of
of assortments balls, Club, Gun the of shock the by broken plaques
projectiles, of necklaces shells, of chaplets sponges, and rammers
artilleryman the of tools the all word, a howitzers--in of garlands
belief a induced and arrangement, wonderful their by eyes the surprised
deadly. than ornamental more was purpose real their that

a case, glass splendid a by covered seen, was honour of place the In
powder--a the of effort the under twisted and broken breech, of piece
cannon. Maston's J.T. of fragment precious

four by assisted president, the hall the of extremity the At
carved a on placed chair, His platform. wide a occupied secretaries,
32-inch a of proportions powerful the upon modelled was gun-carriage,
trunnions upon hung and degs., 90 of angle an at pointed was it mortar;
in agreeable very rocking-chair, a as it use could president the that so
six upon supported plate, iron huge a desk, the Upon heat. great
beautifully-chased a of made inkstand, tasteful very a stood carronades,
a like off went required, when which, report-bell, a and piece, Spanish
scarcely bell of sort new this discussions vehement the During revolver.
artillerymen. excited of legion this of voices the cover to sufficed

the like zigzags, in arranged benches, desk, the of front In
and bastions of succession a formed intrenchment, of circumvallations
that and seats; their took Club Gun the of members the where curtains
The ramparts. the on plenty were there said, be may it evening,
not would he that assured be to all for known sufficiently was president
motive. great very a without colleagues his together called have

singularly a of austere, cold, calm, forty, of man a was Barbicane Impey
an of chronometer, a as exact as mind, concentrated and serious
chivalrous, very not character; immovable and temperament imperturbable
the on bear to ideas practical bringing always and adventurous, yet
colonist, Northern a New-Englander, essential an enterprises; wildest
the and Stuarts, the to fatal so Roundheads those of descendant the
the of cavaliers ancient the gentlemen, Southern the of enemy implacable
mould. single a in cast Yankee a word, a country--in mother

director named timber-merchant; a as fortune great a made had Barbicane
inventions; in fertile himself showed he war, the during artillery of
of progress the to powerfully contributed he ideas, his in enterprising
researches. experimental to impetus immense an gave ballistics,

the in exception rare a by having, height, average of person a was He
to seemed features strongly-marked His intact. limbs his all Club, Gun
guess to order in that true be it if and rule, and square by drawn be
seen Barbicane profile, his at look must one man a of instincts the
and audacity, energy, of indications certain most the offered thus
_sang-froid_.

with absorbed, mute, chair, his in motionless remained he moment that At
silk, black of cylinder a hat, tall his under sheltered look inward an
men. American of skull the upon down screwed seems which

they him; disturbing without him around noisily talked colleagues His
suppositions, of field the into launched another, one questioned
of _x_ the out make to vain, in but tried, and president, their examined
physiognomy. imperturbable his

large the of clock fulminating the from struck o'clock eight as Just
silence general a up; jumped spring, a by moved if as Barbicane, hall,
follows:-- as spoke tone, emphatic slightly a in orator, the and ensued,

plunged peace unfruitful an since time some is colleagues,--It "Brave
period a After inactivity. deplorable into Club Gun the of members the
our abandon to obliged been have we incidents, of full so years, some of
proclaim to fear not do I progress. of road the on short stop and works
be would again hands our in arms put would which war any that aloud
welcome--"

Maston. J.T. impetuous cried war!" "Yes,

side. every on heard was hear!" "Hear,

actual under impossible is "war Barbicane, said war," "But
long hope, may interrupter honourable my whatever and, circumstances,
We battle. of field a on thunder cannons our before elapse will years
of order another in seek and it, to minds our up make therefore, must,
devoured." are we which by activity the for food ideas

point; delicate the to coming was president its that felt assembly The
attention. its redoubled it

asked "I Barbicane, continued colleagues," brave my ago, months few "A
not could we speciality, our in remaining still whilst if, myself
if and century, nineteenth the of worthy experiment grand some undertake
with it execute to us allow not would ballistics of progress the
conviction the and calculated, worked, sought, therefore have I success.
that enterprise an in succeed must we that studies my from resulted has
elaborated project, This country. other any in impracticable seem would
of worthy is it communication; my of subject the form will length, at
a make to fail cannot and history, past Club's Gun the of worthy you,
world!" the in noise

artilleryman. passionate a cried noise?" "Much

Barbicane. answered word," the of sense true the in noise "Much

voices. several repeated interrupt!" "Don't

president, the resumed colleagues," brave my you, of beg therefore "I
attention." your all me grant "to

rapid a with having Barbicane, assembly. the through ran shudder A
calm a in speech his continued head, his on hat his fixed firmly gesture
tone:--

moon, the seen not has who colleagues, brave you, of one not is "There
to speak to wish I if astonished be not Do It. of heard least, at or,
the be to lot our perhaps, is, It Night. of Queen the about you
much as me second and me, Understand world. unknown this of Columbuses
be shall name its and conquest, its to you lead will I can, you as
of country grand the form that States thirty-six the of those to joined
Union!" the

voice. one with Club Gun the cried moon!" the for "Hurrah

density, mass, "its Barbicane; resumed studied," much been has moon "The
in plays it part the distance, movements, constitution, volume, weight,
have maps selenographic determined; perfectly all are world, solar the
those surpass, not does it if equals, that perfection a with drawn been
of proofs satellite our to given has photography maps; terrestrial of
mathematics, of sciences the that all word, a beauty--in incomparable
but moon; the about known is teach can optics and geology, astronomy,
established." been ever has it with communication direct no now until

of sentence this welcomed surprise and interest of movement violent A
orator. the

certain how words few in you to recall "to resumed, he me," "Allow
have to pretended journeys, imaginary upon embarked minds, ardent
a century seventeenth the In satellite. our of secrets the penetrated
the of inhabitants the seen having of boasted Fabricius David certain
his published Baudoin, Jean Frenchman, a 1649 In eyes. own his with moon
the At Adventurer_. Spanish Gonzales, Dominique by Moon the to _Journey
that expedition celebrated the published Bergerac de Cyrano epoch same
nation (that Frenchman another on, Later France. in success much so had
his wrote Fontenelle, named moon), the of notice of deal great a took
its in science but time; his of masterpiece a Worlds_, of _Plurality
translated pamphlet, a 1835, About masterpieces! even crushes progress
to sent Herschel, John Sir that related American_, York _New the from
by had, observations, astronomical make to there Hope, Good of Cape the
moon the brought lighting, interior by perfected telescope, a of means
perceived distinctly he Then yards. eighty of distance a within to
borders, golden with mountains green hippopotami, lived which in caverns
membraneous with inhabitants and deer, white horns, ivory with sheep
named American an of work the treatise, This bats. of those like wings
a was it that out found soon was it But success. great very a had Locke,
it." at laugh to first the were Frenchmen and mystification, scientific

belli_!" _casus a that's "but Maston; J.T. cried American!" an at "Laugh

were they laughed Frenchmen before friend; worthy my comforted, "Be
history, rapid this terminate To countryman. our by in taken completely
balloon a in up went Rotterdam, of Pfaal, Hans certain a that add may I
than lighter times thirty-seven azote, from made gas a with filled
This days. nineteen of journey a after moon the reached and hydrogen,
was it but imaginary, purely was attempts, preceding the like journey,
contemplative and strange a of writer American popular a of work the
Poe!" Edgar named have I genius.

of words the by electrified assembly, the cried Poe!" Edgar for "Hurrah
president. the

purely call may I which attempts these of end an to come now have "I
communications serious any establish to insufficient quite and literary,
practical some that add to ought I However, Night. of Queen the with
Some her. with communication serious into themselves put to tried minds
of commission a send to proposed mathematician German a ago years
immense plains, vast the on There, Siberia. of steppes the to _savants_
reflectors; luminous of means by traced be to were figures geometrical
the called vulgarly hypothenuse, the of square the others, amongst
'ought mathematician, the said being,' intelligent 'Any Bridge.' 'Ass's
Selenites The figure. that of destination scientific the understand to
similar a by answer will exist, they if moon), the of (inhabitants
create to easy be will it established, once communication and, figure,
of inhabitants the with converse hold to us allow will that alphabet an
not was project his but mathematician, German the spoke Thus moon.' the
existed has communication direct no now until and execution, into put
the to reserved was it But satellite. her and earth the between
the with communication into itself put to Americans of genius practical
certain, easy, simple, are so doing of means The world. sidereal
proposition." my of subject the make will and unfailing,

not was There words. these welcomed exclamations of tempest and hubbub A
words the by away carried and dominated not was who audience the of one
orator. the of

sides. all on heard was Silence!" hear! "Hear,

tone, graver a in resumed, Barbicane down calmed was agitation the When
speech. interrupted his

made has ballistics of science the progress "what he, said know," "You
firearms perfection of degree what to and years, few last the during
in ignorant not are You on. gone had war the if brought been have would
force expansive the and cannons of resistance of power the that general
asked I principle, that from starting Well, unlimited. are powder of
under established apparatus, sufficient of means by if, myself
a send to possible be not would it resistance, of conditions determined
moon!" the to cannon-ball

panting thousand a from escaped stupefaction of "Oh!" an words these At
that calm profound the like silence, of moment a occurred then breasts;
applause, of thunder a but came, thunder the fact, In thunder. precedes
The again. shake meeting-hall the made which clamour and cries,
ten of end the at only was It not. could he speak; to tried president
heard. himself making in succeeded he that minutes

in question the at looked have "I coldly. resumed he finish," me "Let
that results it calculations indisputable my from and aspects, its all
a yards thousand twelve of speed initial an at hurled projectile, any
have, I her. reach necessarily must moon, the at directed and second,
the colleagues, worthy my you, to proposing of honour the therefore,
experiment." little this of attempting




III. CHAPTER

COMMUNICATION. BARBICANE'S PRESIDENT OF EFFECT


the of words last the by produced effect the depict to impossible is It
succession a What vociferations! what cries! What president. honourable
the which of onomatopoeia the all and cheers, hurrahs, groans, of
and hubbub indescribable an was It full. so is language American
All could. they as noise much as made feet and hands, Mouths, disorder.
have not would once at off going museum artillery this in weapons the
surprising; not is That sound. of waves the agitated violently more
cannons. their as noisy as nearly cannoneers are there

he perhaps clamours; enthusiastic these amidst calm remained Barbicane
gestures his for colleagues, his to words some address to wished again
violent in itself exhausted bell fulminating his and silence, for asked
chair, his from dragged soon was He heard. even not was it detonations;
he comrades faithful his of hands the from and triumph, in carried
crowd. excited less no the of those into passed

the that repeated been often has It American. an astonish can Nothing
been have must dictionary wrong the French; not is "impossible" word
simple, is everything easy, is everything America In mistake. by taken
born. are they before dead are they difficulties, mechanical to as and
Yankee true one not realisation its and project Barbicane the Between
difficulty. a of appearance the even see to himself allowed have would
done. as said soon As

evening. the during prolonged was president the of march triumphant The
Frenchmen, Germans, procession--Irish, torchlight veritable A
population the compose that individuals heterogeneous the Scotchmen--all
was cheering the and tongue, maternal their in Maryland--shouted of
unanimous.

then out shone moon the her, about all was it knew she if as Precisely
intense her with lights other eclipsing magnificence, serene with
shining the towards eyes their directed Yankees the All irradiation.
the by her called others hands, their with her saluted some disc;
in optician an midnight and o'clock eight between names; sweetest
of Queen The field-glasses. selling by fortune a made Jones-Fall-street
Americans The life. high of lady a like them through at looked was Night
if as seemed It proprietors. of freedom the with her to regard in acted
already and conquerors enterprising these to belonged Phoebe blonde the
that was question only the yet And territory. Union the of part formed
into entering of way brutal rather projectile--a a sending of
civilised amongst vogue in much but satellite, a with even communication
nations.

was it diminish; not did enthusiasm the and struck, just had Midnight
magistrates, population; the of classes all in doses equal in up kept
as well as intelligent street-porters, tradesmen, merchants, _savants_,
a was It fibres. delicate most their in even moved were men "green"
the by bathed quays the town, low town, high the enterprise; national
overflowed docks, their in imprisoned ships, the Patapsco, the of waters
talked, everybody whisky; and gin, joy, with intoxicated crowds with
gentleman the from applauded, and approved, disputed, perorated, argued,
of glass his before couch bar-room the on stretched comfortably
in "knock-me-down" upon drunk got who waterman the to "sherry-cobbler"
Point. Fell's of taverns dark the

Barbicane President calmer. became emotion the a.m. 2 about However,
not could Hercules A pieces. to knocked almost home getting in succeeded
squares the abandoned gradually crowd The enthusiasm. such resisted have
and Philadelphia, Susquehanna, Ohio, of railroads four The streets. and
heterogeneous the took Baltimore, at converge which Washington,
town the and States, United the of corners four the to population
tranquillity. relative a in reposed

evening memorable this during that believe to error an be would It
York, New Union, the of towns large The agitated. was alone Baltimore
La Charlestown, Orleans, New Richmond, Washington, Albany, Boston,
the in shared all Florida, and Michigan, Massachusetts, Texas, of Mobile
were Club Gun the of correspondents thousand thirty The delirium.
equal with awaited and letter, president's their with acquainted
same The October. of 5th the of communication famous the impatience
telegraph the along ran it speech his uttered orator the as evening
a miles 348,447 of speed a with Union, the of states the across wires,
the at that certainty absolute with said be therefore, may, It second.
France, as large as times ten America, of States United the moment same
swollen hearts, of millions twenty-five and voice, single a with cheered
pulsation. same the with beat pride, with

bi-monthly or monthly, weekly, daily, hundred five day next The
different its under it examined they question; the up took newspapers
a from moral, or economical, meteorological, aspects--physical,
a was moon the whether debated They view. of point social or political
Did transformation. undergoing still not was she if or world, finished
yet not did atmosphere the when time the in earth the resemble she
our to present hemisphere hidden her would spectacle of kind What exist?
simply was present at question the that Granting spheroid? terrestrial
that in saw one every Night, of Queen the to projectile a sending about
day one that hoped all experiments; of series a of starting-point the
some and orb, mysterious the of secrets last the penetrate would America
power of balance the disturb would conquest her that fear to seemed even
Europe. in

a suggested papers the of one not discussion, under once project The
and bulletins, treatises, papers, the all realisation; its of doubt
societies religious or literary, scientific, by published magazines
of Society" History "Natural the and advantages, its upon enlarged
and "Geographical the Albany, of Society" Art and "Science the Boston,
Society" Philosophical "American the York, New of Society" Statistical
in sent Washington of Institution" "Smithsonian the and Philadelphia, of
immediate with Club, Gun the to congratulations their letters thousand a
money. and service of offers

was there adherents; many so had ever proposition no that said be may It
jokes, the to As anxieties. or doubts, hesitations, of question no
and, Europe, in welcomed have would that songs comic and caricatures,
they moon, the to projectile a sending of idea the France, in all, above
"life-preservers" the all author; their against turned been have would
the against him guarantee to powerless been have would world the in
in at laughed be to not are that things are There indignation. general
World. New the

the of citizens greatest the of one day that from became Barbicane Impey
fact one and science, of Washington a like something States, United
a by paid was which homage sudden the show to serve will several amongst
man. one to nation

an of manager the Club Gun the of meeting famous the after days Some
of representation a Theatre Baltimore the at announced company English
the in seeing town, the of population the but Nothing_, About Ado _Much
Barbicane, President of projects the to allusion damaging a title
manager unfortunate the forced and seats, the broke theatre, the invaded
public to bowing manager, the man, sensible a Like play. the change to
for and It_, Like You _As by comedy offending the replaced opinion,
houses. fabulous had he weeks several




IV. CHAPTER

OBSERVATORY. CAMBRIDGE THE FROM ANSWER


enthusiasm the amidst instant an lose not did Barbicane meantime the In
his together call to was care first His object. the was he which of
debate, a after There, Club. Gun the of board-room the in colleagues
their of part astronomical the about astronomers consult to agreed they
the discuss then would they known, once answer Their enterprise.
success the assure to neglected be would nothing and means, mechanical
experiment. great their of

and up drawn was questions, special containing terms, precise in note A
town, This Massachusetts. in Cambridge of observatory the to addressed
justly is founded, was States United the of University first the where
greatest the assembled are There staff. astronomical its for celebrated
to Bond enabled which telescope powerful the is there science; of men
of satellite the discover to Clarke and Andromeda of nebula the resolve
way every in worthy therefore, was, institution celebrated This Sirius.
Club. Gun the of confidence the of

of hands the reached awaited, impatiently answer, the days two After
Barbicane. President

follows:-- as ran It

Gun the of President the to Observatory Cambridge the of Director "_The
Baltimore_. at Club

the to addressed inst., 6th the of favour your of receipt the "On
Baltimore the of members the of name the in Cambridge of Observatory
deemed have who staff, our of meeting a called immediately we Club, Gun
follows:-- as answer to expedient it

these:-- were it to proposed questions "The

moon? the to projectile a send to possible it Is "'1.

her and earth the separates that distance exact the is What "'2.
satellite?

a which to transit projectile's the of duration the be would What "'3.
moment what at consequently and given, been had speed initial sufficient
point? particular a at moon the reach to as so hurled be it should

position favourable most the present moon the would moment what At "'4.
projectile? the by reached being for

the hurl to destined cannon, the ought heavens the in point What "'5.
at? aimed be projectile,

when moment the at occupy moon the will heavens the in place What "'6.
start?' will projectile the

the to projectile a send to possible it 'Is 1, No. question "Regarding
moon?'

an given is it if moon the to projectile a send to possible is it "Yes,
this that prove Calculations second. a yards 1,200 of velocity initial
the earth the from distance the to proportion In sufficient. is speed
the of square the to ratio inverse an in diminishes gravitation of force
that greater times three distance a for that say, to is distance--that
projectile the of weight the consequence, In less. times nine is force
the at annulled completely being by end will and rapidly, decrease will
the of that to equal be will moon the of attraction the when moment
the moment that At distance. the of 47/52 the at say, to is earth--that
it point that clears it if and all, at weight no have will projectile
The gravitation. lunar of effect the by only moon the to on fall will
quite therefore, is, experiment the of possibility theoretic
the of power the in solely depends that success, its to as demonstrated;
employed. engine

separates that distance exact the is 'What 2, No. question "Regarding
satellite?' her from earth the

of ellipse, an but earth, the round circle a describe not does moon "The
therefore, is, consequence the foci; the of one occupies earth our which
recedes others at and to, nearer approaches it times certain at that
apogee its has it language, astronomical in or, earth, the from, farther
the from miles 247,552 at is moon the apogee its At perigee. its and
a makes which only, miles 218,657 at perigee its at and earth,
perigee The distance. the of ninth a than more or 28,895, of difference
all of basis the us give should that one the therefore, is, distance
calculations.

the of duration the be would 'What 3, No. question "Regarding
given, been has speed initial sufficient a which to transit projectile's
the reach to as so hurled be it should moment what at consequently and
point?' particular a at moon

a yards 12,000 of speed initial the indefinitely kept projectile the "If
destination; its reach to hours nine about take only would it second,
happen, will it decreasing, on go will velocity initial that as but
300,000 take will projectile the that upon, calculated everything
the where point the reach to minutes, 20 and hours 83 or seconds,
it point that from and equal, are gravitations lunar and terrestrial
and minutes, 53 hours, 13 or seconds, 50,000 in moon the upon fall will
20 and minutes, 13 hours, 97 hurled be therefore, must, It seconds. 20
at. aimed point the at moon the of arrival the before seconds

the present moon the would moment what 'At 4, No. question "Regarding
projectile?' the by reached being for position favourable most

perigee moon's the of epoch the above said been has what to "According
her crossing be will she when moment the at and chosen, be first must
a by distance entire the diminish further still will which zenith,
consequently, miles; 3,919 radius--i.e., terrestrial the to equal length
is moon the But miles. 214,976 be will accomplished be to passage the
a once is which perigee, her reaches she when zenith her at always not
long at simultaneously conditions two the under only is She month.
waited be must zenith and perigee of coincidence This time. of intervals
moon the year next of 4th December on that fortunately happens It for.
perigee her at be will she midnight at conditions; two these offer will
earth the from distance shortest her at say, to is zenith--that her and
time. same the at zenith her at and

the ought heavens the in point what 'At 5, No. question "Regarding
aimed?' be projectile the hurl to destined cannon

aimed be to ought cannon the admitted, being observations preceding "The
vertically situated spot the is zenith (the place the of zenith the at
perpendicular be will range its that so spectator), a of head the above
soonest the pass will projectile the and horizon, the of plane the to
reach to moon the for But gravitation. terrestrial of range the beyond
the latitude in exceed not must place that place a of zenith the
comprised be must it words, other luminary--in the of declination
the place other any In latitude. south or north of 28 and 0 between
the affect seriously would which oblique, be necessarily must range
experiment. the of success

the In occupy moon the will place 'What 6, No. question "Regarding
departure?' projectile's the of moment the at heavens

which moon, the space, into hurled is projectile the when moment the "At
from distant as times four be will day, each 35" 10' 13 forward travels
the to corresponds which space a 20", 42' 52 by point--i.e., zenith her
as But projectile. the of transit the during travel will she distance
to impart will earth the of movement rotatory the which deviation the
cannot projectile the as and account, into taken be also must shock the
the of radii sixteen to equal deviation a after until moon the reach
11, about to equal is orbit, moon's the upon calculated which, earth,
the by caused those to 11 these add to necessary is it
at Thus, 64. numbers, round in or, moon, the of delay already-mentioned
will moon the to applied radius visual the firing, of moment the
64. of angle an place the of line vertical the with describe

of Observatory the to proposed questions the to answers the are "Such
Club. Gun the of members the by Cambridge

up-- sum "To

28 and 0 between situated country a in placed be must cannon The "1st.
latitude. south or north of

place. the of zenith the at aimed be must It "2nd.

a yards 12,000 of speed initial an have must projectile The "3rd.
second.

46mins. 10hrs. at year, next of 1st December on hurled be must It "4th.
p.m. 40secs.

December on departure its after days four moon the meet will It "5th.
zenith. her at arrives she moment the at precisely, midnight at 4th,

the commence to once at therefore, ought, Club Gun the of members "The
into them put to ready be and enterprise, an such by necessitated labour
in moon the find not will they for upon, fixed moment the at execution
eleven and years eighteen till zenith and perigee of conditions same the
later. days

their at entirely itself puts Cambridge of Observatory the of staff "The
its join to begs and astronomy, theoretic of questions for disposition
America. of whole the of those to congratulations

staff, the of behalf "On

BELFAST, "J.M.

Cambridge_." of Observatory the of "_Director




V. CHAPTER

MOON. THE OF ROMANCE THE


the at placed and sight, of power infinite with endowed spectator A
seen have would universe, the gravitates which round centre unknown
creation. of epoch chaotic the during space all filling atoms of myriads
of law a place; took change a on, went centuries as degrees, by But
these obeyed; atoms wandering the which itself manifested gravitation
formed affinities, their to according chemically combined atoms,
the which with masses nebulous those made and molecules, into themselves
strewed. are heavens the of depths

round rotation of movement a by animated immediately were masses These
turn to began molecules, vague of made centre, This point. central their
immutable the following then, condensing; progressively whilst itself on
by diminished became volume its as proportion in mechanics, of laws
two these and accelerated, was rotation of movement its condensation
the of centre the planet, principal a resulted there persisting, effects
mass. nebulous

other seen have then would spectator the attentively watching By
in condense and planet, central the like behave mass the in molecules
and rotation, progressively-accelerated of movement a by manner same the
of nebulae, The stars. innumerable of form the under it round gravitate
formed. were present, at 5,000 nearly count astronomers which

Milky the called have men that one is there nebulae 5,000 these Amongst
has which of each stars, of millions eighteen contains which and Way,
world. solar a of centre the become

eighteen these amongst examined specially then had spectator the If
of star a brilliant, least and modest most the of one stars of millions
the all sun, the itself named proudly that one the order, fourth the
have would due is universe the of formation the which to phenomena
eyes. his under place taken successively

state, gaseous its in still sun this perceived have would he fact, In
on turning it perceived have would he molecules; mobile of composed and
movement, This concentration. of work its finish to axis own its
the by accelerated been have would mechanics, of laws the to faithful
centrifugal the when come have would time a and volume, of diminution
molecules the causes which centripetal, the overpowered have would force
centre. the towards tend to all

the of eyes the before passed have would phenomenon another Then
would equator the of plane the in situated molecules the and spectator,
sun. the round Saturn of that like rings concentric several formed have
of movement a with seized matter, cosmic of rings these turn their In
into up broken been have would mass, central the round rotation
planets. into say, to is nebulae--that secondary

these on attention his all concentrated then had spectator the If
give and sun the like exactly behave them seen have would he planets
bodies secondary those of origin rings, cosmic more or one to birth
satellites. call we which

the to molecule the from molecule, the to atom the from up going in Thus
principal the from star, principal the to nebulae the from and nebulae,
the to planet the from and planet, the to sun the from sun, the to star
the by undergone transformations of series whole the have we satellite,
universe. the of days first the from powers celestial

and universe, stellar the of immensities the amidst lost seems sun The
the of nebula the to science, of theories actual by related, is it yet
the amidst appears it as small and world, a of Centre Way. Milky
times 1,400,000 is size its for enormous, still is it regions, ethereal
from off struck planets, eight gravitate it Around earth. the of that
proceeding in are, These creation. of days first the in mass own its
Mars, Earth, the Venus, Mercury, distant, most the to nearest the from
circulate Jupiter and Mars Between Neptune. and Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter,
a of perhaps, _dbris_, wandering the bodies, smaller other regularly
has telescope the which of pieces, of thousands into up broken star
small so are asteroids these of Some present. at eighty-two discovered
gymnastic a at going by day single a in round walked be could they that
pace.

elliptical their in maintains sun the which bodies attendant these Of
their of satellites possess some gravitation, of law great the by orbit
three Neptune four, Jupiter eight, Saturn eight, has Uranus own.
of important least the of one latter, this one; Earth the and perhaps,
the that one that is it and Moon, the called is world, solar the
conquer. to means Americans the of genius enterprising

spectacle the and proximity relative her from Night, of Queen The
attention the divided first at phases, different her of renewed rapidly
the tires sun the but sun; the with earth the of inhabitants the of
lower to admirers its forces light its of splendour the and eyesight,
eyes. their

in seen be to herself allows graciously humane, more Phoebe, blonde The
she yet and ambitious, not eye, the to gentle is she grace; modest her
being ever without Apollo, radiant the brother her eclipses sometimes
to owed they gratitude what understood Mahommedans The him. by eclipsed
29-1/2 at months their ruled they and earth, the of friend faithful this
revolution. her on days

this to worship particular dedicated world the of people first The
Astarte, Phoenicians the Isis, her called Egyptians The goddess. chaste
explained they and Latona, and Jupiter of daughter Phoebe, Greeks the
handsome the and Diana of visits mysterious the by eclipses her
traversed lion Nemean the that relates legend mythological The Endymion.
poet the and earth, upon apparition its before moon the of country the
soft its lines sweet his in celebrated Plutarch, by quoted Agesianax,
parts luminous the by formed mouth, admirable and nose, charming eyes,
Selene. adorable the of

a in and, temperament, character, the understood ancients the though But
the view, of point mythological a from moon the of qualities moral word,
selenography. of ignorant very remained them amongst learned most

certain discovered times ancient of however, astronomers, Several
pretended Arcadians the Though science. by confirmed now particulars
though existed, moon the before epoch an at earth the inhabited had they
vault, crystal the to fastened and immovable her believed Simplicius
solar the from off broken fragment a as her upon looked Tacitus though
polished a her of made Aristotle, of disciple the Clearch, and orbit,
in ocean--though, the of images the reflected were which upon mirror
or earth, the by exhaled vapours of mass a her in saw only others short,
_savants_, other itself, on turned that ice half and fire half globe a
suspected instruments, optical without and observations wise of means by
Night. of Queen the govern that laws the of most

was moon the that opinion the out gave 460, B.C. Miletus, of Thales Thus
explanation right the gave Samos of Aristarchus sun. the by up lighted
light. reflected by shone she that taught Cleomenus phases. her of
of movement her of duration the that discovered Chaldean the Berose
thus he and revolution, of movement her of that to equal was rotation
Lastly, side. same the presented always moon the why explained
some discovered era, Christian the before years 200 Hipparchus,
satellite. earth's the of movements apparent the in inequalities

other and confirmed, afterwards were observations different These
the and century, second the in Ptolemy them. by profited astronomers
on Hipparchus of remarks the completed tenth, the in Wefa Aboul Arabian
undulating the following whilst undergoes moon the that inequalities the
the in Copernicus, Then sun. the of action the under orbit its of line
exposed completely sixteenth, the in Brahe, Tycho and century, fifteenth
the amongst plays moon the that part the and world the of system the
bodies. celestial

of little very but known, well pretty were movements her epoch that At
explained Galileo that then was It known. was constitution physical her
of existence the by phases certain in produced light of phenomena the
feet. 27,000 of height average an gave he which to mountains,

highest the lowered Dantzig, of astronomer an Hevelius, him, After
them brought Riccioli, contemporary, his but feet; 15,000 to altitudes
feet. 21,000 to again up

powerful a with armed century, eighteenth the of end the at Herschel,
a gave He measurements. preceding the reduced considerably telescope,
the down brought and mountains, highest the to feet 11,400 of height
But feet. 2,400 than more little to heights different of average
Louville, Schroeter, of observations the and too, mistaken was Herschel
and Gruithuysen, Lohrman, Pastorff, Bianchini, Nasmyth, Halley,
necessary were Moedler, and Boeer MM. of studies patient the especially
the _savants_, these to Thanks question. the resolve definitely to
and Boeer known. perfectly now is moon the of mountains the of elevation
15,000 exceed six which of elevations, different 1,905 measured Moedler
a to towers summit highest Their feet. 14,400 exceed twenty-two and feet
disc. lunar the of surface the above feet 22,606 of height

she completed; being was moon the of survey the time same the At
was nature volcanic essentially her and craters, with riddled appeared
rays the in refraction of absence the From observation. each by affirmed
no have can she that concluded is it her by occulted planets the of
therefore it water; of absence entails air of absence This atmosphere.
such under live to order in Selenites, the that manifest became
from singularly differ and organisation, special a have must conditions,
earth. the of inhabitants the

the searched instruments perfected more methods, new to thanks Lastly,
surface her of point a not leaving intermission, without moon
is surface her miles; 2,150 measures diameter her yet and unexplored,
volume her and globe, the of surface the of one-thirteenth
of none but spheroid; terrestrial the of volume the of one-forty-ninth
clever these and eyes, astronomers' the escape could secrets her
further. still observations wonderful their carried _savants_

appeared disc the full her at was moon the when that remarked they Thus
phases her during and lines, white with striped places certain in
greater with these of study the prosecuting By lines. black with striped
lines. these of nature exact the out making in succeeded they precision
bordering ridges, parallel between sunk furrows narrow and long are They
to ten from varied length their craters; the of edges the upon generally
Astronomers yards. 1,600 about was width their and miles, hundred one
not could they do; could they all was that and furrows, them called
not. or rivers ancient of beds dried-up the were they whether ascertain
geological this determine to other, or day some hope, Americans The
parallel of series the reconnoitre to undertake also They question.
learned a Gruithuysen, by moon the of surface the on discovered ramparts
elevated of system a be to them considered who Munich, of professor
obscure still two These engineers. Selenite by raised fortifications
by settled definitely be only can others, many doubtless and points,
moon. the with communication direct

it learnt; be to more nothing is there light her of intensity the to As
no has heat its and sun, the of that than weaker times 300,000 is
the as known phenomenon the to as thermometers; upon action appreciable
rays sun's the of effect the by explained naturally is it light," "ashy
the complete to seem which and moon, the to earth the from transmitted
last and first its during form crescent a presents it when disc lunar
phases.

earth's the respecting acquired knowledge of state the was Such
aspects, its all under perfect to undertook Club Gun the which satellite
moral. and political, geological, geographical, cosmographical,




VI. CHAPTER

BE TO ALLOWED LONGER NO IS WHAT AND IGNORE TO IMPOSSIBLE IS IT WHAT
STATES. UNITED THE IN BELIEVED


out bringing of that was proposition Barbicane's of effect immediate The
began Everybody Night. of Queen the to relative facts astronomical all
the on appeared had moon the if as seemed It assiduously. her study to
sky the in her seen ever had one no that and time, first the for horizon
without day, the of lion the was she fashion; the became She before.
the amongst place her took and account, that on modest less appearing
old revived newspapers The prouder. the any being without "stars"
recalled they part; a played wolves" the of "Sun this which in anecdotes
they her; to ascribed had ages past of ignorance the which influence the
quoted have would they and more little a tone; every in her about sang
selenomania. with filled was America of whole the sayings; witty her

the upon touched which question the treated journals scientific The
letter the published they specially; more Club Gun the of enterprise
approved and it upon commented they Cambridge, of Observatory the from
reserve. without it of

be to allowed longer no was Yankee ignorant most the even short, In
oldest the to nor, satellite, his to relative fact single a of ignorant
Science left. her about superstitions any have to them, amongst women
impossible was it ears; and eyes their into penetrated it them; flooded
astronomy. ass--in an be to

earth the between distance the how know not did people many then Until
to of advantage taken was fact This calculated. been had moon the and
moon. the of parallax the measuring by done was it that them to explain
the was it told were they them, to new seemed "parallax" word the If
the of extremity either from drawn lines straight two by formed angle
perfection the about doubt in were they If moon. the to radius earth's
the was only not that them to proved immediately was it method, this of
within to right were astronomers that but miles, 234,347 distance mean
miles. seventy

the moon, the of movements the with familiar not were who those To
movements, distinct two possesses she that daily demonstrated newspapers
of that second the axis, her upon rotation of that being first the
is time--that same the in both accomplishing earth, the round revolution
days. 27-1/3 in say, to

the on day and night causes that one the is rotation of movement The
lunar a in night one and day one but is there only moon, the of surface
turned face, the happily, But, hours. 354-1/3 last each they and month,
equal intensity an with it by lighted is globe, terrestrial the towards
always one the face, other the to As moons. fourteen of light the to
only tempered night, absolute of hours 354 naturally has it invisible,
due is phenomenon This stars." the from falls that light pale "the by
revolution and rotation of movements the that peculiarity the to solely
which, phenomenon a periods, equal rigorously in accomplished are
of satellites the to common is Herschel, and Cassini to according
satellites. other the to probably very and, Jupiter,

understand quite not did minds unyielding rather but well-disposed Some
earth the to face same the shows invariably moon the if how, first at
same the in herself round turn one describes she revolution, her during
and dining-room, your into answered--"Go was it such To time. of period
centre; the towards face your keep to always as so table the round turn
circle one described have will you ended is walk circular your when
every traversed successively have will eye your since yourselves, round
the is table the heavens, the is room the then, Well, room. the of point
moon!" the are you and earth,

comparison. the with delighted away go they And

still, earth; the to face same the presents always moon the then, Thus,
certain of consequence in that added be should it exact, quite be to
called east, to west from and south to north from fluctuations
0.57. about disc, her of half the than more rather shows she libration,

Cambridge the of director the as much as knew ignoramuses the When
make to began they rotation of movement moon's the about Observatory
and earth, the round revolution of movement her about uneasy themselves
wanted. they information the them gave quickly reviews scientific twenty
be may stars, infinite its with firmament, the that learnt then They
the indicating moves, moon the which upon dial vast a as upon looked
movement this in is it that earth; the of inhabitants the all to time
she that phases, different her in herself shows Night of Queen the that
the when say, to is sun--that the with opposition in is she when full is
the in being earth the other, each with line a on are bodies three
the with conjunction in is she when new is moon the that centre;
lastly, earth; the and sun the between is she when say, to is sun--that
the with makes, she when quarter last or first her in is moon the that
apex. the occupies she which of angle right a earth, the and sun

could eclipses that consequence in inferred Yankees perspicacious Some
their and opposition, or conjunction of periods the at place take only
whilst sun, the eclipse can moon the conjunction In just. was reasoning
the and turn; her in him eclipse can that earth the is it opposition in
because is month lunar a in twice happen not do eclipses these reason
the of that like elliptical is moves moon the which upon plane the
earth.

horizon, the above attain can Night of Queen the which height the to As
be can that all contained Cambridge of Observatory the from letter the
the to according varies height this that knew one Every it. about said
zones only the But taken. is observation the where place the of latitude
where say, to is zenith--that her reaches moon the where globe the of
necessarily spectators--are the of heads the above directly is she
the Hence equator. the and parallels 28th the between comprised
point some upon experiment the attempt to given recommendation important
hurled be may projectile the that order in globe, the of part this in
of attraction the escape quickly more thus may and perpendicularly,
the of success the to essential condition a was This gravitation.
thereupon. exercised much was opinion public and enterprise,

earth, the round revolution her in moon the by followed line the to As
that ignorant most the to demonstrated had Cambridge of Observatory the
These foci. the of one occupies earth the which of ellipse an is it
the all to as well as planets the all to common are orbits elliptical
not could it that proves rigorously mechanism rational and satellites,
moon the apogee her at when that understood clearly was It otherwise. be
to nearest was she perigee her at when and earth, the from farthest was
planet. our

or to wished he whether knew American every what was therefore, This,
true these if But of. ignorant be decently could one no what and no,
many and fears illusive certain way, their made rapidly principles
away. cleared difficulty with were errors

an was moon the that instance, for maintained, people worthy Some
round orbit elongated its along travelling whilst which, comet, ancient
of circle her in retained was and earth, the to near passed sun, the
the thus explain to pretended astronomers drawing-room The attraction.
sun. the accused they which of misfortune a moon, the of aspect burnt
and atmosphere, an have comets that notice to told were they when Only
answer. to what know not did they none, or little has moon the that

fears certain manifested "Shakers" of class the to belonging Others
the in made observations the since that heard had they moon; the about
a in accelerated had revolution of movement her Caliphs the of times
an that concluded logically very thence they proportion; certain
distance the in diminution a to correspond must movement of acceleration
infinitely on going effect double this that and bodies, two the between
were they However, earth. the into falling by end day one would moon the
generations future for fear to cease and themselves reassure to obliged
an Laplace, of calculations the to according that told were they when
was movement of acceleration this mathematician, French illustrious
diminution proportional a that and limits, narrow very within restricted
be cannot world solar the of equilibrium the Thus it. follow will
centuries. future in disturbed

dealt be to ignoramuses of class superstitious the was there Lastly
not does what know they ignorant; being with content not are these with;
them of Some deal. great a know they moon the about and exist,
people which of means by mirror polished a be to disc her considered
communicate and earth, the on points different from themselves see might
new 1,000 of out that pretended Others another. one to thoughts their
cataclysms, as such change, notable some brought had 950 moons
the in believed therefore they &c.; deluges, earthquakes, revolutions,
they destinies; human on Night of Queen the of influence mysterious
each with tie sympathetic some by connected is Selenite every that think
entirely she that Mead, Dr. with pretend, they earth; the of inhabitant
and moon new the during born are boys system--that vital the governs
necessary became it last at But &c. &c., quarter, last her during girls
moon, the if and truth; to back come to errors, vulgar these up give to
courtesans of minds the in prestige her lost influence, her of stripped
majority immense the her, on backs their turned some if power, every of
than ambition other no had they Yankees, the to As favour. her in were
plant to and sky, the of continent new this of possession taking of that
of States United the of banner star-spangled the summit highest its upon
America.




VII. CHAPTER

CANNON-BALL. THE OF HYMN THE


7th, October of letter memorable its in had, Observatory Cambridge The
mechanical view--the of point astronomical an from question the treated
practical the that then was It treated. be to still had point
but country other any to insurmountable seemed have would difficulties
play. as upon looked were they there but America;

working a nominated time, any losing without had, Barbicane President
three in was committee This Club. Gun the of heart the in committee
the cannon, the of questions great three the elucidate to sittings
learned very members four of composed was It powder. the and projectile,
were him with and vote, casting the had Barbicane matters. these upon
the lastly, and, Elphinstone, Major Morgan, General associated
of functions the confided were whom to Maston, J.T. inevitable
secretary.

house, Barbicane's President at met committee the October of 8th the On
should stomach the that important was it as Republican-street; 3, No.
took Club Gun the of members four the debate, a important so trouble not
Maston J.T. teapots. and sandwiches with covered table a at seats their
began. business the and hook steel his to on pen his screwed immediately

follows:-- as meeting the opened Barbicane

important more the of one solve to have "we he, said colleagues," "Dear
the of treats which sciences of greatest ballistics--that in problems
by space into hurled bodies of say, to is projectiles--that of movement
themselves." to left then and impulsion of power some

emotion. of voice a in Maston J.T. cried ballistics!" ballistics, "Oh,

to be would thing logical most "the Barbicane, continued "Perhaps,"
engine." the discussing to meeting first this consecrate

Morgan. General answered "Certainly,"

it deliberation, mature "after Barbicane, continued "Nevertheless,"
of that precede to ought projectile the of question the that me to seems
upon depend to ought latter the of dimensions the that and cannon, the
former." the of dimensions the

the with heard was and president, the interrupted here Maston J.T.
deserved. career past magnificent his which attention

right is president "our tone, inspired an in he said friends," dear "My
other; every of precedence the projectile the of question the give to
our messenger, our be will moon the at hurl to mean we cannon-ball the
entirely an from it regard to permission your ask I and ambassador,
view." of point moral

the of curiosity the excited projectile a at looking of way new This
the to attentively listened therefore they committee; the of members
Maston. J.T. of words

aside lay will I brief. be will "I continued, he colleagues," dear "My
up take to order kills--in that projectile projectile--the material the
to is cannon-ball A projectile. moral projectile--the mathematical the
it creating by and power, human of manifestation brilliant most the me
Creator!" the to nearest approached has man

Elphinstone. Major said hear!" "Hear,

planets, the and stars the made has God "if orator, the cried fact," "In
speed--that terrestrial of criterion cannon-ball--that the made has man
but nothing really are which space in wandering bodies of reduction
the light, electricity, of speed the claim Providence Let projectiles.
the is ours But wind! and sound, satellites, planets, comets, stars,
trains of that than greater times hundred cannon-ball--a the of speed
horses!" fastest the and

chanted he as lyrical quite became accents his inspired; was Maston J.T.
projectile. the to consecrated hymn the

Take ones. eloquent are "here he; continued figures?" like you "Would
than slower times 80,000 moves it though pounder; 24 simple the
the than slower times 76 light, than slower times 64,000 electricity,
leaves it when yet sun, the round translation of movement her in earth
a miles 14 of rate the at goes it sound; than quicker goes it cannon the
the at say, to is day--that a miles 20,100 hour, an miles 840 minute,
rotation, of movement globe's the in equator the of points the of speed
the to get to days 11 take therefore would It year. a miles 7,336,500
the at Neptune, reach to years 360 sun, the to get to years 12 moon,
the cannon-ball, modest this what is That world. solar the of limits
twenty with when, therefore, be, it will What do! can hands, our of work
a miles seven of rapidity a with it hurl shall we speed, that times
will you think to like I projectile! superb shot! splendid Ah! second?
ambassador!" terrestrial a to due honours the with there up received be

with overcome Maston, J.T. and peroration, brilliant this greeted Cheers
colleagues. his of felicitations the amidst down sat emotion,

let poetry, to time some given have we "that Barbicane, said now," "And
facts." to proceed us

each they as committee the of members the answered ready," are "We
sandwiches. half-a-dozen demolished

president; the continued solve," to have we is it problem what know "You
per yards 12,000 of speed a with projectile a endowing of that is "it
at but succeed, shall we that believe to reason every have I second.
Morgan General obtained; already have we speeds what see us let present
subject." that upon us edify can

war the during "because general, the answered easily," more the much "So
of cannon 100-pound The Commission. Experiment the of member a was I
initial an projectiles their gave yards, 5,000 of range a with Dahlgren,
second." a yards 500 of speed

of name the gave Americans (the Columbiad?" Rodman the and "Yes;
the asked destruction) of engines enormous their to "Columbiad"
president.

a hurled York, New near Hamilton, Fort at tried Columbiad, Rodman "The
speed a with miles, six of distance a ton, a half weighing projectile,
has Palliser nor Armstrong neither which result a second, a yards 800 of
England." in obtained

formidable his pointing Maston, J.T. said nowhere!" are "Englishmen
eastward. hook steel

obtained maximum the is yards 800 of speed "a Barbicane, resumed "Then,"
present." at

Morgan. answered "Yes,"

not had mortar my if "that Maston, J.T. replied however," add, might "I
up--" blown been

gesture. benevolent a with Barbicane replied up," blown was it but "Yes,
keep must We point. starting a for yards 800 of speed the take must "We
this produce to used means the of discussion the meeting another till
our which dimensions the to attention your call to me allow speed;
to different very something be must it course Of have. must projectile
weight." ton a half of one

major. the asked "Why?"

to enough large be must "it Maston, J.T. answered quickly "Because,"
there supposing moon, the of inhabitants the of attention the attract
any." are

more still reason another for "and Barbicane, answered "Yes,"
important."

major. the asked Barbicane?" mean, you do "What

think to then and projectile a up send to enough not is it that mean "I
transit." its in it follow must we it; about more no

proposition. the at surprised slightly general, the said "What?"

saying, was he what knew who man a like Barbicane, replied "Certainly,"
result." without be will experiment our "or

projectile the give to have will "you major, the replied then," "But
dimensions." enormous

instruments optical that know You attention. your me grant Please "No.
six objects increase telescopes certain perfection; great acquired have
at Now miles. forty of distance a within to moon the bring and thousand,
power The visible. perfectly are square feet sixty objects distance that
that because increased, been not has telescope the of penetration of
the and clearness, their of detriment the to exercised only is power
intense light a send not does mirror, reflecting a only is which moon,
limit." that beyond objects increase to telescopes the for enough

you "Do general. the asked do?" to mean you do what then, well, "Very
projectile?" your to feet sixty of diameter a giving intend

"No."

moon the making of task the yourself upon take to going not are "You
luminous?" more

though." am, "I

Maston. exclaimed strong!" rather "That's

the lessening in succeed I "If Barbicane. answered simple," but "Yes,
not I shall traverses, light moon's the which atmosphere the of density
intense?" more light that render

"Evidently."

my establish to have only shall I result that obtain to order "In
that." do can We mountain. high some upon telescope

simplifying of way a such have "you major; the answered in," give "I
thus?" obtain to hope you do enlargement What things!

only, miles five within moon the bring will which times, 48,000 of "One
feet." nine of diameter a need only will objects and

a have will projectile our "then Maston; J.T. exclaimed "Perfect!"
feet?" nine of diameter

"Precisely."

its "that Elphinstone, Major returned however," you, inform to me "Allow
be--" still will weight

me allow weight its discussing "before Barbicane, answered major!" "Oh,
from it be Far way. that in marvels did forefathers our that you tell to
to well is it but progressed, not have ballistics that pretend to me
dare I obtained, were results surprising Ages Middle the in that know
ours." than surprising more even affirm,

Maston. J.T. exclaimed statement," your "Justify

examples. some you give can "I Barbicane; answered easier," is "Nothing
hurled they 1453, in II., Mahomet by Constantinople of siege the At
its of time the in Malta, at lbs.; 1,900 weighed that bullets stone
weighing projectiles hurled Elme Saint Fort of cannon certain a knights,
mortar a XI. Louis under historian, French a to According lbs. 2,500
a Bastille, the at fired bomb, that but only; lbs. 500 of bomb a hurled
wise where Charenton, at fell ones, wise imprisoned men mad where place
ones." mad imprison men

Maston. J.T. said well," "Very

hurl cannons Armstrong The all? after seen, we have what "Since,
a half of projectiles Columbiads Rodman the and lbs., 500 of projectiles
they range in increased have projectiles if that then, seems, It ton!
we direction, that in efforts our turn we if Now, weight. in lost have
of weight the doubling in science the of progress the with succeed must
Malta." of Knights the and II. Mahomet of projectiles the

to intend you do metal what "but major; the answered evident," is "That
projectile?" own your for employ

Morgan. General said cast-iron," "Simply

for common very "that's disdainfully, Maston J.T. exclaimed "Cast-iron!"
moon." the to go to destined bullet a

Morgan; answered friend," honourable my exaggerate, us let not "Do
sufficient." be will "cast-iron

is projectile the of weight the "as Elphinstone, Major replied "Then,"
in feet nine measuring bullet, cast-iron a volume, its to proportion in
heavy." frightfully be still will diameter,

Barbicane. said hollow," be it if not but solid, be it if "Yes,

obus?" an be will it "Hollow!--then

of specimens "and Maston, J.T. replied despatches," put can we which "In
productions." terrestrial our

solid a be; must it what is "that Barbicane; answered obus," an "Yes,
weight a lbs., 200,000 than more weigh would inches 108 of bullet
projectile the give to necessary is it as however, great; too evidently
lbs." 20,000 of weight a it give to propose I stability, certain a

major. the asked metal?" the of thickness the be will "What

800 of diameter "a Morgan, replied proportions," usual the follow we "If
least." at thick feet two sides demands inches

a want not do "we Barbicane; answered thick," too much be would "That
to enough strong sides needs only it armour-plate; pierce to projectile
the is therefore, This, powder-gas. the of pressure the resist
weigh to order in have to obus iron an ought thickness problem:--What
at us tell will Maston, Mr. calculator, clever Our lbs.? 20,000 only
once."

secretary. honourable the replied easier," is "Nothing

which amongst paper, the on signs algebraical some traced he saying, So
a them from extract to seemed even He appeared. frequently x^2 and n^2
said-- and root, cubic certain

thick." inches two hardly be must sides "The

doubtfully. major the asked sufficient?" be that "Will

not." "certainly president, the answered "No,"

puzzled. looking Elphinstone, resumed done?" be must what "Then

cast-iron." of instead metal another use must "We

Morgan. suggested "Brass?"

to that than better something have I and too, heavy too is that "No;
propose."

major. the asked "What?"

Barbicane. answered "Aluminium,"

president. the of colleagues three the all cried "Aluminium!"

chemist, French illustrious an that know You friends. my "Certainly,
a in aluminium obtaining in 1854 in succeeded Deville, Claire St. Henry
the silver, of whiteness the possesses metal precious This mass. compact
of fusibility the iron, of tenacity the gold, of indestructibility
widely very is and wrought, easily is it glass; of lightness the copper,
is it rocks; most of basis the forms aluminium as nature, in distributed
expressly created been have to seems and iron, than lighter times three
projectile!" our for material the with us furnish to

his in noisy very always secretary, the cried aluminium!" for "Hurrah
enthusiasm. of moments

quoted aluminium not "is major, the said president," dear my "But,
high?" exceedingly

of pound a discovered first "when Barbicane; answered so," was "It
dollars, twenty-seven to fell it then dollars; 280 to 260 cost aluminium
dollars." nine worth is it now and

give easily not did who major, the replied pound," a dollars nine "But
price." enormous an still is "that in;

reach." of out not but major; dear my "Doubtless,

Morgan. asked then?" weigh, projectile the will "What

"A Barbicane. answered calculations," my of result the is "Here
if weigh, would thick inches 12 and diameter in inches 108 of projectile
be would it aluminium in cast lbs.; 67,440 cast-iron, of made were it
lbs." 19,250 to reduced

capitally." programme our suits "that Maston; cried "Perfect!"

a dollars nine at that know not you do "but major; the replied "Yes,"
cost--" would projectile the pound

that; know I Yes, dollars. fifty and thousand seventy-three hundred "One
be not will enterprise our for money friends; my nothing, fear but
that." for answer I wanting,

Maston. J.T. replied us," upon showered be will "It

president. the asked aluminium?" to say you do what "Well,

committee. the of members three the answered "Adopted,"

little of is "it Barbicane, resumed projectile," the of form the to "As
in itself find will it cleared, atmosphere the once since, consequence,
on turn will which ball, round a propose therefore I space; empty
pleases." so it if itself,

projectile the of question The meeting. committee first the ended Thus
the with delighted was Maston J.T. and upon, resolved definitely was
give will it "as Selenites, the to bullet aluminium an sending of idea
earth!" the of inhabitants the of idea an of end no them




VIII. CHAPTER

CANNON. THE OF HISTORY


outside. effect great a produced meeting this at passed resolutions The
weighing projectile a of idea the at alarmed grew people timid Some
ever could cannon what asked People space. into hurled lbs. 20,000
the of report The mass. a such for sufficient speed initial an transmit
victoriously. questions these answer to destined was meeting second

fresh before down sat Club Gun the of members four the evening next The
then debate The tea. of ocean veritable a and sandwiches of mountains
began.

ourselves occupy to going are "we Barbicane, said colleagues," dear "My
and composition, form, length, its engine, the of construction the with
gigantic it give to have shall we that probable is It weight.
industrial our be, might difficulties our great however but, dimensions,
and me to listen please you Will them. overcome easily will genius
them." fear not do I present? the for objections spare

declaration. this greeted murmur approving An

yesterday's our point what "to Barbicane, resumed forget," not must "We
an give to how following: the now is problem the us; brought debate
diameter in inches 108 shot a to second a yards 12,000 of speed initial
lbs. 20,000 weighing

Elphinstone. Major answered indeed," problem the is "That

"what Barbicane, resumed space," into hurled is projectile a "When
of resistance the forces, independent three by upon acted is It happens?
with impulsion of force the and earth, the of attraction the medium, the
resistance The forces. three these examine us Let animated. is it which
little of air--is the of resistance the say, to is medium--that the of
miles forty only is atmosphere terrestrial the fact, In importance.
in that cross will projectile the yards 12,000 of rapidity a With deep.
resistance the make to enough short be will time this and seconds, five
the of attraction the to pass now us Let insignificant. medium the of
that know We projectile. the of weight the to say, to is earth--that
of square the to ratio inverse an in diminishes weight that
to left body a when us: teach physics what is this fact, distances--in
first the in feet 15 falls it earth, the of surface the on falls itself
say, to is miles--that 257,542 fall to had body same the if and second,
reduced be would fall moon--its the and earth the between distance the
to equivalent almost is That second. first the in line a half to
overcome to progressively how therefore, is, question The immobility.
impulsion?" of force the By it? do we shall How gravitation. of law this

major. the answered difficulty," the is "That

over triumph shall we "But president. the replied indeed," it is "That
the of length the on depends want we impulsion of force this for it,
limited being only one the employed, powder of quantity the and engine
therefore, ourselves, occupy us Let other. the of resistance the by
quite is It cannon. the to given be to dimensions the with to-day
not will it seeing like, we as large as it, make can we that understood
moved." be to have

general. the replied evident," is that "All

enormous our cannon, longest "the Barbicane, said now," "Until
shall we long; feet twenty-five than more been not have Columbiads,
to have shall we dimensions the by people many astonish therefore
adopt."

cannon a for ask I part, my "For Maston. J.T. exclaimed "Certainly,"
least!" at long mile a half

general. the and major the cried mile!" a "Half

short." too half be will that and mile, a half "Yes,

exaggerate." "you Morgan, answered Maston," "Come,

why know not do really I "and secretary; irate the said not," do I "No,
exaggeration." with me tax you

far." too go you "Because

an "that dignified, looking Maston, J.T. answered sir," know, must "You
far." too go never can he cannon-ball, a like is artilleryman

interfered. president the but personal, getting was debate The

gun a want evidently We out. it reason us let and friends, my calm, "Be
detention the increase will engine the of length the as range, great of
overstep to useless is it but projectile, the behind accumulated gas of
limits." certain

major. the said "Perfectly,"

a of length the Ordinarily case? a such in rules usual the are "What
projectile, the of diameter the times twenty-five or twenty is cannon
weight." its times 240 to 235 weighs it and

impetuosity. with Maston J.T. cried enough," not is "It

that keeping by fact in and friend, worthy my that, to agree "I
the lbs., 30,000 weighing wide, feet nine projectile a for proportion
7,200,000 of weight a and feet 225 of length a have only would engine
lbs."

a take well as might "You Maston. J.T. resumed ridiculous," is "That
pistol."

to propose I why is "that Barbicane; answered too," so think "I
long." feet 900 cannon a construct to and length, that quadruple

this nevertheless, but, objections, some made major the and general The
definitely was secretary, the by supported strongly proposition,
adopted.

sides?" its give we must thickness "what Elphinstone, said "Now,"

Barbicane. answered feet," six of thickness "A

the asked gun-carriage?" a upon mass a such raising of think not do "You
major.

Maston. J.T. said however! superb, be would "That

this casting of think I "No, Barbicane. answered impracticable," "But
and hoops, wrought-iron with up it binding itself, ground the in engine
When masonry. cement and stone of mass thick a with it surrounding then
prevent to as so precision great with bored be must it cast is it
of force expansive the all and gas, of loss no be will there so windage,
propulsion." the in employed be will powder the

cannon." our have "we Maston, said hurrah!" "Hurrah!

his with friend impatient his calming Barbicane, answered yet," "Not
hand.

not?" "Why

howitzer, cannon, a be it Shall form. its discussed not have we "Because
mortar?" a or

Morgan. replied cannon," "A

major. the said howitzer," "A

Maston. J.T. exclaimed mortar," "A

favourite his of part the taking each pending, was discussion fresh A
short. it stopped president the when weapon,

will Columbiad Our agree. you make soon will "I he, said friends," "My
the because cannon, a be will It three. all of mixture a be
a be will It chamber. the as diameter same the have will powder-magazine
mortar, a be will it Lastly, obus. an hurl will it because howitzer,
any without that and 90, of angle an at pointed be will it because
communicate will it ground, the to fixed unalterably recoil; of chance
body." its in accumulated impulsion of power the all projectile the to

committee. the of members the answered adopted," "Adopted,

be _canobusomortar_ this will "and Elphinstone, said question," "One
rifled?"

speed, initial enormous an have must we "No, Barbicane. answered "No,"
a than rapidly less rifle a leaves shot a that well very know you and
smooth-bore."

major. the answered "True,"

Maston. J.T. repeated time," this it have we "Well,

president. the replied yet," quite "Not

not?" "Why

made." be will it metal what of know yet not do we "Because

delay." without that decide us "Let

you." to it propose to going was "I

sandwiches, dozen a swallowed each committee the of members four The
recommenced. debate the and tea, of cup a by followed

tenacity, great of possessed be "must Barbicane, said cannon," "Our
and indissoluble, heat, by infusible be must it hardness; great
acids." of action corrosive the by inoxydable

shall we as "and major, the answered that," about doubt no is "There
much have not shall we metal of quantity considerable a employ to have
choice."

the of fabrication the for propose "I Morgan, said then," "Well,
of parts 100 say, to is known--that hitherto alloy best the Columbiad
brass." of 6 and tin, of 12 copper,

has composition this that agree "I president, the answered friends," "My
hard very and dear too be would it bulk in but results; excellent given
but material, excellent an adopt must we think therefore I work. to
major?" opinion, your that not Is cast-iron. as such cheap,

Elphinstone. answered "Quite,"

than less times ten costs "cast-iron Barbicane, resumed fact," "In
is and moulds, sand into run readily is it melted, easily is it bronze;
time. and money of economy an therefore, is, it manipulated; rapidly
war the during that remember I and excellent, is material that Besides,
each shots thousand a fired cannon cast-iron Atlanta of siege the at
it." by damaged being without minutes twenty every

Morgan. answered brittle," very is cast-iron "Yet

it let not shall we Besides, too. resistance possesses it but "Yes,
that." for answer can I explode,

Maston J.T. replied honest," be yet and explode to possible is "It
sententiously.

our beg to going therefore, am, "I Barbicane. answered "Evidently,"
feet 900 cannon cast-iron a of weight the calculate to secretary worthy
thick." feet six sides and feet, nine of diameter inner an with long,

he before, day the done had he as and, Maston, J.T. answered once," "At
a of end the at said and facility, marvellous with calculations his made
minute--

tons." 68,040 weigh will cannon "This

pound?" a cents two at cost that will much how "And

one and hundred seven thousand ten and hundred five million "Two
dollars."

anxiously. Barbicane at looked general the and major, the Maston, J.T.

to said I what repeat only can "I president, the said gentlemen," "Well,
money." for want not shall we uneasy; be don't yesterday, you

after up, broke committee the president its of assurance this Upon
evening. next the for meeting third a fixed having




IX. CHAPTER

POWDERS. OF QUESTION THE


awaited public The settled. be to remained still powder of question The
length and projectile the of size The anxiety. with decision last this
powder of quantity the be would what given, being cannon the of
which, of agent, terrible This impulsion? the produce to necessary
in part a play to destined was master, himself made has man however,
proportions. unusual

in invented was gunpowder that asserted often and known generally is It
great his for paid who Schwartz, monk the by century fourteenth the
story this that now proved nearly is it But life. his with discovery
was Gunpowder Ages. Middle the of legends the among ranked be must
like composed, fire, Greek of product direct a is it one; no by invented
mixtures; these epoch that since only saltpetre; and sulphur of it,
detonating into transformed been have dissolving, only were which
mixtures.

few gunpowder, of history false the perfectly know men learned if But
be to necessary is this Now power. mechanical its of aware are people
to submitted question the of importance the understand to order in known
committee. the

burning, by produces, it lbs.; 2 about weighs gunpowder of litre a Thus
a of action the under and liberated, gas, this gas; of litres 400 about
the Therefore litres. 4,000 of space the occupies 2,400, of temperature
as deflagration its by produced gas of volume the to is powder of volume
a into compressed is it when gas, this of force frightful The 400. to 1
imagined. be may small, too times 4,000 space

next the when, perfectly knew committee the of members the what is This
debate. the opened Elphinstone Major sitting. their began they day,

begin to going am "I chemist, distinguished the said comrades," dear "My
our for basis a as serve will which figures, unexceptionable some with
spoke Maston J.T. Hon. the which of cannon-ball, 24-lb. The calculation.
of lbs. 16 by cannon the of out driven is yesterday, before day the
only." powder

Barbicane. asked figures?" your of certain are "You

only cannon Armstrong "The major. the answered certain," "Absolutely
Rodman the and lbs., 800 of projectile a for powder of lbs. 75 uses
bullet half-ton its send to powder of lbs. 160 expends only Columbiad
the in myself them found I for doubted, be cannot facts These miles. six
Artillery." of Committee the of reports

general. the answered certain," is "That

these from drawn be to conclusion "the major, the resumed "Well,"
weight the with augment not does powder of quantity the that is figures
and, powder, of lbs. 16 took lbs. 24 of shot a if fact, in shot; the of
weighing powder of quantity a cannons ordinary in if terms, other in
is proportion this used, is projectile the of weight the of two-thirds
of shot the for that see will you and Calculate, necessary. always not
been has quantity this powder, of lbs. 333 of instead weight, ton a half
only. lbs. 116 to reduced

president. the asked at?" driving you are "What

"would Maston, J.T. said major," dear my theory, your of extreme "The
were shot your provided all, at powder no having to you bring
heavy." sufficiently

things," serious most the in even joke his have will Maston "Friend
a propose soon shall I uneasy; be not need he "but major; the replied
it have to wish I Only him. satisfy will that powder of quantity
of weight the guns, largest the for and war, the during that understood
of weight the of tenth a to experience, after reduced, was powder the
shot." the

quantity the deciding before "but, Morgan; said exact," more is "Nothing
to well be would it think I impulsion, the give to necessary powder of
nature." its upon agree

"its major; the answered powder," large-grained a use shall "We
rapid." most the is deflagration

by ends and brittle, very is it "but Morgan; replied doubt," "No
gun." the of chamber the damaging

service long for destined gun a for bad be would what but "Certainly;
and explosion, of danger no run We Columbiad. our for so be not would
effect mechanical its make to fire take immediately must powder the
complete."

fire set to as "so Maston, J.T. said touchholes," several make might "We
time." same the at places several in it to

it of working the make would that "but Elphinstone, answered doubt," "No
that powder large-grained my to back come therefore I difficult. more
difficulties." these removes

general. the answered it," be "So

in powder a used "Rodman major, the resumed Columbiad," his load "To
rarefied simply charcoal, willow of made chestnuts, as large as grains
on stain no left shining, and hard was powder This pans. cast-iron in
oxygen, and hydrogen of proportion great a contained hands, the
much not did brittle, very though and, instantaneously, deflagrated
mouthpiece." the damage

to nothing have we "that Maston, J.T. answered me," to seems it "Well,
made." is choice our that and about, hesitate

which laughing, major, the replied gold-powder," prefer you "Unless
susceptible his of hook steel the from gesture threatening a provoked
friend.

he discussion; the from aloof himself kept had Barbicane then Until
saying with himself contented He idea. an evidently had and listened,
simply--

propose?" you do powder of quantity what friends, my "Now,

of space the for another one at looked Club Gun the of members three The
minute. a

last. at Morgan said pounds," thousand hundred "Two

major. the replied thousand," hundred "Five

Maston. J.T. exclaimed thousand," hundred "Eight

In exaggeration. with colleague his tax not dared Elphinstone time This,
weighing projectile a moon the to sending of that was question the fact,
A second. a yards 2000 of force initial an it giving of and lbs., 20,000
by made proposition triple the followed therefore, silence, of moment
colleagues. three the

Barbicane. President by broken last at was It

this from start "I tone, quiet a in he said comrades," brave "My
conditions, given the in cannon, our of resistance the that principle,
Maston J.T. Honourable the surprise therefore, shall, I unlimited. is
I and calculations, his in timid been has he that him tell I when
powder." of lbs. 800,000 his double to propose

of out jumping Maston, J.T. shouted pounds!" thousand hundred "Sixteen
chair. his

that." as much as "Quite

long." mile a half cannon my to back come to have shall we "Then

major. the said evident," is "It

of Secretary the resumed powder," of pounds thousand hundred "Sixteen
your as now, feet; cubic 22,000 of space a about occupy "will Committee,
and full, half be will it feet, cubic 54,000 about hold only will cannon
to gas the of explosion the allow to enough long be not will chamber the
projectile." your to impulsion sufficient give

all They truth. the spoke Maston J.T. answer. to nothing was There
Barbicane. at looked

powder. of quantity that to hold "I president, the resumed "However,"
of litres 6,000,000,000 give will powder of pounds 1,600,000 Think!
gas."

general. the asked done?" be to it is how "Then

powder, of quantity enormous this reduce must We simple. very is "It
power." mechanical its time same the at keeping

means?" what By "Good!

simply. Barbicane answered you," tell will "I

him. at looked all interlocutors His

of mass that bring to "than resumed, he fact," in easier, is "Nothing
cellular curious that know all You less. times four volume a to powder
vegetables?" of tissues elementary the constitutes which matter

Barbicane." you, understand "I major, the said "Ah!"

in purity perfect in obtained "is president, the said matter," "This
of skin the but nothing is which cotton, in especially things, different
nitric cold with combined cotton, Now plant. cotton the of seeds the
eminently insoluble, eminently substance a into transformed is acid,
French a 1832, in ago, years Some explosive. eminently combustible,
called he which substance, this discovered Braconnot, chemist,
different its studied Pelouze, Frenchman, another 1838, In xyloidine.
at chemistry of professor Schonbein, 1846, in lastly, and properties;
cotton." nitric is powder This gunpowder. as it proposed Basle,

Elphinstone. answered pyroxyle," "Or

Morgan. replied cotton," fulminating "Or

discovery?" this of bottom the at put to name American an not there "Is
patriotism. of sentiment lively a by animated Maston, J.T. exclaimed

major. the replied unfortunately," one, "Not

tell may "I president, the resumed Maston," satisfy to "Nevertheless,
the of study the to annexed be may fellow-citizens our of one that him
in agents principal the of one is which collodion, for celluosity,
has alcohol which to ether in dissolved pyroxyle simply is photography,
student." medical a then Maynard, by discovered was it and added, been

secretary noisy the cried cotton!" fulminating and Maynard for "Hurrah
Club. Gun the of

its with acquainted are "You Barbicane. resumed pyroxyle," to return "I
the with prepared is It us. to precious so it make which properties
fifteen for acid nitric smoking in plunged cotton facility; greatest
all." is that and dried, then water, in washed then minutes,

Morgan. said certainty," simple, more is "Nothing

quality precious a moisture, by damaged not is pyroxyle more, is "What
Its cannon. the load to days several take will it as eyes, our in
its and 240 at of instead 170 at place takes inflammability
gunpowder ordinary on fired be may it that immediate so is deflagration
too." fire catch to time has latter the before

major. the answered "Perfect,"

more." cost will it "Only

Maston. J.T. said matter?" that does "What

than greater times four speed a projectiles to communicates it "Lastly,
of weight its of 8/10ths if that add even may I gunpowder. of that
greatly still is force expansive its added is potash of nitrate
augmented."

major. the asked necessary?" be that "Will

lbs. 1,600,000 of instead "Thus Barbicane. answered so," think not do "I
as and cotton, fulminating of lbs. 400,000 have only shall we powder, of
feet, cubic 27 into cotton of lbs. 500 compress danger, without can, we
the of chamber the in feet 180 than more up take not will quantity that
of feet 700 than more have will projectile the means these By Columbiad.
gas of litres of 6,000,000,000 of force a under traverse to chamber
Night." of Queen the over flight its taking before

into himself threw He emotion. his contain not could Maston J.T. Here
would he and projectile, a of violence the with friend his of arms the
bombproof. been have not he had in stove been have

and Barbicane committee. the of sitting first the ended incident This
just had impossible, seemed nothing whom to colleagues, enterprising his
Their powder. and cannon, projectile, the of question complex the solved
execution. into it put to but left nothing was there made, being plan




X. CHAPTER

FRIENDS. OF MILLIONS TWENTY-FIVE AGAINST ENEMY ONE


Gun the of details least the in interest great took public American The
The day. by day debates committee the followed It enterprise. Club's
of questions the experiment, great this for preparations simple most
all solved, be to difficulties mechanical the provoked, it figures
pitch. highest the to opinion popular excited

and work the of commencement the between elapse would year a than More
The excitement. of void be not would interval the but completion; its
the of metal the casting the boring, the for chosen be to place
to necessary than more was this all loading, perilous its Columbiad,
of out be would fired, once projectile, The curiosity. public excite
would it how it, of become would what then seconds; few a in sight
privileged few a but none moon, the reach would it how space, in behave
for preparations the then, Thus, eyes. own their with see would persons
the constituted execution its of details precise the and experiment the
interest. of source real

was enterprise the of attraction scientific purely the meantime the In
incident. an by heightened once at all

Barbicane the friends and admirers of legions numerous what known is It
and number the notwithstanding But, author. its round called had project
One unanimous. be to destined not was it majority, the of importance
Club. Gun the against protested States, United the all of out one man,
is nature human and--for occasion, every on violently it attacked He
man's one this to sensitive more was constituted--Barbicane thus
others. the all of applause the to than opposition

came whence from antipathy, this of motive the knew well he Nevertheless
lastly, date; ancient of and personal was it why enmity, solitary this
root. taken had it rivalry what in

enemy. persevering this seen never had Club Gun the of president The
had have certainly would men two the of meeting the for Happily,
a Barbicane, like _savant_ a was rival This consequences. disastrous
Yankee. pure a character, violent and determined, enterprising, proud,
Philadelphia. in lived He Nicholl. Captain was name His

the during on went which struggle curious the of ignorant is one No
former the vessels, ironclad and projectile the between war Federal
pierced. be to not determined latter the latter, the pierce to destined
two the of navies the in transformation radical a came Thence
the supremacy, for struggled plates iron and Cannon-balls continents.
with armed Ships thicker. got latter the as larger getting former
invulnerable their of shelter under fire the into went guns formidable
shot Wechhausen and Tennessee, ram Monitor, Merrimac, The armour.
the against proof themselves made having after projectiles enormous
have not would they what others to did They ships. other of projectiles
war of art whole the which upon principle immoral an them, to do others
based. is

an was Nicholl and projectiles, of caster great a was Barbicane Now
at day and night cast one The plate-armour. of forger great equally
followed Each Philadelphia. at night and day forged other the Baltimore,
ideas. of current different essentially an

a invented Nicholl projectile, new a invented had Barbicane as soon As
in life his passed Club Gun the of president The armour. plate new
constant a Hence it. doing him preventing in captain the holes, piercing
in appeared Nicholl persons. their touched even which rivalry
split, he which against ironclad impenetrable an as dreams Barbicane's
which projectile a like appeared dreams Nicholl's in Barbicane and
up. him ripped

_savants_ these lines, diverging two along ran they although Still,
in axioms the all of spite in other each meeting by ended have would
these for Happily field. duel a on been have would it then but geometry;
to fifty from of distance a country, their to useful so citizens, worthy
the in obstacles such put friends their and them, separated miles sixty
met. never they that way

the held inventors two the of which known clearly not was it present At
It difficult. decision just a rendered obtained results The palm.
to way give to have would armour-plate end the in that however, seemed,
latest the At doubts. their had men competent Nevertheless, projectiles.
effect more no had Barbicane of shots cylindro-conical the experiments
of forger the day That armour-plate. Nicholl's upon pins than
but nothing had henceforth and victorious, himself believed Philadelphia
simple substituted Barbicane on, later when, But rival. his for disdain
go to obliged was captain the shots, conical for lbs. 600 of howitzers
of though projectiles, these fact, It estimation. own his in down
armour-plate pieces to broke and holes with drilled velocity, mediocre
metal. best the of

the with rest to seemed victory and point this reached had Things
a terminated Nicholl that day very the ended war the when projectile,
all defied It kind. its of masterpiece a was It armour-plate. forged new
Washington the to taken it had captain The world. the in projectiles the
it. pierce to Club Gun the of president the challenged and Polygon
experiment. the attempt not would made, been having peace Barbicane,

shock the to armour-plate his expose to offered rage, a in Nicholl, Then
conical. or round, hollow, solid, projectile, of kind any of

success, last his compromise to not determined was who president, The
refused.

Barbicane tempt to tried obstinacy, unqualified this by excited Nicholl,
yards 200 plate his put to proposed He advantage. every him leaving by
75. at even Not yards? 100 At refused. still Barbicane gun. the from

yards 25 "at newspapers, the through captain, the cried then," 50, "At
it." behind be will I and plate, my from

it of front in be would Nicholl Captain if even that answered Barbicane
more. any fire not would he

recourse had He himself. contain longer no could Nicholl reply, this On
to refuses who man the cowardice--that insinuated he personalities; to
in that, it; of afraid being nearly very is cannon a from shot a fire
have distance miles six at now fight who artillerymen the short,
and courage, individual for formulae mathematical substituted prudently
cannon-ball a for wait quietly to required bravery much as is there that
science. of rules the all to according it send to as armour-plate behind

knew never he Perhaps nothing. answered Barbicane insinuations these To
him absorbed enterprise great his of calculations the for them, about
entirely.

of anger the Club, Gun the to communication famous his made he When
jealousy supreme was it with Mixed maximum. its reached Nicholl Captain
anything invent he could How powerlessness. absolute of sentiment a and
ever could armour-plate What long? feet 900 Columbiad a than better
this by crushed first at was Nicholl lbs.? 30,000 of projectile a resist
by proposition the crush to resolved and recovered he then cannon-ball,
arguments. best his of weight the

a sent He Club. Gun the of labours the attacked violently therefore He
to refuse not did they which newspapers, the to letters of number
the Once scientifically. work Barbicane's demolish to tried He publish.
must it reasons aid, his to kind every of reasons called he begun, war
metal. bad of and specious often acknowledged be

Nicholl figures. his about attacked violently was Barbicane Firstly,
accused he and formulae, his of falseness the B + A by prove to tried
ballistics. of principles rudimentary the of ignorant being of him
it calculations, own Nicholl's to according and errors, other Amongst
He second. a yards 12,000 of velocity a body any give to impossible was
projectile a velocity that with even that hand, in algebra sustained,
It atmosphere. terrestrial the of limits the pass never would heavy thus
and velocity, the Granted still. Better leagues! eight go even not would
the of pressure the resist not would shot the sufficient, as it taking
even and powder, of pounds 1,600,000 of combustion the by developed gas
a such support not would least at it pressure, that resist did it if
would and Columbiad, the from issued it as melt would it temperature;
spectators. imprudent the of heads the on rain red-hot in fall

work. his with on went and attacks, these to attention no paid Barbicane

Without aspects. other its in question the considered Nicholl Then
looked he view, of points other all from uselessness its of speaking
who citizens the for both dangerous, exceedingly as experiment the upon
the for and presence, their by spectacle a condemnable so authorised
the if that remarked also He cannon. deplorable the near towns
absolutely result a destination, its reach not did projectile
and again, earth the to on fall would it that evident was it impossible,
velocity its of square the by multiplied mass a such of fall the that
a such in Therefore, globe. the on point some damage singularly would
of rights the upon put being restriction any without and circumstance,
of intervention the which in cases those of one was it citizens, free
be not must all of safety the and necessary, became government
individual. single a of pleasure good the for endangered

to himself allowed Nicholl Captain exaggeration what to seen be will It
his of notice any took Nobody opinion. his in alone was He carried. be
his till liked, he as much as exclaim him let They prophecies. Cassandra
defender the himself constituted had He pleased. he if sore was throat
did he and to, listened not but heard was He advance. in lost cause a of
who Club, Gun the of president the from admirer single a off carry not
arguments. rival's his refute to trouble the take even not did

fight to able being not and intrenchments, last his into driven Nicholl,
the in proposed therefore He it. for pay to resolved opinion, his for
an in and terms these in conceived bets of series a Inquirer_ _Richmond
proportion. increasing

that-- bet He

be not would enterprise Club's Gun the for necessary funds The 1.
dols. 1,000 forthcoming,

would and impracticable was feet 900 of cannon a of casting the That 2.
dols. 2,000 succeed, not

the that and Columbiad, the load to impossible be would it That 3.
projectile, the of weight the under spontaneously ignite would pyroxyle
dols. 3,000

dols. 4,000 discharge, first the at burst would Columbiad the That 4.

few a fall would and miles, six go even not would projectile the That 5.
dols. 5,000 discharge, its after seconds

his in sum important an risking was captain the that seen be will It
stake. at were dols. 15,000 than less No obstinacy. invincible

of 19th the on received he wager, the of importance the Notwithstanding
terms:-- these in couched laconism, superb of packet sealed a October

18th. October "Baltimore,

"Done.

"BARBICANE."




XI. CHAPTER

TEXAS. AND FLORIDA


to favourable place decided--a be to question one remained still There
the of recommendation the to According chosen. be to had experiment the
plane the to perpendicularly aimed be must gun the Observatory Cambridge
only moon the Now zenith. the towards say, to is horizon--that the of
of 28 and 0 between situated places the in zenith the in appears
The 28. only is declination her when terms, other in or, latitude,
where globe the of point exact the determine to therefore, was, question
cast. be should Columbiad immense the

Barbicane meeting. general a held Club Gun the October of 20th the On
But Belltropp. Z. by States United the of map magnificent a brought
habitual his with rose Maston J.T. it unfold to time had he before
follows:-- as speak to began and vehemence,

really is to-day settle to are we question the colleagues, "Honourable
a doing for occasion an with us furnish will and importance, national of
patriotism." of act great

understanding without other each at looked Club Gun the of members The
to. coming was orator the what

to anything doing of think "would continued, he you," of one "Not
the that right one is there if and country, his of glory the lessen
formidable the bosom its in harbouring of that is it claim may Union
circumstances--" present the under Now, Club. Gun the of cannon

Barbicane. said me--" allow you "Will

J.T. impetuous the replied ideas," of discussion free the demand "I
glorious our which from territory the that maintain I "and Maston,
Union." the to belong to ought rise will projectile

members. several answered "Certainly,"

south the on as enough, far stretch not do frontiers our as then, "Well,
in and States United the beyond seek must we as limit, our is ocean the
legitimate a all is this parallel, 28th this country neighbouring a
Mexico!" against declared be should war that demand I and belli_, _casus

parts. all from cried was no!" "No,

word a such hearing at astonished much am "I Maston. J.T. replied "No!"
precincts!" these in

listen--" "But

will war this later or "Sooner orator. fiery the cried never!" "Never!
day." very this be should it that demand I and declared, be

agree "I crash, a with off go bell his making Barbicane, said "Maston,"
anywhere made be to not ought and cannot experiment the that you with
before, speak to allowed been had I if but Union, the of soil the on but
perfectly is it that know would you map, this at glanced had you and
of frontiers certain for neighbours, our against war declare to useless
our at have we Look, parallel. 28th the beyond extend States United the
Florida." and Texas of part southern the all disposition

that regret without not was it still consequences; no had incident This
decided therefore, was, It convinced. be to himself allowed Maston J.T.
that on or Texas of soil the on either cast be should Columbiad the that
unexampled an create to destined was decision this But Florida. of
states. two these of towns the between rivalry

the crosses coast, American the touches it when parallel, 28th The
portions. equal nearly two into it divides and Florida, of peninsula
by formed arc the subtends it Mexico, of Gulf the into plunging Then,
Texas, skirting then Louisiana; and Mississippi, Alabama, of coasts the
Mexico, over direction its continues it angle, an cuts it which off
Pacific the in itself loses and California, Old and Sonora the crosses
below situated Florida and Texas of portions the only therefore Ocean;
recommended latitude of conditions requisite the fulfilled parallel this
Cambridge. of Observatory the by

only It cities. important no contains Florida of portion southern The
only, town One Indians. wandering against raised forts with bristles
position. its of favour in claim a in put could Town, Tampa

important. more and numerous more are towns contrary, the on Texas, In
on situated cities the all and Nuaces, of county the in Christi Corpus
in city Grande Rio Web, in Ignacio San Comalites, Laredo, Bravo, Rio the
in Brownsville and Panda, El Santa-Rita, Hidalgo, in Edinburgh Starr,
Florida. of pretensions the against league powerful a formed Cameron,

and Floridan the before public made hardly was therefore, decision, The
that From way. shortest the by Baltimore to flocked deputies Texican
Club Gun the of members influential the and Barbicane President moment
of towns seven If claims. formidable by night and day besieged were
entire two birthplace, Homer's being of honour the for contended Greece
cannon. a over fight to threatened states

the about weapons with marching seen then were parties rival These
which imminent, was fight a met they time Every town. the of streets
skill and prudence the Happily consequences. disastrous had have would
demonstrations Personal danger. this off warded Barbicane President of
thus was It states. different the of newspapers the in outlet an found
of claims the supported _Tribune_ the and Herald_ York _New the that
the of part the took Review_ _American the and _Times_ the whilst Texas,
to which know not did Club Gun the of members The deputies. Floridan
to. listen

to seemed it which counties, twenty-six its with proudly up came Texas
than more proved counties twelve that answered Florida but array; in put
smaller. times six country a in twenty-six

smaller, much Florida, but inhabitants; 33,000 its of bragged Texas
Besides, 56,000. with populated densely more much being of boasted
which fevers, paludian of home the being of Texas accused Florida
inhabitants, of thousands several another, with year one off, carried
wrong. far not was Florida and

and fevers, its envy not need Florida that replied Texas turn its In
when unhealthy countries other call to imprudent least, at was, it that
wrong. far not was Texas and negro," "vomito chronic had itself Florida

are "there Herald_, York _New the through Texicans the added "Besides,"
state a America, all in cotton best the grows that state a to due rights
superb contains that state a ships, building for oak holm produces which
ore." pure of cent. per fifty yield that iron of mines and coal

though Florida, of soil the that answered Review_ _American the that To
Columbiad, the of casting the for conditions better offered rich, so not
clay-ground. and sand of composed was it as

place, a in cast be can anything "before Texicans, the answered "But,"
difficult, is Florida with communication now place; that to get must it
fourteen is which Bay, Galveston offers Texas of coast the whilst
world." the in fleets the all contain could and round, leagues

is Bay Galveston "your Florida, to devoted newspapers the replied "Why,"
opens Espiritu-Santo of bay our whilst parallel, 29th the above situated
to direct go ships it by and latitude, of degree 28th the at precisely
Town." Tampa

sand." with up half-choked is "it Texas; answered truly!" bay nice "A

a was I "that Florida, cried talk," you hear to think, would one "Any
country." savage

prairies!" your over wander still do Seminoles the "Well,

civilised?" they Comanches--are your and Apaches your about what "And

draw to tried Florida when days some for up kept thus been had war The
_Times_ the morning one and ground, another upon adversary her
ought it American," "essentially being enterprise the that insinuated
territory. American" "essentially an upon attempted be to only

itself. contain not could Texas words these At

and Texas not Were you? as American as not we "are cried, it "American!"
1845?" in Union the in incorporated both Florida

America to belonged have we "but _Times_, the answered "Certainly,"
1820." since

for English or Spanish been having "after _Tribune_, the replied "Yes,"
dollars!" of 5,000,000 for States United the to sold were you years, 200

Was that? for blush we "Need Florida. answered matter?" that does "What
dollars?" of 16,000,000 for Napoleon from 1803 in bought Louisiana not

of slice miserable "A deputies. Texican the cried then shameful!" is "It
instead which, Texas, with itself compare to dare to Florida like land
on Mexicans the out drove which independent, itself made sold, being of
Republican Federative itself declared which 1836, March, of 2nd the
San the of banks the on Houston Samuel by gained victory the after
which short, in country, Santa-Anna--a of troops the over Jacinto
America!" of States United the to itself joined voluntarily

Florida. answered Mexicans!" the of afraid was it "Because

pronounced, was cutting, too really word, this day the From "Afraid!"
the between expected was engagement An intolerable. became situation the
be to obliged were deputies The Baltimore. of streets the in parties two
watched.

letters and documents, Notes, wild. driven half was Barbicane President
decide to he ought course Which house. his inundated threats of full
of facility soil, of fitness of view of point the In upon?
states two the of rights the transport, of rapidity and communications,
nothing had they personalities, political the to As equal. really were
question. the with do to

when time some lasted already had embarrassment and hesitation this Now
colleagues his called he it; to end an put to resolved Barbicane
wise profoundly a was them to proposed he solution the and together,
following:-- the from seen be will as one,

occurred just has that all "of he, said consideration," due "After
will difficulties same the that evident is it Texas, and Florida between
will rivalry The state. favoured the of towns the between up crop again
contains Texas Now all. is that and city, to state from changed be
honour the dispute will that conditions requisite the with towns eleven
whilst us, for troubles fresh create will that and enterprise, the of
Town!" Tampa for decide I therefore one; but has Florida

them put It decision. this at thunderstruck were deputies Texican The
different to provocations nominal sent they and rage, terrible a into
magistrates the for course one only was There Club. Gun the of members
special a of steam the had They it. took they and take, to Baltimore of
and no, or would they whether it, into Texicans the packed up, got train
hour. an miles thirty of speed a at town the from away them sent

threatening and last a hurl to quickly too off carried not were they But
adversaries. their at sarcasm

two between peninsula simple a Florida, of width the to allusion Making
blown be would and shock, the resist not would it pretended they seas,
fired. was cannon the time first the up

laconism a with Floridans the answered up!" blown be it let well! "Very
times. ancient of worthy




XII. CHAPTER

ORBI." ET "URBI


once difficulties topographical and mechanical, astronomical, The
was sum enormous An money. of question the remained there removed,
no individual, private No project. the of execution the for necessary
millions. necessary the of disposed have could even, state single

was enterprise the resolved--although had Barbicane President
every ask to and interest, universal of business a it make American--to
duty and right bounded the was It co-operation. financial its for nation
The satellite. the of business the in interfere to earth the all of
all to thence extended end this for Baltimore, at opened subscription
orbi_. et world--_urbi the

money the yet hope; all beyond succeed to destined was subscription This
in disinterested, purely was operation The lent. not given, be to was
gain. of chance no offered and word, the of meaning literal the

the at stopped not had communication Barbicane's of effect the But
Pacific, and Atlantic the crossed had it States; United the of frontiers
The Oceania. and Africa both Europe, and Asia both invaded had
with communication into put immediately were Union the of observatories
St. Paris, of some--those countries; foreign of observatories the
Buda, Hamburg, Warsaw, Stockholm, Altona, Berlin, Cape, the Petersburg,
their Pekin--sent and Madras, Benares, Lisbon, Malta, Bologna,
result. the awaited prudently others the Club; Gun the to compliments

astronomical twenty-two the by seconded Observatory, Greenwich the to As
boldly it it; of work short made it Britain, Great of establishments
Nicholl's Captain up took and success, of possibility the denied
send to promised societies scientific different the Whilst theories.
contemptuously and met staff Greenwich the Town, Tampa to deputies
and jealousy English pure was This proposition. Barbicane the dismissed
else. nothing

excellent, was science of world the upon effect the speaking, Generally
greatly were general, in who, masses, the to passed it thence from and
those seeing importance, great of fact a question, the in interested
capital. considerable a subscribe to upon called be to were masses

of full manifesto, a issued Barbicane President October of 8th the On
the of face the on persons "all to appeal made he which in enthusiasm,
language, every into translated document, This help." to willing earth
success. great had

a with Union the of towns principal the in opened were Subscriptions
then street; Baltimore 9, Bank, Baltimore the at office central
two the of countries different the in opened were subscriptions
Stieglitz Petersburg, St. Rothschild; de S.M. by Vienna, continents:--At
Arfuredson; and Tottie Stockholm, Mobilier; Crdit Paris, Co.; and
Berlin, Co.; and Ardouin Turin, Son; and Rothschild de N.M. London,
Ottoman Constantinople, Co.; and Odier, Lombard, Geneva, Mendelssohn;
Amsterdam, Weisweller; Daniel Madrid, Lambert; J. Brussels, Bank;
Lecesne; Lisbon, Co.; and Torlonia Rome, Co.; Credit Netherlands
Mana Janeiro, Rio Bank; Mana Ayres, Buenos Bank; Private Copenhagen,
Co.; and Chambre La Thomas Valparaiso, Bank; Mana Video, Monte Bank;
Co. and Daran Martin Mexico, Co.; and Chambre La Thomas Lima,

were dollars 400,000 manifesto Barbicane's President after days Three
hand in sum a such With Union. the of towns different the in received
once. at begin could Club Gun the

foreign that America informed telegrams later days few a But
were countries Certain rapidly. in pouring were subscriptions
less money their go let others generosity; their by distinguished
temperament. of matter a was It easily.

an is following the and words, than eloquent more are figures However,
when Club Gun the of credit the to paid sums the of statement official
closed:-- was subscription the

This roubles. 368,733 of sum enormous the was Russia of contingent The
Russians the of taste scientific the remembers who one no astonish need
to thanks studies, astronomical to given have they which impetus the and
2,000,000 cost which of principal the observatories, numerous their
roubles.

moon The Americans. the of pretensions the at laughing by began France
vaudevilles of score a and puns stale thousand a for excuse an as served
French the as But, ignorance. with palm the contested taste bad which in
and laughing, after paid now they singing, after paid formerly
the bought they price that At francs. 1,258,930 of sum a subscribed
little. a joke to right

sufficiently was difficulties, financial her of midst the in Austria,
216,000 to amounted subscription public the in part Her generous.
welcome. were which florins,

small was figure The rix-dollars. 52,000 contributed Norway and Sweden
a if higher been have certainly would it but country; the considering
For Stockholm. at as well as Christiania at opened been had subscription
to money their send to like not do Norwegians the other or reason some
Norway.

the of approbation her testified thalers, 250,000 sending by Prussia,
sum, important an contributed observatories different Her enterprise.
Barbicane. President encouraging in ardent most the amongst were and

the in interested personally was she but generously, behaved Turkey
her and years her of course the rules fact, in moon, the business;
she and piastres, 1,372,640 give than less no do could She fast. Ramadan
from pressure certain a however, betrayed, that ardour an with them gave
Porte. the of Government the

by States of order second the all amongst herself distinguished Belgium
each for fraction a and penny one about francs, 513,000 of gift a
inhabitant.

a demanding only florins, 110,000 contributed colonies her and Holland
money. ready paid she as cent., per five of discount

ducats, 9,000 notwithstanding, gave, room, for confined rather Denmark,
experiments. scientific for love her proving

be not could more florins; 34,285 subscribed Confederation Germanic The
more. given have not would she besides, her; from asked

in francs 2,000,000 found Italy circumstances, embarrassed in Although
had she If out. inside well them turning by but pockets, children's her
yet not did she but more, given have would she Venetia possessed then
Venetia. possess

Roman 7,040 than less send not could they thought States Pontifical The
3,000 of extent the to devotion her pushed Portugal and crowns,
cruzades.

of course in empires but piastres; 86 mite, widow's the gent Mexico
circumstances. embarrassed rather in always are formation

It scheme. American the to francs 257 of sum modest the sent Switzerland
practical the upon looked only Switzerland that stated frankly be must
did moon the to bullet a sending of action the operation; the of side
any of establishing the for sufficient nature a of seem not
it thought Switzerland so Night, of Queen the with communication
such upon depending enterprise an in capital engage to imprudent
right. perhaps, was, Switzerland all, After events. uncertain

110 than more together get to impossible it found she Spain, to As
The finish. to railways her had she that excuse an as gave She reals.
that in favourably very upon looked not is science that is truth
Spaniards, certain then And behindhand. little a still is it country;
of size the of conception clear no had either, ignorant most the not and
might it feared they moon; the of that with compared projectile the
the to on fall her make and orbit, her from satellite the disturb
have to better was it case that In globe. terrestrial the of surface
small that with out, carried they which it, with do to nothing
exception.

she which with antipathy contemptuous The remained. alone England
single a but have English The known. is proposition Barbicane's received
They contains. Britain Great which bodies of 25,000,000 their in mind
was Club Gun the of enterprise the that understood be to it gave
not did they and non-intervention," of principle the "to contrary
farthing. single a subscribe

shoulders, its shrugging with itself contented Club Gun the news this At
say, to is America--that South When work. great its to returned and
poured Columbia--had and Plata La of provinces the Brazil, Chili, Peru,
itself found it dollars, 300,000 of quota their hands their into
a is following the which of capital considerable a of possessed
statement:--

subscriptions, foreign dollars; 4,000,000 subscription, States United
dollars. 5,446,675 total, dollars; 1,446,675

Gun the of coffers the into public the by poured sum large the was This
Club.

boring, casting, of work The importance. its at surprised be need one No
almost an in installation their and workmen, of transport masonry,
the workshops, and furnaces of construction the country, uninhabited
would, expenses incidental and projectile powder, tools, manufacturing
the of Some whole. the nearly absorb estimates, the to according
of that each; dollars 1,000 cost war the during fired cannon-shots
cost well might artillery, of annals the in unique Barbicane, President
more. times 5,000

Goldspring the with made was contract a October of 20th the On
with Parrott furnished had war the during which York, New Manufactory,
guns. cast-iron best his

Goldspring the that parties contracting the between stipulated was It
South in Town, Tampa to send to itself pledge should Manufactory
Columbiad. the of casting the for materials necessary the Florida,

the of 15th the on latest, the at terminated, be to was operation This
penalty under condition, good in delivered cannon the and October, next
herself present again should moon the until forfeit day a dollars 100 of
and years eighteen during say, to is conditions--that same the under
days. eleven

transports necessary the and pay, their workmen, the of engagement The
Company. Goldspring the by made be to all

president Barbicane, I. by signed was duplicate, in made contract, This
Goldspring the of Manager Murphison, J. and Club, Gun the of
parties. contracting the of part the on signed thus who Manufactory,




XIII. CHAPTER

HILL. STONY


of detriment the to Club Gun the of members the by made choice the Since
it read--made to how knows one every America--where in one every Texas,
the had before Never Florida. of geography the study to business his
_Roman's Florida_, in Travels _Bertram's many so sold booksellers
of Territory _Williams' Florida_, West and East of History Natural
East in Cane Sugar the of Culture the on _Cleland and Florida_,
a quite was There required. were works these of editions New Florida_.
them. for rage

with see to wished he read; to than do to better something had Barbicane
without Therefore, Columbiad. the of site the choose and eyes own his
a of construction the for necessary funds the put he moment, a losing
a made and Observatory, Cambridge the of disposition the at telescope
making the for Albany, of Co., and Breadwill of firm the with contract
J.T. by accompanied Baltimore left he then projectile; aluminium the of
Goldspring the of manager the and Elphinstone, Major Maston,
Manufactory.

There Orleans. New reached companions travelling four the day next The
the to belonging despatch-boat a _Tampico_, the board on embarked they
and, disposal, their at placed had Government the which Navy, Federal
Louisiana. of shores the of sight lost quickly they on, steam all with

the departure its after days two one; long a not was passage The
the sighted miles, eighty and hundred four made having _Tampico_,
coast, flat low, a saw Barbicane approached, it As coast. Floridian
in rich creeks of series a coasting After unfertile. rather looking
Espiritu-Santo. of Bay the entered _Tampico_ the lobsters, and oysters

and Tampa of those roadsteads, long two into divided is bay This
A cleared. soon steamer the which to entrance narrow the Hillisboro,
waves the above rose Brooke Fort of batteries the afterwards time short
natural little a on lying carelessly appeared, Tampa of town the and
Hillisboro. river the of mouth the by formed harbour

four the p.m.; seven at 22nd, October on anchored _Tampico_ the There
immediately. landed passengers

Floridian on foot set he as violently beat heart his felt Barbicane
the trying architect an like feet his with it feel to seemed he soil;
steel his with ground the scratched Maston J.T. house. a of solidity
hook.

will we and lose, to time no have "we Barbicane, said then "Gentlemen,"
country." the survey to to-morrow horseback on off set

Town Tampa of inhabitants thousand three the landed Barbicane minute The
Gun the of president the to due quite honour an him, meet to out went
formidable with him received They favour. their in decided had who Club,
in up himself shutting by ovation an escaped Barbicane but exclamations,
one. any see to refusing and Hotel Franklin the at room his

fire of full race, Spanish of horses small 23rd, October day, next The
four, of instead But, windows. his under ground the pawed vigour, and
by accompanied down went Barbicane riders. their with fifty, were there
in themselves find to astonished first at were who companions, three his
horseman each that besides remarked He cavalcade. a such of midst the
his in pistols and shoulders his across slung carbine a carried
given immediately was force of display a such for reason The holsters.
him-- to said who Floridian, young a by him

there." are Seminoles the "Sir,

Seminoles?" "What

you give to prudent it deemed we and prairies, the frequent who "Savages
escort." an

steed. his mounted he as Maston J.T. exclaimed "Pooh!"

Floridian. the answered side," safe the on be to well is "It

now and attention, your for you thank "I Barbicane, replied "Gentlemen,"
off." be us let

of cloud a in disappeared and immediately, out set troop little The
the and already, brilliantly shone sun the a.m.; five was It dust.
this moderated breezes sea fresh but 84, indicated thermometer
heat. excessive

coast the followed and south down went Town, Tampa leaving on Barbicane,
twelve Bay, Hillisboro into falls river small This Creek. Alifia to
bank right its followed escort his and Barbicane Town. Tampa below miles
an behind disappeared bay the of waves The east. the towards up going
sight. in alone was country Floridian the and ground, the in inequality

populous more north, the to one the parts; two into divided is Florida
of one Pensacola, and capital, for Tallahassee has abandoned, less and
lying other, the States; United the of arsenals marine principal the
peninsula, narrow a only is Mexico, of Gulf the and Atlantic the between
land of tongue little Stream--a Gulf the of current the by away eaten
the of vessels numerous the which archipelago, small a amidst lost
the of sentinel advanced the is It continually. double Channel Bahama
measures state this of area superficial The tempests. great of gulf
the beyond situated chosen be to had one which amongst acres, 38,033,267
along rode Barbicane As enterprise. the for suitable and parallel 28th
its and ground the of configuration the examined attentively he
distribution. particular

was Sunday, Palm on 1512, in Leon de Ponce Juan by discovered Florida,
that of worthy well was It Florida_. _Pascha named all of first
shore the from miles few a But coasts. arid and dry its with designation
showed country the and changed, gradually ground the of nature the
creeks, of network a by up cut was soil the name; its of worthy itself
been have might it lakes; small and ponds, watercourses, rivers,
soon and rose gradually ground the but Guiana; or Holland for mistaken
and North the of vegetables the all where plains, cultivated its showed
and sun tropical a where fields, immense its perfection, in grow South
of work the all do texture clayey its in conserved water the
rice, tobacco, yams, pineapples, of prairies its lastly and cultivating,
reach, could eye the as far as extended which sugarcanes, and cotton,
prodigality. careless with riches their out spreading

progressive the finding on satisfied greatly appeared Barbicane
the on him questioned Maston J.T. when and ground, the of elevation
subject,

our cast to interest our to greatly is "it he, said friend," worthy "My
ground." elevated on Columbiad

Gun the of secretary the exclaimed moon?" the nearer be to order "In
Club.

less or more yards few a can "What smiling. Barbicane, answered "No,"
more accomplished be can work our ground elevated on but No, matter?
us save will which water, against struggle to have not shall we easily;
consideration into taken be to has that and tubings, expensive and long
sunk." be to has deep feet 900 well a when

as much as must, "we engineer; the Murchison, said right," are "You
with meet we if but casting; the during watercourses avoid possible,
machines our with them exhaust can we much; matter not will they springs
an at work to not have we Here course. their from them divert or
to have implements boring the all where dark, and narrow well, artesian
and spade with sky, open the under work can we No; dark. the in work
long." take not will work our blasting, of help the by and, pickaxe,

its or ground the of elevation the by "if Barbicane, resumed "Still,"
our do can we waters, subterranean with struggle a avoid can we nature
in cutting our make therefore, must, we perfectly; and rapidly more work
sea." the of level the above feet of thousands some situated ground

soon shall we mistaken, not am I if and, Barbicane, Mr. right, are "You
spot." suitable a find

president. the said up," turned spadeful first the see to like should "I

Maston. J.T. exclaimed last!" the I "And

believe "and, engineer; the answered gentlemen," it, manage shall "We
for forfeit any you pay to have not will Company Goldspring the me,
delay."

a dollars hundred "a Maston; J.T. replied not," better had it "Faith!
to is conditions--that same the in herself presents moon the till day
make would that know you days--do eleven and years eighteen for say,
dollars?" 658,000

learn." to need not shall we and know, not do we sir, "No,

the to miles; twelve about journeyed had troop little the a.m. ten About
varied most the were There region. forest a succeeded country fertile
were forests impenetrable almost The profusion. tropical in perfumes
trees, apricot and olive, fig, citron, orange, pomegranates, of up made
other each rivalled which of fruit and blossoms the vines, huge bananas,
magnificent these of shade perfumed the Under perfume. and colour in
amongst birds, brilliantly-coloured of world a fluttered and sang trees
feathered its of worthy casket, jewel a deserved crab-eater the which
nest. a for gems,

nature opulent such through pass not could major the and Maston J.T.
beauty. splendid its admiring without

a in was marvels, these of little thought who Barbicane, President But
its by him displeased fertile, so country, this onwards; hasten to hurry
under water felt he hydropical, otherwise being without fertility; very
aridity. incontestable of signs the vain in sought and feet, his

several ford to obliged were They on. journeyed they meantime the In
alligators with infested were they for danger, without not and rivers,
boldly them threatened Maston J.T. long. feet eighteen to fifteen from
the frightening in succeeded only he but hook, formidable his with
red the while banks, the frequented that teals and phaetons, pelicans,
stare. stupid a with on looked flamingoes

turn. their in disappeared countries humid of inhabitants these last At
woods; smaller in scattered thinly more and smaller became trees The
of herds ranged where plains immense amidst stood groups isolated some
deer. startled

the is "Here stirrups. his in rising Barbicane, exclaimed last!" "At
pines." of region

major. the answered savages," "And

about moved They horizon. the on appeared Seminoles few a fact, In
or lances long brandishing horses, fleet their on forwards and backwards
themselves confined they However, report. dull a with guns their firing
and Barbicane on effect no had which demonstrations, hostile these to
companions. his

of space open vast a plain, rocky a of middle the in then were They
was It rays. burning with covered sun the which extent in acres several
the to offer to seemed and soil, the of elevation wide a by formed
construction the for conditions required the all Club Gun the of members
Columbiad. their of

name?" any place this "Has stopping. Barbicane, cried "Halt!"

Floridians. the answered Hill," Stony called is "It

and instruments, his took dismounted, word, a saying without Barbicane,
drawn troop little The precision. extreme with position his fix to began
silence. profound in him watched him around up

an after Barbicane, meridian. the passed sun the moment that At
said-- and observation, his of result the noted rapidly interval,

7' 27 lat. in level sea the above feet 1,800 situated is place "This
its by me to appears It meridian. Washington the by 7' 5 long. West and
our to favourable condition every offer to nature rocky and barren
furnaces, workshops, magazines, our raise therefore will we enterprise;
he, said spot," very this from is it and here, huts workmen's and
our that Hill, Stony of summit "the foot, his with it upon stamping
world!" solar the of regions the for start will projectile




XIV. CHAPTER

TROWEL. AND PICKAXE


Town, Tampa to returned companions his and Barbicane evening same That
New for _Tampico_ the board on re-embarked engineer, the Murchison, and
greater the back bring to workmen of army an engage to was He Orleans.
Tampa at remained Club Gun the of members The working-stock. the of part
of assistance the with work preliminary the foot on set to order in Town
country. the of inhabitants the

the to returned _Tampico_ the departure its after days Eight
succeeded had Murchison steamboats. of fleet a with Bay Espiritu-Santo
would he slavery of days evil the In workmen. 1,500 together getting in
liberty, of land the America, since but trouble; and time his lost have
pay. good get can they wherever flock they freemen, contained only has
of rate high a offered it Club; Gun the to wanting not was money Now
workman The perquisites. proportionate and considerable with wages
a upon depend finished, work the once could, Florida for enlisted
Baltimore. of bank the in name his in placed capital

severe be could and choose, and pick to only therefore had Murchison
his in enrolled He workmen. his of skill and intelligence the about
iron-founders, stokers, mechanics, of pick the legion working
or white sort, every of artisans and brickmakers, miners, lime-burners,
families their brought them of Many colour. of distinction without black
emigration. an quite was It them. with

of quays the on landed troop this a.m., 10 at October, of 31st the On
town little the in reigned which activity and movement The Town. Tampa
In imagined. be may day single a in population its doubled thus had that
Gun the of enterprise this by benefited enormously was Town Tampa fact,
Stony to drafted immediately were who workmen of number the by not Club,
from degrees by converged who idlers curious of influx the by but Hill,
peninsula. Floridian the towards globe the of points all

flotilla the unloading in occupied were they days few first the During
iron plate of number large a and provisions, machines, tools, the of
time same the At numbered. and pieced separately pieces in made houses
that long miles fifteen railway a of sleepers first the laid Barbicane
Town. Tampa and Hill Stony unite to destined was

capricious with constructed, are railways American how known is It
much cost not do They valleys. deep and hills, steep slopes, bold bends,
as off jump or off run trains their only way, their in much not are and
trifle, a but was Hill Stony to Town Tampa from railway The please. they
construction. its for money much nor time much neither wanted and

call. his at come had who workmen of army this of soul the was Barbicane
and enthusiasm, ardour, his them to communicated them, animated He
of gift the with endowed if as once, at everywhere was He conviction.
His fly. bluebottle his Maston, J.T. by followed always and ubiquity,
no were there him With things. thousand a invented mind practical
miner, a good as was He embarrassment. or difficulties, obstacles,
every to answer an having artilleryman, an was he as mechanic and mason,
with actively corresponded He problem. every to solution a and question,
the night and day and Manufactory, Goldspring the and Club Gun the
harbour. Hillisboro in orders his awaiting up steam her kept _Tampico_

of detachment a with Town Tampa left November, of 1st the on Barbicane,
rose houses workmen's of town small a day next very the and workmen,
its from and palisades, with it surrounded They Hill. Stony round
great the of one for taken been have soon might it ardour and movement
in began work and once at regulated was Life Union. the of cities
order. perfect

was digging and ground, the of nature the established had boring Careful
together foremen his called Barbicane day That 4th. November on begun
them-- to said and

part this in together you called have I why friends, my know, all "You
feet six diameter, in feet nine cannon a cast to want We Florida. of
we thick; feet half a and nineteen revetment stone a with and thick,
work large This deep. feet 900 and wide feet 60 well a want therefore
cubic 2,543,400 therefore, have, You months. nine in terminated be must
a feet cubic 10,000 say, to is days--that 255 in out dig to soil of feet
but elbow-room, of plenty had you if difficulty no offer would That day.
trouble. more be will it space limited a have only will you as
upon depend I and done, be will it done be must work the as Nevertheless
skill." your upon as much as courage your

from and soil, Floridian the of out dug was spadeful first the a.m. 8 At
of hands the in moment a idle stop not did tool useful this moment that
hours. three every other each relieved gangs The miner. the

of limit the exceed not did it colossal was work the although Besides,
greater much of works many How that. from Far capability. human
contended directly more be to had elements the which in and difficulty,
to it Suffice termination! successful a to brought been had against,
Saladin Sultan the by Cairo near made Joseph, Father of well the mention
strength the increase to appeared yet not had machines when epoch an at
Nile the of level the to down goes which and hundredfold, a man of
by Coblentz at dug well other that And feet! 300 of depth a at itself
a was needed was that All deep! feet 600 Baden, of Jean Margrave the
was There easier. boring the made which width, double a and depth triple
the of success the about doubted who workman or foreman one not
operation.

Barbicane by of approved and Murchison by taken decision important An
the that decided contract the in article An work. the accelerated
for precaution, useless wrought-iron--a with hooped be should Columbiad
therefore was clause This hoops. without do evidently could cannon the
the employ then could they for time, of economy great a Hence up. given
is masonry the which by wells, digging for used now boring of system new
simple very this to Thanks boring. the as time same the at done
it kept wall the ground; the up prop to obliged not were they operation
weight. own its by down went and up

the reached have should spade the when begin to only was manoeuvre This
ground. the of part solid

of centre very the in dig to began workmen fifty November of 4th the On
Stony of top the say, to is palisades--that by surrounded inclosure the
wide. feet sixty hole circular Hill--a

it which deep, inches six soil black of sort a up turned first spade The
which sand, fine of feet two succeeded soil this To away. carried soon
casting. the for used be to was it as out, taken carefully was

which and chalk, English to similar appeared, clay white sand this After
thick. feet four was

by formed rock of species a layer, hard the upon rang pickaxes the Then
half a and six was hole the point that At shells. petrified dry very
begun. was masonry the and deep, feet

of sort a wheel, oak an made they excavation that of bottom the At
hole a centre its in strength; enormous of and bolted strongly circle
was It Columbiad. the of diameter exterior the of size the pierced was
the placed, were masonry the of foundations the that wheel this upon
the After together. solidly stones the joined which of cement hydraulic
centre, the to circumference the from space the up bricked had workmen
wide. feet twenty-one well a in inclosed themselves found they

pickaxe, and spade with again began miners the ended was work this When
it support to care taking itself, wheel the under rock the upon set and
deeper feet two was hole the time every tressels; strong extremely on
it with taking sank, gradually wheel the tressels; the away took they
worked masons the which of layer upper the at masonry, of circle its
during gas of escape the for vent-holes make to care taking incessantly,
casting. of operation the

the on attention constant and skill great required work of kind This
was wheel the under digging one than more workmen; the of part
of splinters the by wounded mortally even were some and dangerous,
night; nor day by moment a for slacken not did energy their but stone;
the on 99 to up thermometer the sent rays sun's the when day, by
the light, electric of waves white the under night, by planes; calcined
machines, the and blasting the rock, the on pickaxe the of noise
a traced air, the through scattered smoke of wreaths the with together
the and buffaloes of herds the which Hill, Stony round terror of circle
pass. to dared never Seminoles of detachments

the speeded steam-cranes advanced; regularly work the meantime the In
none; were there obstacles unexpected of rubbish; the of away carrying
against. guarded and foreseen been had difficulties the all

depth the attained had well the by gone had month first the When
was depth this December In feet. 112 time--i.e., the for assigned
to had workmen the February During January. in tripled and doubled,
were They ground. the from sprang which water of sheet a against contend
to air compressed of apparatus and pumps powerful employ to obliged
just issued, it which from orifice the up close to as so off, it drain
these of better the got they last At ship. board on caulked are leaks as
the soil the of loosening the of consequence in only springs, unwelcome
force frightful The landslip. a was there and way, gave partially wheel
This imagined! be may high, feet 400 than more circle, bricked this of
taken be to had weeks Three workmen. several of life the cost accident
again. solid wheel the making and revetment stone the propping in up
machines, the of power the and engineer the of skill the to thanks But,
continued. boring the and right, set all was it

on and work, the of progress the stopped henceforth incident fresh No
fixed delay the of expiration the before days twenty June, of 10th the
of depth the reached had round, bricked quite well, the Barbicane, by
thirty block, massive a upon rested masonry the bottom the At feet. 900
soil. the with level a on was it top the at whilst thick, feet

congratulated warmly Club Gun the of members the and Barbicane President
with accomplished been had work cyclopean his Murchison; engineer the
rapidity. extraordinary

a for Hill Stony leave not did Barbicane months eight these During
took he operations, boring the over watched narrowly he whilst minute;
and workmen, his of well-being and health the insure to precaution every
large to common epidemics the avoid to enough fortunate was he
globe the of regions those in disastrous so and men, of agglomerations
influence. tropical to exposed

the for lives their with paid workmen several that true is It
such but occupations; dangerous these by engendered carelessness
that details are these and avoided, be cannot misfortunes deplorable
with occupied more are They to. attention little very pay Americans
However, particular. in individuals with than general in humanity
every upon them applied and principles, contrary the professed Barbicane
respectful and intelligence his to care, his to Thanks occasion.
wisdom, humane and prodigious his to cases, difficult in intervention
other the on cities of that exceed not did catastrophes of average the
count they where France, of those others amongst Atlantic, the of side
work. of francs 200,000 every upon accident one about




XV. CHAPTER

CASTING. THE OF CEREMONY THE


boring of operation the in employed were that months eight the During
simultaneously conducted been had casting the of works preparatory the
been have would Hill Stony at arriving stranger a rapidity; extreme with
there. saw he what at surprised much

a as it round circle a in standing and well, the from yards hundred Six
yards three and wide feet six each furnaces, 1,200 were point, central
They long. miles two was furnaces 1,200 these by made line The apart.
and chimneys, quadrangular high with model, same the on built all were
arrangement architectural the thought Maston J.T. effect. singular a had
there thought He Washington. at monuments the of him reminded It superb.
he where Greece, in even not world, the in finer nothing was
been. have to never acknowledged

decided committee the meeting third their at that remembered be will It
grey the particular in and Columbiad, the for cast-iron use to
and ductile, tenacious, most the fact, in is, metal This description.
with smelted when and operations, moulding all for suitable malleable,
hydraulic engine-cylinders, for quality superior of is it coal pit
&c. presses,

rarely is fusion, single a undergone has it if cast-iron, But
is it that fusion second a of means by is it and enough; homogeneous
deposits. earthly last its of dispossessed and refined, purified,

great the in smelted ore, iron the Town, Tampa to forwarded being Before
heated silicium and coal with contact in put and Goldspring, of furnaces
first this After cast-iron. into transformed was temperature, high a to
millions 136 were there But Hill. Stony to taken was metal the operation
the railway; by sent be to expensive too bulk a cast-iron, of pounds of
It material. raw the of that doubled have would transport of price
with them load to and York New at vessels freight to preferable appeared
were tons 1,000 of vessels sixty-eight than less no bars; in iron the
Ocean the took York, New left 3rd May on which fleet, a quite required,
doubled Channel, Bahama the entered shores, American the coasted route,
Bay the entered month same the of 10th the on and Florida, of point the
There Town. Tampa of port the in safely anchored and Espiritu-Santo of
Stony to railway by carried cargo their and unloaded were vessels the
was metal of mass enormous the January of middle the about and Hill,
destination. its at delivered

to many too not were furnaces 1,200 that understood be easily will It
furnaces these of Each simultaneously. iron of tons 60,000 these melt
the on built been had they metal; of lbs. 1,400,000 about contained
were they gun; Rodman the of casting the for used those of model
apparatus warming The arch. elliptical high a with form, in trapezoidal
so furnace, the of extremities two the at placed were chimney the and
of built furnaces, These throughout. heated equally was it that
bars the for "sole" a and coal-grates with filled were brick, fireproof
to metal the allowed 25, of angle an at inclosed sole, this iron; of
trenches converging 1,200 thence from receiving-troughs; the into flow
well. central the to down it carried

were casting and masonry of works the which upon that following day The
object his mould; interior the upon work to set Barbicane terminated,
a axis, coincident a with well, the of centre the in raise to was now
the up fill exactly to diameter, in nine and high feet 900 cylinder
of made was cylinder This Columbiad. the of bore the for reserved space
The straw. and hay of addition the with sand, and clay of mixture a
the with filled be to was masonry the and mould the between left space
feet six cannon the of sides the make thus would which metal, molten
thick.

be to had maintained, equilibrium its have to order in cylinder, This
of means by intervals at fixed and bands iron with consolidated
these casting the after lining; stone the into fastened cross-clamps
worse the be not would which metal, of block the in lost be would clamps
them. for

was casting the and July, of 8th the on completed was operation This
10th. the for fixed

friend his to Maston J.T. said ceremony," fine a be will casting "The
Barbicane.

one!" public a be not will it "but Barbicane, answered "Undoubtedly,"

comers?" all to inclosure the of doors the open not will you "What!

a say to not delicate, a is Columbiad the of casting the not; "Certainly
closed with done be should it that prefer I and operation, dangerous,
ceremony public a have may you discharged is projectile the When doors.
no!" then, till but like, you if

unforeseen with attended be might operation the right; was president The
being prevent would spectators of concourse large a which danger,
No movement. of freedom complete preserve to necessary was It averted.
of members of delegation a except inclosure the into admitted was one
brisk the was them Among Town. Tampa to voyage the made who Club Gun the
General Elphinstone, Major Blomsberry, Colonel Hunter, Tom Bilsby,
a was Columbiad the of casting the whom to quanti_, _tutti and Morgan,
he cicerone; their himself constituted Maston J.T. business. personal
through everywhere, about them led he detail; any them excuse not did
to them forced he and machines, the amongst workshops, magazines, the
1,200th the of end the At other. the after one furnaces 1,200 the visit
it. of sick rather were they visit

evening the o'clock; twelve at precisely place take to was casting The
bars in metal of lbs. 114,000 with charged been had furnace each before
circulate could air warm the that so other each to crossway disposed
been had chimneys 1,200 the morning early Since them. amongst freely
was soil the and atmosphere, the into flames of volumes forth pouring
as burnt be to coal of pounds many as were There convulsively. shaken
throwing coal of tons 68,000 therefore, were, There melted. be to metal
smoke. black of curtain thick a sun the before up

rambling the furnaces, of circle the in unbearable became soon heat The
their added bellows powerful thunder; of rolling the resembled which of
oxygen. with furnaces incandescent the saturated and blasts, continuous

a At rapidly. done be must succeed to order in casting of operation The
liquid the out pour to was furnace each cannon-shot a by given signal
emptied. entirely be to and iron

preconcerted the awaited workmen and foremen made, arrangements These
one any longer no was There emotion. with mixed impatience with moment
the near place his took superintendent each and inclosure, the in
run. the of aperture

eminence, neighbouring a on installed colleagues, his and Barbicane
be to ready planted was cannon a them Before operation. the at assisted
engineer. the from sign a as fired

the run; to began metal of drops first the twelve before minutes few A
liquid a in all was iron the when and filled, gradually were reservoirs
the facilitate to order in instants some for quiet left was it state
substances. foreign of separation

flame its shot and fired, suddenly was cannon The struck. o'clock Twelve
simultaneously, opened were tapping-holes hundred Twelve air. the into
troughs hundred twelve along crept serpents fiery hundred twelve and
plunged they There fire. of rings in rolling well, central the towards
and exciting an was It feet. 900 of depth a down noise terrific with
iron, of waves these whilst trembled, ground The spectacle. magnificent
time same the at evaporated smoke, of clouds their sky the into throwing
vent-holes the through upwards it hurled and mould, the of humidity the
artificial These vapour. impenetrable of form the in masonry the of
3,000 of height a to up went they as spirals thick their unrolled clouds
the of limits the upon wandering Indian Red Any air. the into feet
the in crater new a of formation the in believed have might horizon
typhoon, a nor irruption, an neither was it yet and Florida, of heart
terrible those of one nor elements, the of struggle a nor storm, a nor
had alone man No; producing. of capable is Nature which phenomena
a of worthy flames gigantic those vapours, reddish those produced
earthquake, an of shock the like vibrations tremendous those volcano,
his was it and storms, and hurricanes of rivals reverberations, those
of Niagara whole a himself, by dug abyss, an into hurled which hand
metal! molten




XVI. CHAPTER

COLUMBIAD. THE


mere to reduced were People succeeded? casting of operation the Had
success, its in believe to reason every was there However, conjecture.
the in liquefied metal of mass entire the absorbed had mould the as
certain. be to impossible time long a necessarily was it Still furnaces.

no took it lbs., 160,000 of cannon his cast Rodman Major when fact, In
monstrous the would therefore, long, How cool. to fortnight a than less
intense its by guarded and vapour, of clouds its with crowned Columbiad,
to difficult was It admirers? its of eyes the from kept be heat,
estimate.

test rude a to put was Club Gun the of members the of impatience The
was Maston J.T. helped. be not could it But time. of lapse this during
an casting the after fortnight A anxiety. his through roasted nearly
the and sky, the towards soaring still was smoke of column immense
the round feet 200 of radius a within feet the of soles the burnt ground
Hill. Stony of summit

cooling of means no were There them. followed weeks by; went days The
of members The it. approach to impossible was It cylinder. immense the
muster. could they patience what with wait to obliged were Club Gun the

"It morning. one Maston J.T. said August," of 10th the at are we "Here
the remains still There December! of 1st the to months four hardly wants
never We loaded! be to Columbiad the and out, taken be to mould interior
get never it Will cannon! the approach even cannot One ready! be shall
deception!" cruel a be would That cool?

Barbicane succeeding. without secretary impatient the calm to tried They
himself see To irritation. serious covered silence his but nothing, said
to enemy an remove--time, could alone time that obstacle an by stopped
enemy an of power the in be to circumstances--and the under feared be
war. of men for hard was

the of state the in change certain a showed observations daily However,
notably had off thrown vapour the August of 15th the Towards ground.
only earth the after days few A thickness. and intensity in diminished
up shut monster the of breath last the smoke, of puff slight a exhaled
and ceased, ground the of vibrations the degrees By tomb. stone its in
spectators the of impatient most the contracted; heat of circle the
the on and twenty, next the feet, ten gained they day one approached;
take could engineer the and colleagues, his Barbicane, August of 22nd
Stony of summit the covered which surface cast-iron the on place their
to allowed yet not was it where spot, healthy very a certainly Hill,
feet. cold have

of sigh immense an with Club Gun the of president the cried last!" "At
satisfaction.

interior the of extraction The day. same the resumed were works The
bore; the out clear to order in with proceeded immediately was mould
without work to set were boring-tools and spades, pickaxes,
the under hard exceedingly become had sand and clay the intermission;
the away cleared they machines of help the by but heat; the of action
was rubbish the iron; the with contact its at burning still mixture
such with done was work the and railway, the on away carted rapidly
arguments, his and urgent, so was intervention Barbicane's spirit,
on that conviction, much so carried dollars, of form the under presented
disappeared. had mould the of trace all September of 3rd the

were boring-machines the begun; immediately was boring of operation The
the of surface interior the later weeks few a and delay, without up set
high a acquired had bore the and cylindrical, perfectly was tube immense
polish.

Barbicane the after year a than less September, of 22nd the on last, At
delicate of means by raised weapon, enormous the communication,
nothing was There use. for ready was vertical, quite and instruments,
fail. not would she sure were they but for, wait to moon the but

fall frightful a had nearly he and bounds, no knew joy Maston's J.T.
Blomsberry's Colonel Without feet. 900 of tube the down looking whilst
Gun the of secretary the preserved, happily had he which arm, right
of depths the in grave a found have would Erostatus, modern a like Club,
Columbiad. the

as doubt possible any longer no was there finished; then was cannon The
Nicholl Captain October of 6th the on so execution; perfect its to
his in inscribed who Barbicane, President to debt his off cleared
the that believed be may It dollars. 2,000 of sum a receipt-column
illness. an him cost and pitch, highest its reached anger captain's
and dollars, 5,000 and 4,000, 3,000, of bets three yet were there Still
not though one, bad a be not would bargain his 2,000, gained only he if
the and calculations, his into enter not did money But excellent.
which against cannon a of casting the in rival his by obtained success
blow terrible a was resisted have not would thick feet sixty plates iron
him. to

quite been had Hill Stony on inclosure the September of 23rd the Since
readily be will visitors of concourse the and public, the to open
imagined.

flocked States United the of points all from people innumerable fact, In
that during increased prodigiously was Tampa of town The Florida. to
then it Club; Gun the of works the to entirely consecrated year,
Fort surrounded having After souls. 150,000 of population a comprised
that on out lengthened being now was it streets of network a in Brooke
Bay; Espiritu-Santo of harbours two the separated which land of tongue
in up grown had houses of forest whole a and squares, new quarters, new
sun. American the of heat the under regions formerly-deserted these
private schools, churches, of erection the for formed were Companies
increased was town the of size the year a than less in and dwellings,
tenfold.

that everywhere men; business born are Yankees that known well is It
instinct their zone, torrid the to glacial the from them, takes destiny
to visitors simple why is That exercised. usefully is business for
Club Gun the of operations the following of purpose sole the for Florida
as soon as operations commercial in involved be to themselves allowed
the for freighted vessels The Town. Tampa in installed were they
activity unparalleled given had workmen the and metal the of transport
freighted tonnage, and form every of vessels other Soon port. the to
harbours; two the and bay the ploughed merchandise, and provisions with
town, the in established were merchants and shipbrokers of offices vast
port the in arrivals fresh published day each Gazette_ _Shipping the and
Tampa. of

the of consequence in town, the round multiplied were roads Whilst
by joined was it commerce, and population its in increase prodigious
connected rails of line One Union. the of States Southern the to railway
from thence arsenal; maritime southern great the Pensacola, to Mobile La
there existed already There Tallahassee. to ran it point important that
It seashore. the on Marks Saint to long, miles twenty-one line, short a
in awakening Town, Tampa as far as prolonged was that loop-line this was
Thus Florida. Central of portions sleeping or dead the passage its
line one born idea the to due industry of marvels these to thanks Tampa,
large a of airs the right its as take could man, one of brain the in day
suffered Florida of capital the and "Moon-City," it surnamed They town.
globe. the of points all from visible eclipse an

Texas between great so was rivalry the why understand now will one Every
their saw they when Texicans the of irritation the and Florida, and
sagacity long-sighted their In Club. Gun the by aside set pretensions
experiment the from gain might country a what foreseen had they
a such accompany would that wealth the and Barbicane, by attempted
a and railways, commerce, of centre vast a lost Texas cannon-shot.
given been had advantages these All population. of increase considerable
the between pier a like thrown peninsula, Floridian miserable that to
therefore, Barbicane, Ocean. Atlantic the of those and Gulf the of waves
antipathy. Texan the Santa-Anna General with divided

new the fury, industrial and commercial its to up given though However,
interesting the forget to not care took Town Tampa of population
the of details least the contrary, the On Club. Gun the of operations
an was There them. interested pickaxe, the of blow every enterprise,
perfect Hill--a Stony to Town Tampa from and to people of flow incessant
pilgrimage. a still, better or, procession,

the experiment the of day the that foresee to easy already was It
came they for millions, by counted be would spectators of concourse
was Europe peninsula. narrow the to earth the of points all from already
America. to emigrating

numerous the of curiosity the acknowledged, be must it then, until But
seeing upon counted Many satisfied. moderately been only had arrivals
hungry for much not was This it. from smoke the saw only who casting the
Thereupon operation. that see to one no allow would Barbicane but eyes,
for president the blamed they murmurs; and discontent, grumbling, ensued
as stigmatised was act His conduct. dictatorial considered they what
Barbicane but Hill, Stony round riot a nearly was There "un-American."
finished, quite was Columbiad the however, When, moved. be to not was
would it besides, up; kept be longer no could doors closed of state this
opinion. public offend to imprudent, even and taste, bad in been have
in but, comers; all to inclosure the opened therefore, Barbicane,
out money coin to determined he character, practical his with accordance
curiosity. public the of

immense this see to allowed be even to something indeed, was, It
the Americans the to seemed depths its into descend to but Columbiad,
one not was there consequence In felicity. earthly of ultra_ plus _ne
the visiting of pleasure the himself give to willing not was who visitor
allowed steam-cranes from hung Baskets abyss. metallic this of interior
Women, mania. perfect a became It curiosity. their satisfy to them
the penetrate to business their it made all men old and children,
at fixed was descent the for price The gun. colossal the of mysteries
the during charge, high this notwithstanding and, head, a dollars five
allowed visitors of influx the experiment, the preceded that months two
dollars! 500,000 nearly pocket to Club Gun the

the were Columbiad the to visitors first the that said be hardly need It
that to accorded justly was privilege This Club. Gun the of members
of 25th the on place took reception of ceremony The body. illustrious
Maston, J.T. president, the down took honour of basket A September.
members other and Blomsberry, Colonel Morgan, General Elphinstone, Major
that of bottom the at were they hot How all. in ten Club, Gun the of
delightful--how how but stifled, nearly were They tube! metal long
which stone massive the on ten for laid been had table A exquisite!
electric of jet a by lighted was and Columbiad, the of bottom the formed
to seemed that dishes, exquisite Numerous itself. day as bright as light
the and guests, the before placed successively were heaven, from descend
repast, splendid this during profusely flowed France of wines richest
earth! the of surface the below feet 900 given

and given were Toasts one. noisy a say to not gay, a was festival The
Club, Gun the to satellite, her and earth the to drank They to. replied
the of courier peaceful "the Selene, Phoebe, Diana, Moon, the Union, the
immense the of waves sonorous the by up carried hurrahs, the All night."
the then thunder; of noise a with mouth its reached tube, acoustic
the of those to shouts their united heartily Hill Stony round multitude
Columbiad. gigantic the of depths the in sight from hidden revellers ten

ate, or shouted he Whether longer. no himself contain could Maston J.T.
he way Any determine. to difficult be would most talked or gesticulated
the if even "not empire, an for place his up given have not would
him blow to moment--were very that at fired and primed, cannon--loaded,
universe." planetary the into pieces in




XVII. CHAPTER

TELEGRAM. A


and ended, virtually now was Club Gun the by undertaken work great The
would projectile the day the before elapse still would months two yet
to years two as long as seem would months two These moon. the for start
each of details smallest the then Until impatience. universal the
eagerly were and day, every newspapers the in appeared had operation
"interest this that feared be to was it now but public, the by devoured
no of afraid was one every and diminished, much be would dividend"
emotions. of share daily his receiving longer

unexpected, most the disappointed: agreeably all were They
to time in happened incident improbable and incredible, extraordinary,
pitch. highest its to excitement general the up keep

the through transmitted telegram, a p.m., 3.47 at 30th, September On
Barbicane. President for Town Tampa at arrived Cable, Atlantic

his notwithstanding and, message, the read and envelope the open tore He
the read he as dim eyes his and pale grew lips his self-control, great
telegram.

the of archives the in stored message the of text the is following The
Club:-- Gun

Paris, "France,

a.m. 4 30th, "September

States. United Florida, Town, Tampa "Barbicane,

shell. spherical your for projectile cylindro-conical a "Substitute
_Atlanta_. steamer by arrive Shall inside. go Shall

ARDAN." "MICHEL




XVIII. CHAPTER

ATLANTA. THE OF PASSENGER THE


simply had telegraph, by coming of instead news, wonderful this If
Irish, French, the envelope--if sealed a in and post by arrived
been necessarily not had clerks telegraph American and Newfoundland,
He moment. a for hesitated have not would it--Barbicane with acquainted
order in and sake, prudence' for it about silent quite been have would
practical a be might telegram This work. his on discredit throw to not
could probability What Frenchman. a from came it as especially joke,
if And journey? a such of idea the conceive should man any that be there
a in inclosed be to have would who madman a not he was exist did man the
cannon-ball? a in of instead strait-waistcoat

already was proposition Ardan's Michel and known, was message the But
for reason no had Barbicane so Union, the of States the over all
Town, Tampa in then colleagues his together called therefore He silence.
the about word a saying or it about thought he what showing without and,
laconic the coldly read he deserved, telegram the credibility of degree
text.

at laughing are of!"--"They possible!"--"Unheard "Not
doubt, for expression of sort Every us!"--"Ridiculous!"--"Absurd!"
of accompaniment with minutes some for heard was folly and incredulity,
words:-- the uttered alone Maston J.T. gestures. appropriate

exclaimed. he idea!" an "That's

they that as ideas such have people if "but major, the answered "Yes,"
execution." into them putting of think to not ought

an for ready Club, Gun the of secretary the answered quickly not?" "Why
drop. let was subject the But argument.

Town. Tampa about going already was name Ardan's Michel meantime the In
the about not together, joked and talked natives and Strangers
had who Maston, J.T. about personage--but mythical a European--evidently
a send to proposed Barbicane When existence. his in believe to folly the
and natural enterprise the thought one every moon the to projectile
being reasonable a that But ballistics. of affair simple practicable--a
to or, farce, a was projectile the inside journey the go to offer should
"humbug." all was it Americanism, familiar a use

thing unusual an Union, the throughout evening till lasted laughter This
partisans. and adepts finds enterprise impossible any where country a in

certain a awaken to fail not did proposition Ardan's Michel Still
many How thing." a such of thought not had "They minds. many in emotion
this not should Why next! the realities become had day one denied things
who man the way, any But, another? or day one accomplished be journey
project his as certainly, and madman, a be must risk a such run would
quiet be to better done have would he seriously, taken be not could
ridiculous such with population whole a troubling of instead it, about
trash.

great the was That exist? really personage this did all, of first But,
in unknown altogether not was Ardan" "Michel of name The question.
audacious his for about talked much European a to belonged It America.
the of depths the across all sent telegram the Then enterprises.
had Frenchman the which upon ship the of designation the Atlantic,
his for assigned date the passage, his taken had he declared
air certain a proposition the to gave circumstances these arrival--all
it. about minds their disburden to obliged were They probability. of
became groups the groups, into formed individuals isolated these Soon
of virtue by atoms like curiosity of action the under condensed
towards going crowd compact a was result the and attraction, molecular
dwelling. Barbicane's President

he what said not had message, the of arrival the since president, The
without opinions his express Maston J.T. let had he it; about thought
to proposing quiet, kept He blame. or approbation either manifesting
consideration, into impatience public taken not had he but events, await
Town Tampa of population the of sight the at pleased very not was and
soon vociferations and cries, Murmurs, windows. his under assembled
disagreeables the all had he that seen be will It appear. to him forced
man. public a of duties the as well as

the him asked citizen a and made, was silence appeared; therefore He
Michel as telegram the in designated person the question:--"Is following
not?" or America to way his on Ardan

you." than more no know "I Barbicane, answered "Gentlemen,"

voices. impatient some exclaimed know," to get must "We

coldly. president the answered us," inform will "Time

the answered suspense," in country whole a keep to right no has "Time
telegram the as projectile the for plans your altered you "Have orator.
demanded?"

the to recourse have must we right, are you but gentlemen; yet, "Not
emotion." this all caused has that telegraph

crowd. the cried telegraph-office!" the "To

immense the heading and, street, the into descended Barbicane
telegraph-office. the towards went he assemblage,

underwriters the to way its on was telegram a afterwards minutes few A
questions:-- following the to answer an for asking Liverpool, at

Had Europe? leave she did When _Atlanta_? the is vessel of sort "What
board?" on Ardan Michel named Frenchman a she

that information precise such received Barbicane afterwards hours Two
possible. longer no was doubt

for 2nd October on sail set Liverpool, from _Atlanta_, steamer "The
passengers' the in inscribed Frenchman a board on having Town, Tampa
Ardan." Michel as book

president the of eyes the telegram first the of confirmation this At
was and hands, his clenched he flame; sudden a with up lighted were
mutter-- to heard

and exist! does Frenchman the then! possible, is It then! true, is "It
can never I madman! a is he But here! be will he fortnight a in
consent."

Co. and Breadwill of firm the to wrote he evening same very the yet And
fresh until projectile the of casting the suspend to them begging
orders.

whole the of possession took which described be emotion the can how Now
surpassed was proposition Barbicane the of effect The America? of
accepted they way the said, Union the of newspapers the what tenfold;
old the from hero this of arrival the chanted they how and news, the
one every which in agitation feverish the depict to how continent;
a even give to how seconds; and minutes, hours, the counting lived,
show to how heads; many so upon idea one of effect the of idea feeble
work preoccupation, single a for up given being occupation every
the in waiting start, to ready vessels, suspended, commerce stopped,
of species every _Atlanta_, the of arrival the miss to not as so ports
Espiritu-Santo of bay the empty, returning and full arriving conveyance
and pleasure-yachts, packet-boats, steamers, by ploughed incessantly
thousands the numbers in denominate to how dimensions; all of fly-boats
Tampa of population the increased fortnight a in who people curious of
in army an like tents under encamp to obliged were and fourfold, Town
be not could and force, human above task a is this campaign--all
rashness. without undertaken

Channel Bahama the of semaphores the October of 20th the on a.m. 9 At
steamer large a later hours Two horizon. the on smoke thick signalled
to sent immediately was _Atlanta_ name The them. with signals exchanged
of bay the entered vessel English the p.m. 4 At Town. Tampa
Harbour, Hillisboro to entrance the passed she p.m. 5 At Espiritu-Santo.
Town. Tampa of port the in anchor weighed p.m. 6 at and

surrounded vessels 500 before bed sandy its reached not had anchor The
the was Barbicane assault. by taken was steamer the and _Atlanta_ the
to vain in tried he which of emotion the voice a in and deck, on first
suppress--

exclaimed. he Ardan!" "Michel

poop. the on mounted individual an answered "Present!"

mouth, silent and eyes, questioning crossed, arms his with Barbicane,
_Atlanta_. the of passenger the at fixedly looked

stooping, rather already but tall, age, of years forty-two man a was He
large His shoulders. their on balconies support which caryatides like
a mane; lion's a like hair red of shock a then and now every shook head
whiskers, cat's a like bristling moustache a forehead, wide face, short
and round cheeks, his of middle the on hair yellow of bunches little and
feline eminently this completed eyes short-sighted wild-looking, rather
humane, particularly mouth the cut, boldly was nose the But physiognomy.
never was that field a like ploughed and intelligent, high, forehead the
long on poised well body muscular a Lastly, fallow. remain to allowed
gait decided a and levers, well-set and powerful arms, muscular limbs,
than wrought "rather European, this of fellow built solidly a made
art. metallurgic from expressions his of one borrow to cast,"

in deciphered easily have would Gratiolet or Lavater of disciples The
of signs indisputable personage this of physiognomy and cranium the
to tendency and danger in courage of say, to is combativity--that
the in belief a and benevolence, of those obstacles, overcome
superhuman on much dwell natures many makes that instinct an marvellous,
of need the acquisivity, of bumps the hand, other the on but, things;
wanting. absolutely were acquiring, and possessing

of passenger the of type physical the to touches finishing the put To
wide cravat, open flowing, and loose, wide, garments his _Atlanta_, the
hands. nervous came which through unbuttoned, always cuffs and collar,
was man that dangers and winter of midst the in even that felt People
cold. never

never about, bustled he crowd, the amongst steamer, the of deck the On
speech, nautical in anchors," his "dragging moment, a for still
nails his biting and everybody, with friends making gesticulating,
invents Creator the whom beings original those of one was He nervously.
cast. the breaks immediately He whom of and fantasy, of moment a in

for field large a offered Ardan Michel of character the fact, In
perpetual a in lived man astonishing This analysis. physiological
of age the passed yet not had and hyperbole, to disposition
with eye his of retina the on themselves depicted objects superlatives;
he ideas; gigantic of association an thence from dimensions; exaggerated
men. and difficulties except scale large a on everything saw

witty and instinct, by artist an nature, luxuriant a of besides was He
side weak the defended and hominem_, _ad arguments loved he fellow;
nail. and tooth

ignorant," "sublimely as out himself gave he peculiarities other Amongst
_savants_, all for contempt supreme professed and Shakspeare, like
a short, in was, He points." our score only "who he, said "people,"
a adventurer, an not but adventurous brains, of country the of Bohemian
a sun, the of horses the with away running Phaeton a fellow, harebrained
for facility wonderful a had He wings. of relays with Icarus of kind
out getting for facility wonderful equally an and scrapes, into getting
cat. a like feet his on falling again, them of

the of love the and cost!" may it "Whatever was, motto his short, In
expression. fine Pope's to according passion," "ruling his impossible

risks Who qualities. his of defects the had fellow enterprising this But
got and much risked often Ardan said. is it nothing, wins nothing
have not would he chivalric; and disinterested perfectly was He nothing.
himself sold have would and enemy, worst his of death-warrant the signed
negro. a redeem to slavery into

Did person. bustling brilliant, this knew everybody Europe and France In
hoarse Fame, of voices hundred the by ceaselessly of talked get not he
entire the taking house, glass a in live not he Did service? his in
also he But secrets? intimate most his of confidant as universe
cuffed had he those amongst enemies of collection admirable an possessed
crowd. the in passage a make to elbows his using whilst wounded and

one Every child. spoiled a like treated and liked generally was he Still
uneasy with them followed and enterprises, bold his in interested was
stop to wished friend some When imprudent! so be to known was He mind.
burnt only is forest "The catastrophe, approaching an predicting by him
that knowing not smile, amiable an with answered he trees," own its by
proverbs. Arabian of prettiest the quoting was he

always bustle, a in always _Atlanta_, the of passenger the was Such
he what by not moved, always fire, inward of action the under boiling
on it--but about think even not did America--he in do to come had
a offered individuals ever If organisation. feverish his of account
Yankee the and Ardan Michel Frenchman the were they contrast striking
his in each audacious, and bold, enterprising, however, both, Barbicane,
way. own

the by interrupted quickly was rival his of contemplation Barbicane's
the and frantic so even became cries These crowd. the of cheers
having after Ardan, Michel that form personal a such took enthusiasm
was fingers, ten his left nearly he which in hands thousand a shaken
cabin. his in refuge take to obliged

word. a uttered having without him followed Barbicane

alone, were they as soon as him asked Ardan Michel Barbicane?" are "You
twenty of friend a to spoken have would he as tone same the in and
standing. years'

Club. Gun the of president the answered "Yes,"

right! That's well? Very you? are How Barbicane. morning, good "Well,
right!" that's

decided have "you preliminary, further without Barbicane, said "Then,"
go?" to

decided." "Quite

you?" stop will "Nothing

message?" my in you told I as projectile your altered you Have "Nothing.

more, once insisting Barbicane, asked But," came. you till waited "I
reflected?" quite have "you

a for go to occasion the find I lose? to time any I have "Reflected!
that me to seems It all. is that and it, by profit I moon, the to trip
reflection." much so want not does

journey of project his of spoke who man the at eagerly looked Barbicane
anxiety. of absence such with and carelessness, much so with

execution?" of means some plan, some have "you said, he least," at "But

my say to like I thing. one you tell to me allow But means. "Excellent
it. about more no hear to and everybody, to and all, for and once say
your together call better, something of think can you unless Then,
you if America all Florida, all town, the all colleagues, your friends,
and execution, of means my state to ready be shall I to-morrow and like,
do?" that Will be. may they whatever objections, any answer

Barbicane. answered do," will that "Yes,

Michel about crowd the told and cabin, the left president the Whereupon
demonstrations great with received were words His proposition. Ardan's
could one every day next The difficulties. all short cut That joy. of
most the of some Still ease. their at hero European the contemplate
they _Atlanta_; the of deck the leave not would spectators obstinate
his screwed had Maston J.T. others, Amongst board. on night the passed
the taken have would it and poop, the of combing the into hook steel
again. out it get to capstan

old only are we "and tone, every in he cried hero!" a hero! a is "He
European!" that to compared women

withdraw, to spectators the requested having after president, the to As
bell the till it leave not did and cabin, passenger's the re-entered he
quarter. midnight the out rang steamer the of

the by warmly other each shook popularity in rivals two the then But
friends. separated and hand,




XIX. CHAPTER

MEETING. A


public satisfy to enough early rise not did sun the day next The
to put be would questions indiscreet that fearing Barbicane, impatience.
number small a to auditors his reduced have to like would Ardan, Michel
dam to as easy as was it But instance. for colleagues his to adepts, of
his renounce to obliged therefore, was, He Niagara. at Falls the up
The lecture. public a of risks the all run friend his let and project,
dimensions, colossal its notwithstanding Town, Tampa of Hall Town new
the assumed had which occasion, the for insufficient considered was
meeting. public a of proportions

few a In town. the outside situated plain, vast a was chosen place The
The sun. the of rays the from it sheltering in succeeded they hours
accessories necessary the furnished canvas, in rich port, the of ships
the over spread was cloth of sky immense an Soon tent. colossal a for
There day. the of heat the against it defended and plain, calcined
several for temperature stifling a braved and stood persons 300,000
of crowd that Of arrival. Frenchman's the awaiting whilst hours
badly, saw third second a hear; and see could alone one-third spectators
saw, nor heard neither it third, remaining the to As hear. not did and
applaud. to eager least the not was it though

the by accompanied appearance, his made Ardan Michel o'clock three At
President to arm right his gave He Club. Gun the of members principal
midday the than radiant more Maston, J.T. to left his and Barbicane,
ruddy. as nearly and sun,

forest a over extended eyes his which from platform, the mounted Ardan
not did he embarrassed; least the in seem not did He hats. black of
cheers the To amiable. and familiar, gay, there, home at was he pose;
asked hand his with then bow; gracious a by answered he him greeted that
very himself expressed and English, in speak to began silence, for
terms:-- these in correctly

a you keep to intend I warm, very is it "although he, said "Gentlemen,"
have which projects the of explanation some you give to minutes few
I and _savant_, a nor orator an neither am I you. interest to appeared
Barbicane friend my but public; in speak to having upon count not did
with me to listen Then it. do I so pleasure, you give would it me tells
orator." the of faults the excuse to please and ears, 600,000 your

who audience, the by admired much was beginning unceremonious This
applause. of murmur immense an by satisfaction their expressed

prohibited. is dissent or approbation of mark "no he, said "Gentlemen,"
have you that forget not do all, of first And, continue. I settled, That
ignore to enough far goes ignorance his but man, ignorant an with do to
easy and natural, simple, a appeared therefore, has, It difficulties.
the for start to and projectile a in passage his take to him to thing
of mode the to as and later, or sooner made be would journey That moon.
by began Man progress. of law the follows simply it adopted, locomotion
in then feet, two on went he day fine one then fours, all on travelling
the is projectile the Well, railway. a on then coach, a in then cart, a
only are planets truth, the speak to and, future, the of carriage
But Creator. the of hand the by hurled cannon-balls simple projectiles,
the that think may gentlemen, you, of Some vehicle. our to return to
the All kind. the of excessive--nothing is at travel will it speed
sun the round movement its in itself earth the and faster, go planets
ask I Only examples. some are Here fast. as times three along us carries
are measures American for leagues, in myself express to permission your
calculations." my in muddled getting fear I and me, to familiar very not

orator The difficulty. no offered and simple, quite appeared demand The
speech. his resumed

am I planets. different the of speed the is gentlemen, following, "The
this know I ignorance, my notwithstanding that, acknowledge to obliged
as be will you minutes two in but exactly, detail astronomical small
5,000 of rate the at goes Neptune that then, Learn, I. as learned
Mars, 11,675; Jupiter, 8,858; Saturn, 7,000; Uranus, hour; an leagues
comets, some 52,520; Mercury, 32,190; Venus, 27,500; earth, the 22,011;
people idlers, veritable us, to As perihelion! their in leagues 14,000
on go will it and leagues, 9,900 exceed not does speed our hurry, no in
is it if and at, wonder to anything is there if you ask I decreasing!
speeds, greater still by day some surpassed be will it that evident not
agents?" mechanical the be probably will electricity or light which of

affirmation. this doubt to seemed one No

is minds--that narrow certain to "according resumed, he hearers," "Dear
Popilius a in inclosed is them--humanity for qualification best the
upon vegetate to condemned is and open, break cannot it which circle
of Nothing shores! planetary the towards flying ever without globe this
shall we planets, the to go shall we moon, the to going are We kind! the
easily, York, New to Liverpool from go now we as stars the to go
as crossed soon as be will ocean atmospheric the and surely, rapidly,
end will and term, relative a only is Distance earth! the of oceans the
zero." to reduced being by

rather was hero, French the of favour in greatly though assembly, The
it. see to appeared Ardan Michel theory. audacious this by staggered

an with continued he hosts," worthy my convinced, seem not do "You
it long how know you Do little. a reason us let "Well, smile. amiable
Not days. hundred Three moon? the reach to train express an take would
times nine even Not that? is what but leagues, 86,410 of journey A more.
that done not have who sailors few very are there and earth, the round
the on hours ninety-eight only be shall I Think, existence. their during
and earth, the from way long a is moon the that imagine you Ah, road!
what But adventure! the attempting before twice think must one that
at gravitates which Neptune, to going were I if say you would
few very that journey a is That sun? the from leagues 1,147,000,000
Baron Even mile! a farthing a cost only it if even go, could people
ticket!" his take to enough have not would Rothschild

Michel besides, assembly; the please to greatly seemed argument This
was he felt he eloquent; superbly grew subject, his of full Ardan,
assurance-- admirable with resumed and to, listened

nothing is sun the to Neptune from distance this friends, my "Well,
leagues of billions are which of some stars, the of that to compared
the separates that distance the of speak people yet And sun! the from
that universe this of think I what know you Do sun! the from planets
my know to like you Should Neptune? at ends and sun the with begins
solar the opinion, my to According one. simple very a is It theory?
are it compose that planets the mass; homogeneous solid one is universe
only is them between space the and another, one crowd together, close
compact most the of molecules the separates that space the
to right the therefore, have, I platinum! or iron, metal--silver,
all will you conviction a with it repeat will I and affirm,
exist!" not does distance word; vain a is share--distance

voice, one with assembly the cried Hurrah!" Bravo! said! "Well
of boldness the and orator, the of accent and gesture the by electrified
conceptions. his

"distance others; the than energetically more Maston, J.T. cried "No!"
exist!" not does

could he emotions and movements his of violence the by away carried And,
the to platform the of top the from fell nearly he contain, hardly
avoided thus and equilibrium, his recovering in succeeded he But ground.
word. vain a be to not distance proved brutally have would that fall a
course. its resumed orator distinguished the of speech the Then

I If solved. now is question this that think "I he, said friends," "My
my in timid been have I because is it all you convinced not have
my to down it set must you and arguments, my in feeble demonstrations,
from distance the repeat, I be, may that However ignorance. theoretic
to unworthy and unimportant very really is satellite her to earth the
saying in much too advancing am I think not do I mind. serious a occupy
in projectiles, by established be will trains of service a soon that
comfortably be will moon the to earth the from journey the which
fear, to lines the off running nor shocks no be will There accomplished.
straight a in fatigue, without rapidly, reached be will goal the and
earth the half over, are years twenty Before flies.' crow the 'as line,
moon!" the visited have will

least those even assistants, the cried Ardan!" Michel for cheers "Three
convinced.

orator. the answered modestly Barbicane!" for cheers "Three

greeted was enterprise the of promoter the towards gratitude of act This
applause. unanimous with

to questions any have you "if Ardan, Michel resumed friends," my "Now,
to endeavour will I still but me, embarrass evidently will you me ask
you." answer

satisfied very be to reason had Club Gun the of president the now Until
which upon theories, speculative upon rolled had It discussion. the with
himself shown had imagination, lively his by away carried Ardan, Michel
towards deviating from prevented be therefore, must, He brilliant. very
well. so of out come not doubtless would he which questions, practical
thought he if friend new his asked and speak, to haste made Barbicane
inhabited. were planets the or moon the that

orator, the answered president," worthy my problem, great a is "That
intelligence--Plutarch, great of men mistaken, not am I if "still, smiling;
the in others--answered many and Saint-Pierre, de Bernardin Swedenborg,
I view of point philosophy natural a from answered I If affirmative.
exists useless nothing that myself to say should same--I the do should
friend another, by question your answering and, world, this in
either inhabitable, are planets the if that affirm should I Barbicane,
be." will they or been, have they inhabited, are they

the had opinion whose spectators, of ranks first the cried well," "Very
others. the for law of force

the said justice," and logic more with answer to impossible is "It
'Are this: to comes therefore, question, "The Club. Gun the of president
part." my for so, think I inhabitable?' planets the

Ardan. Michel answered it," of certain am I--I "And

the against arguments are "there assistants, the of one replied "Still,"
the that evident is it them of most In worlds. the of inhabitability
planets, the of speak to only Thus, modified. be must life of principles
as according others in frozen and some in up burnt be must people the
sun." the from distance short or long a are they

opponent honourable my know to "not Ardan, Michel answered regret," "I
combated be may it think I but value, its has objection His personally.
worlds of habitability the which of those all like success, some with
there if that say should I physician a were I If object. the been has
and sun, the to nearest planets the in motion in put caloric less were
phenomenon simple this planets, distant the in contrary, the on more,
these of temperature the render and heat the equalise to suffice would
naturalist a were I If are. we like organised beings to bearable worlds
Nature that _savants_, illustrious many after him, tell should I
different very in living animals of examples with earth on us furnishes
the to mortal medium a in breathe fish that habitability; of conditions
to difficult existence double a have amphibians that animals; other
greatest the in live sea the of inhabitants certain that explain;
or fifty of pressures crushed, being without there, support and depths,
the to insensible insects, aquatic some that atmospheres; sixty
water boiling of springs in time same the at with met are temperature,
in are there short, Ocean--in Polar the of plains frozen the in and
real. less no but incomprehensible, often action, of means many nature
formed evidently arolites--bodies that say should I chemist a were I If
revealed analysed, when globe--have terrestrial our from away
solely origin its owes that substance a carbon, of traces indisputable
experiments, Reichenbach's to according which, and beings, organised to
theologian a were I if Lastly, 'animalised.' been have necessarily must
seems Paul, St. to according Redemption, Divine that say should I
I But bodies. celestial the all to but earth the to only not applicable
philosopher. natural nor naturalist, chemist, theologian, a neither am
I universe, the rule that laws great the of ignorance perfect my in So,
inhabited, are bodies heavenly the if know not do 'I answer, only can
see!'" to going am I know, not do I as and,

further any hazard theories Ardan's Michel of adversary the Did
crowd the of cries frantic the for say, to impossible is It arguments?
silence When promulgated. being from opinion any prevented have would
triumphant the groups, distant most the in even restored, again was
considerations:-- following the adding with himself contented orator

grave this upon touched hardly have I that gentlemen, think, will "You
this upon lecture instructive an you give to here not am I question.
the of favour in arguments of series another is There subject. vast
only me Allow that. upon look not do I inhabited; being bodies heavenly
planets the that maintain who people the To point. one upon insist to
is it if right be may 'You answer, must you inhabited not are
is it but worlds; possible of best the is earth the that demonstrated
whilst satellite, one only has It Voltaire.' notwithstanding so, not
an service, their at several have Neptune and Saturn, Uranus, Jupiter,
the renders now which that But disdained. be to not is that advantage
axis its of inclination the is abode of place uncomfortable an earth
the hence night; and day of inequality the Hence orbit. its upon
is it spheroid miserable our Upon seasons. of diversity unfortunate
roasted and winter in frozen are we cold; too or warm too either always
consumption, and rheumatism, colds, of planet the is it summer; in
only has axis the where instance, for Jupiter, of surface the on whilst
invariable enjoy can inhabitants the inclination, slight very a
winter and autumn, summer, spring, perpetual the is There temperature.
may and him, suits that climate the choose may 'Jovian' each zone;
You temperature. the of variations the from life his all himself shelter
planet our over Jupiter of superiority this to agree doubtless will
is What years! twelve lasts each which years, its of speaking without
such under and auspices, these under that, me to evident is it more,
fortunate that of inhabitants the existence, of conditions marvellous
more artists learned, more are _savants_ beings--that superior are world
is what Alas! better. are good the and wicked, less wicked the artistic,
little!--an very is perfection this reach to spheroid our to wanting
orbit." its of plane the on inclined less rotation of axis

invent efforts, our unite us "let voice, impetuous an cried "Well!"
axis!" earth's the rectify and machines,

could which of author the proposition, this greeted applause of Thunders
secretary fiery the that probable is It Maston. J.T. than other no be
a such venture to engineer as instincts his by away carried been had
encouraged many truth, the is it for said, be must it but proposition;
resting-point the found had they if doubtless, and cries, their with him
lever a constructed have would Americans the Archimedes, by demanded
was point this But axis. its redressing and world the raising of capable
mechanicians. bold these to wanting

the success: enormous had idea practical eminently this Nevertheless,
very long, and hour, an of quarter good a for suspended was discussion
the of America of States United the in talked they afterwards, long
of secretary perpetual the by enunciated energetically so proposition
Club. Gun the




XX. CHAPTER

PARRY. AND THRUST


the when but discussion, the terminated have to seemed incident This
and loud a in uttered heard were words these subsided had agitation
voice:-- severe

would he perhaps roam, to fancy his allowed has orator the that "Now
and theories, to attention less pay subject, his to back go kindly
expedition." his of part practical the discuss

thin, a was He thus. spoke who person the towards turned were eyes All
taking By beard. American an and face energetic an with man, dry-looking
had he time to time from assembly the in agitation the of advantage
arms his with There, spectators. of row front the degrees, by gained,
the at imperturbably stared he bold, and brilliant eyes his crossed,
silence, kept he question his asked having After meeting. the of hero
him towards directed eyes of thousands the by disturbed seem not did and
being answer The words. his by excited murmur disapproving the by nor
precise and clear same the with question the put again he delayed
added-- he then accent;

earth." the not moon, the discuss to here are "We

has discussion "the Ardan, Michel answered sir," right, are "You
moon." the to return will we point; the from wandered

is satellite our that pretend "you man, unknown the resumed "Sir,"
live certainly they exist do Selenites if but good; so far So inhabited.
not is good--there your for fact the you tell for--I breathing, without
moon." the of surface the on air of particle least the

a that understood he mane; red his shook Ardan affirmation this At
him at looked He question. real the on man this with coming was struggle
said-- and turn, his in fixedly

pray?" so, says who And moon! the in air no is there "Ah!

_savants_." "The

"Indeed?"

"Indeed."

for respect profound a have I apart, "joking Michel, resumed "Sir,"
not do who _savants_ for contempt profound a but know, who _savants_
know."

category?" latter the to belong who any know you "Do

a 'mathematically,' that, maintains who one is there France in "Yes;
to made not is fish a that demonstrates who another and fly, cannot bird
water." in live

of support in quote can I and sir, two, those of question no is "There
to." object not will you that names proposition my

me!" like man ignorant poor a embarrass greatly would you sir, "Then,

never have you which questions scientific with meddle you do why "Then
brutally. unknown the asked studied?"

is danger suspect not does who man the "because Ardan; answered "Why?"
my precisely is it but true, is it nothing, know I brave! always
strength." my makes that weakness

a in unknown the exclaimed madness," as far as goes weakness "Your
tone. bad-tempered

to me takes madness my "if Frenchman, the replied better," the much "So
moon!" the

so come had who intruder the at stared colleagues his and Barbicane
him, knew them of None enterprise. their of way the in stand to boldly
discussion, a such of upshot the upon reassured not president, the and
was assembly The apprehension. some with friend new his at looked
the to attention called struggle this for uneasy, slightly and attentive
expedition. the of impossibilities and dangers

the prove that reasons "the adversary, Ardan's Michel resumed "Sir,"
indisputable. and numerous are moon the round atmosphere all of absence
existed, ever had atmosphere that if priori_ _ that, even, say, may I
you oppose rather would I but earth, the by away drawn been have must it
facts." incontestable with

as gallantry--oppose perfect with Ardan, Michel answered sir," "Oppose,
like." you as much

a traverse rays sun's the when "that unknown, the said know," "You
other in or, line, straight a from deviated are they air like medium
moon the by occulted are stars when Well, refracted. are they words,
least the show not do disc, her of edge the grazing on rays, their
follows, It refraction. of indication slightest the offer nor deviation
atmosphere." no have can moon the that therefore,

the admitted, once this for, Frenchman, the at looked one Every
rigorous. were consequences

only not if best your is "that Ardan, Michel answered fact," "In
I it. answer to embarrassed be would perhaps, _savant_, a and argument,
it because value absolute no has argument this that you tell only can
determined, perfectly be to moon the of diameter angular the supposes
if sir, dear my me, tell and that, waive us let But not. is it which
moon." the of surface the on volcanoes of existence the admit you

no." eruption, in volcanoes yes; volcanoes, "Extinct

been have volcanoes these that suppose us let argument of sake the "For
period." certain a for eruption in

oxygen the furnish themselves can they as but certain, is "That
the in not does eruption their of fact the combustion for necessary
atmosphere." lunar a of presence the prove least

series this leave "and Ardan, Michel answered then," on, pass will "We
am I that you warn I But observation. direct at arrive and argument of
names." quote to going

well." "Very

of eclipse the observing Halley, and Louville astronomers the 1715 "In
nature. remarkable a of fulminations certain remarked May, of 3rd the
to them by attributed were frequent, and rapid light, of jets These
moon." the of atmosphere the in storms

Halley and Louville astronomers "the unknown, the replied 1715," "In
meteoric as such terrestrial, purely phenomena phenomena lunar for took
the was That atmosphere. own our in generated are which bodies other or
it." with go I and facts, these of aspect scientific

the by confused being without Ardan, answered again," on pass us "Let
luminous of number great a observe 1787, in Herschel, not "Did reply.
moon?" the of surface the on points

points. luminous these of origin the explaining without but "Certainly;
lunar a of necessity the conclude thereby not did himself Herschel
atmosphere."

see "I adversary; his complimenting Ardan, Michel said answered," "Well
selenography." in up well are you that

and Boeer MM. observers, skilful most the that add may I and sir; "Yes,
surface." moon's the on wanting absolutely is air that agree Moedler,

the by struck appeared who audience, the amongst place took movement A
personage. singular this of arguments

greatest the with Ardan, Michel answered again," on pass will "We
French skilful A fact. important an at now arrive "and calmness,
18th, July of eclipse the observing whilst Laussedat, M. astronomer,
and rounded were crescent solar the of horns the that proved 1860,
a by produced been have only could appearance this Now truncated.
moon. the of atmosphere the traversing in rays solar the of deviation
fact." the of explanation possible other no is There

authenticated?" fact this is "But

certain." absolutely is "It

their of side the to audience the back brought movement inverse An
silent. remained adversary whose hero, favourite

last his about vanity any showing without speaking on went Ardan
simply-- said he advantage;

affirmed positively be cannot it that sir, dear my therefore, see, "You
atmosphere This moon. the of surface the on atmosphere no is there that
exists." it that admits generally now science but dense, not probably is

in. give not would who unknown, the replied mountains," the upon "Not

some than more not is it and valleys, the of depths the in but "No,
deep." feet of hundreds

be will air the for precautions, your take to well do will you way "Any
rarefied." terribly

up delivered once Besides, man. one for enough be always will there "Oh,
on it breathe to only and it economise to best my do shall I there,
occasions." great

who interlocutor, mysterious the saluted laughter of burst formidable A
proudly. it daring assembly the round looked

the upon agreed are we "as carelessly, Ardan, Michel resumed "Then,"
some of presence the admit to forced are we atmosphere, some of presence
have I Besides, part. my for with, delighted am I consequence water--a
disc, moon's the of side one know only We make. to observation another
other." the on much be may there side that on air little is there if and

so?" "How

assumed has attraction terrestrial of action the under moon the "Because
consequence the Hence end. small the see we which of egg, an of form the
is gravity of centre its that Hausen, of calculations the to due
the all that conclusion this Hence hemisphere. other the in situated
our of side other the to drawn been have water and air of masses
creation." the of days first the in satellite

unknown. the exclaimed fancies," "Pure

difficult appears it and laws, mechanical upon based theories pure "No,
the to it put and assembly this to appeal make I them. refute to me to
the on possible is earth upon exists it as such life if know to vote
moon?" the of surface

Michel proposition. this applauded hearers thousand hundred Three
himself make not could he but again, speak to wished adversary Ardan's
him. upon hailed were threats and Cries heard.

some. said enough!" "Enough,

others. repeated out!" him "Turn

storm the let and move, not did platform, the to on holding he, But
Ardan Michel if proportions formidable assumed have might It by. pass
his abandon to chivalrous too was He gesture. a by it appeased not had
extremity. an such in contradicter

tone. gracious most the in asked, he words?" few a add to wish "You

"or away, carried unknown, the answered thousand!" a hundred! a "Yes,
be--" must you enterprise your in persevere To only! one no, rather

a for asked have I when that me call you can How "Imprudent!
round turn to not as so Barbicane friend my from bullet cylindro-conical
squirrel?" a like road the on

when pieces to you smash will shock fearful the man! unfortunate "But,
start." you

I but difficulty; only and real the upon finger your put there have "You
to Americans the of genius industrial the of opinion an good too have
difficulty." that overcome not will they that believe

crossing whilst projectile the of speed the by developed heat the "But
air?" of beds the

atmosphere." the pass soon so shall I and thick, are sides its "Oh,

water?" provisions? "But

shall I and year, one for enough carry could I that calculated have "I
going." days four be only

road?" the on breathe to air "But

processes." chemical by some make shall "I

there?" get ever you supposing moon, the upon fall your "But

as earth, the upon fall a than rapid less times six be will "It
moon." the of surface the on less times six is attraction

glass." like you smash to sufficient be will still it "But

conveniently rockets of means by fall my delaying me prevent will "What
time?" proper the at lighted and placed

obstacles all solved, be difficulties all that supposing lastly, "But
you that admitting favour, your in chance every uniting by away cleared
back?" come you shall how well, and safe moon the reach

back." come not shall "I

simplicity, its of reason by sublime almost was which answer, this Upon
its than eloquent more was silence its But silent. remained assembly the
to it by profited unknown The been. have would enthusiasm of cries
time. last one protest

which death, your "and cried, he yourself," kill infallibly will "You
science." to useful be even not will death, madman's a only be will

agreeable most the in prophesy you for men, of generous most on, "Go
manner."

not do I "and adversary, Ardan's Michel exclaimed much!" too is it "Ah,
mad your with on Go discussion. a childish so with on go I why know
fault." your not is It like. you as enterprise

away." "Fire

acts." your of responsibility the bear must another "No,

voice. imperious an in Ardan Michel asked pray?" that, is "Who

is it as impossible as attempt, this organised has who fool "The
ridiculous."

unknown the of intervention the since Barbicane direct. was attack The
smoke," own his "consume and himself contain to efforts violent made had
and directly rose he designated outrageously so himself seeing upon but
when face, his to him dared who adversary, his towards walk to going was
him. from separated suddenly himself felt he

and arms, vigorous hundred a by once at all up lifted was platform The
triumph of honours the share to forced was Club Gun the of president the
in came bearers the but heavy, was platform The Ardan. Michel with
the for fighting even struggling, disputing, relays, continuous
this to shoulders their of support the lending of privilege
manifestation.

the leave to tumult the of advantage take not did unknown the However,
at staring still folded, arms his row, front the in kept He place.
Barbicane. President

these of eyes the and either, him of sight lose not did president The
swords. flaming like met men two

intensity of maximum their at kept crowds immense the of cries The
carried be to himself allowed Ardan Michel march. triumphant this during
pleasure. evident with

the by beaten ship a like tossed and pitched platform the Sometimes
their and sailors, good were meeting the of heroes two the But waves.
Town. Tampa of port the in arrived safely vessel

admirers. vigorous his from escaping in succeeded happily Ardan Michel
glided and room, his reached quickly Hotel, Franklin the to fled He
his under watched men 100,000 of army an whilst bed into rapidly
windows.

place taken had scene decisive and grave, short, a meanwhile the In
Club. Gun the of president the and personage mysterious the between

adversary. his to straight went last, at liberated Barbicane,

voice. curt a in he said "Come!"

alone both soon were they and quay, the to on him followed stranger The
Fall. Jones' to on opening wharf a to entrance the at

other. each at looked another, one to unknown still enemies, these There

Barbicane. asked you?" are "Who

Nicholl." "Captain

path." my cross you made never has fate now Until so. thought "I

accord." own my of it crossed "I

me." insulted have "You

"Publicly."

insult." that for satisfaction me give shall you "And

minute." this "Now,

wood a is There secret. kept be to us between everything wish I "No.
it?" know you Do Wood. Tampa--Skersnaw from miles three situated

"Yes."

side?" one by o'clock five at morning to-morrow it enter you "Will

time." same the at other the by it enter will you if "Yes,

Barbicane. said rifle?" your forget not will you "And

Nicholl. Captain answered yours," forget will you than more "Not

Gun the of president the pronounced coldly been had words these After
but, dwelling; his to returned Barbicane separated. captain the and Club
means seeking in night the passed he rest, hours' some taking of instead
problem difficult the solve to and projectile, the of shock the avoid to
meeting. the at Ardan Michel by given




XXI. CHAPTER

AFFAIR. AN SETTLES FRENCHMAN A HOW


the and president the between discussed being was duel the Whilst
a became adversary each which in duel savage and terrible captain--a
triumph. his of fatigues the after resting was Ardan man-hunter--Michel
rival beds American for expression, right the not evidently is Resting
granite. or marble of tables hardness in

that _serviettes_ the between over and over turning badly, slept Ardan
more a installing of thinking was he and sheets, for him served
from him startled noise violent a when projectile his in bed comfortable
be to seemed They door. his shook blows Thundering slumbers. his
racket, this in heard were Shouts instrument. iron an with administered
agreeable. be to early too rather

sake!" Heaven's for "Open, cried. one some "Open!"

a peremptory so in acquiesce should Ardan why reason no was There
giving was it moment the at door his opened and rose he Still demand.
visitor. obstinate the of efforts the under way

not would bomb A room. the into bounded Club Gun the of secretary The
ceremony. less with entered have

president "our abrupto_, _ex Maston J.T. exclaimed evening," "Yesterday
his challenged has He meeting! the during insulted publicly was
fight to going are They Nicholl! Captain than other no is who adversary,
himself! Barbicane from all it learnt I Wood! Skersnaw in morning this
be must duel This end! an at be will project our killed is he If
to Barbicane over empire enough have can only man one Now prevented!
Ardan." Michel is man that and it, stop

up giving Ardan, Michel thus, speaking was Maston J.T. Whilst
two than less in and trousers, vast his into jumped him, interrupting
go could they as fast as rushing were friends two the after minutes
Town. Tampa of suburbs the towards

the of state the Ardan told Maston that course rapid this during was It
and Barbicane between enmity the of causes real the him told He case.
to thanks then, until why date, old of was enmity that how Nicholl,
added he met; never had captain the and president the friends, mutual
lastly, and, bullet; and iron-plate between rivalry a solely was it that
by sought long occasion an been only had meeting the of scene the that
grudge. old an satisfy to Nicholl

America, in duels private these than terrible more nothing is There
and thickets, across other each seek adversaries two the which during
those envy must each that then is It animals. wild like other each hunt
their prairies, the of Indians the to natural so qualities marvellous
An enemy. the of scent their ruse, ingenious their intelligence, rapid
meetings these In death. cause may step, wrong a hesitation, a error,
and sportsmen both and dogs, their by accompanied often are Yankees the
hours. for on go game

had companion his when Ardan, Michel exclaimed are!" you demons "What
energy. much with scene the depicted

make us let "but modestly; Maston J.T. answered are," we what are "We
haste."

with wet still plain the across rush he and Ardan Michel did vain In
reach not could they cuts; shortest the take creeks, the jump dew,
it entered have must Barbicane five. half-past before Wood Skersnaw
before. half-an-hour

cut. had axe his faggots up tying was bushman old an There

crying-- him to ran Maston

the Barbicane, rifle? a with armed wood the enter man a seen you "Have
friend?" best president--my

world the all that navely thought Club Gun the of secretary worthy The
understand. to seem not did bushman the But president. his know must

Ardan. said then sportsman," "A

bushman. the answered Yes," sportsman? "A

since?" long it "Is

ago." hour an "About

Maston. exclaimed late!" "Too

Ardan. Michel asked firing?" any heard you "Have

"No."

shot?" one "Not

game!" much bag to seem not does sportsman That one. "Not

Maston. said do?" we shall "What

us." for meant not bullet a catching of risk the at wood the "Enter

rather would "I accent, unmistakable an with Maston, exclaimed "Ah!"
head." Barbicane's in one than head my in bullets ten have

hand. companion's his pressing Ardan, said then!" ahead, "Go

a was It copse. a in disappeared companions two the after seconds few A
olives, tulip-trees, sycamores, cypresses, huge of made thicket dense
their intermingled trees different The magnolias. and oaks, tamarinds,
Ardan Michel view. the hid quite and confusion, inextricable in branches
tall the through silently phasing side by side on walked Maston and
creepers, vigorous the through themselves for road a making grass,
the of shade sombre the in lost branches or bushes the all in looking
traces the to As step. every at shot a hear to expecting and foliage,
was it wood, the through passage his of left have must Barbicane that
the in on blindly marched they and them, see to them for impossible
adversary his followed have would Indian an which in paths hardly-formed
step. by step

companions two the length hour's an about of search vain a After
redoubled. was anxiety Their stopped.

Barbicane like man "A despair. in Maston said over," all be must "It
too frank, too is He manoeuvre! any to condescend or traps lay not would
enough far doubtless and danger, into straight gone has He courageous.
shot!" the of noise the off carry to wind the for bushman the from

Ardan. Michel answered it!" heard have should we "But

of accent an in Maston J.T. exclaimed late?" too came we if what "But
despair.

resumed he and Maston make. to answer any find not did Ardan Michel
called they shouted; they time to time From walk. interrupted their
adversaries two the of neither but Nicholl; or Barbicane either
disappeared noise, the by roused birds, of flocks Joyful answered.
copses. the through fled deer frightened some and branches, the amongst

wood the of part greater The hour. another search their continued They
They combatants. the of presence the revealed Nothing explored. been had
to going was Ardan and bushman, the of affirmation the doubt to began
stopped. Maston once at all when useless, as pursuit the renounce

yonder!" one some is "There he. said "Hush!"

Ardan. Michel answered one?" "Some

hand. his in not is rifle His move. to seem not does He man! a "Yes!
doing?" be he can What

Ardan. Michel asked him?" recognise you do "But

Maston. answered round," turning is he yes! "Yes,

it?" is "Who

Nicholl!" "Captain

beating. stopped almost heart whose Ardan, Michel cried "Nicholl!"

adversary?" his from fear to more nothing had he Then disarmed! "Nicholl

is." it how know shall "we Ardan; Michel said him," to go us "Let

to stopped they when steps fifty gone not had he and companion his But
a find should they imagined They attentively. more captain the examine
remained they him seeing Upon man. revengeful and bloodthirsty
stupefied.

in and tulip-trees, gigantic two between hung was meshes fine with net A
plaintive with struggling was entangled, wings its with bird, small a it
a but being human a not was net the hung had who bird-catcher The cries.
egg, pigeon's a as large as country, the to peculiar spider, venomous
rushing was he as insect, hideous The legs. enormous with furnished and
high the in refuge take and back turn to forced was prey, his on
his in him threatened enemy formidable a for tulip-tree, a of branches
turn.

the forgetting ground, the on gun his with Nicholl, Captain fact, In
as delicately as delivering in occupied was situation, his of dangers
he When spider. monstrous the of meshes the in taken victim the possible
wings its fluttered it away; fly bird little the let he finished had
disappeared. and joyfully

heard he when copse the through fly it watching was touched, Nicholl,
emotion:-- of full voice a in uttered words these

are!" you man, brave a are "You

tone-- every in repeating him, of front in was Ardan Michel turned. He

one!" kind a "And

for, here come you have "what captain, the exclaimed Ardan!" "Michel
sir?"

or Barbicane killing you prevent and Nicholl, you, with hands shake "To
him." by killed being

two these him for looking been have "I captain, the cried "Barbicane!"
himself?" hiding he is Where him! finding without hours

always must You polite! not is "this Ardan, Michel said "Nicholl!"
shall we alive is Barbicane if uneasy; be don't adversary; your respect
himself amused not has he if that easily more the much so and him, find
have you when But too. you for looking be must he birds protecting with
duel no be will this--there you tells Ardan Michel him--and found
you." between

"there gravely, Nicholl answered me," and Barbicane President "Between
us--" of one of death the that rivalry such is

one detest may you like men "brave Ardan, Michel resumed come!" "Come,
fight." not will You too. another one respect they but another,

sir." fight, shall "I

won't." you "No

friend, president's the am "I heartily, Maston J.T. said then "Captain,"
will that me; kill one some kill absolutely must you if ego_; _alter his
thing." same the exactly be

joking--" "this rifle, his seizing convulsively Nicholl, said "Sir,"

understand I "and Ardan, Michel answered joking," not is Maston "Friend
nor he neither but loves; he man the for killed be to wanting his
so have I for bullets, Nicholl's Captain under fall will Barbicane
hasten will they that rivals two the to make to proposition a tempting
it." accept to

incredulity. visible with Nicholl, asked pray?" it, is what "But

Barbicane's in it communicate only can "I Ardan; answered "Patience,"
presence."

captain. the cried then," him, for look us "Let

his discharged having captain, the out; set immediately men three The
silence. in on walked and shoulder his on it threw rifle,

with seized was Maston vain. in was search the half-hour another During
asking closely, Nicholl Captain observed He presentiment. sinister a
unfortunate the satisfied, vengeance captain's the once if, himself
Ardan Michel thicket. bloody some in lying left been not had Barbicane
looking both were they and thought, same the have to seemed
stopped. suddenly Maston when Nicholl Captain at questioningly

appeared catalpa gigantic a against leaning man a of bust motionless The
grass. the in hidden half off feet twenty

Maston. said he!" is "It

not did he but captain, the at stared Ardan move. not did Barbicane
crying-- forward, rushed Ardan wince.

Barbicane!" "Barbicane!

uttering short, stopped he arm; his seize to about was Ardan answer. No
surprise. of cry a

figures geometrical tracing was hand, his in pencil a with Barbicane,
ground. the on lay gun unloaded his whilst memorandum-book, a upon

and duel his turn his in forgetting _savant_, the work, his in Absorbed
anything. heard nor seen neither had vengeance, his

got he president, the of that on hand his placed Ardan Michel when But
astonishment. with him at looked and up

have I friend, my it, found have I here! "you last; at he cried "Ah!"
it!" found

"What?"

it." do to way "The

what?" do to way "The

the of departure the at shock the of effect the counteract "To
projectile."

his of corner the of out captain the at looking Michel, said "Really?"
eye.

Maston!" Ah, spring. a as act will which water, simply water! "Yes,
too!" "you Barbicane, cried

same the at introduce to me allow "and Ardan; Michel answered "Himself,"
Nicholl." Captain worthy the time

said captain," me, "Excuse moment. a in up Barbicane, cried "Nicholl!"
ready." am I forgotten. had "I he;

recriminate. to time had enemies two the before interfered Ardan Michel

not did you like fellows brave that fortunate is "it he, said "Faith,"
but, you; of other or one for mourn to have now should We sooner. meet
When fear. to more nothing is there it, prevented has who God, to thanks
other the and problems mechanical into plunge to hatred his forgets one
anybody." to dangerous be cannot hatred their spiders, on tricks play to

president. the to story captain's the related Ardan Michel And

you like beings good two "if concluded, he as he said now," you ask "I
gunshots?" with heads other's each break to made were

unexpected, so something situation ridiculous rather this in was There
another. one at look to how know not did Nicholl and Barbicane that
reconciliation. a for try to resolved and this, felt Ardan Michel

"it manner, fascinating most his in smiling he, said friends," brave "My
that prove to Well, more. nothing you, between mistake a been all has
lives, your risk who men are you as and you, between ended is all
you." to make to going am I that proposition the accept frankly

Nicholl. said "Speak,"

the to straight go will projectile his that believes Barbicane "Friend
moon."

president. the replied certainly," "Yes,

earth." the on back fall will it that persuaded is Nicholl friend "And

captain. the cried it," of certain am "I

I all agree; you make to pretend not do "I Ardan. Michel resumed "Good,"
road.'" the on stop shall we if see and me, with 'Come is, you to say

stupefied. Maston, J.T. said "What?"

and eyes their raised had proposition sudden this at rivals two The
Nicholl's Captain for waited Barbicane attentively. other each at looked
reply. president's the awaited Nicholl answer;

shock no now is there "as tone, engaging most his in Michel said "Well,"
fear----" to

Barbicane. cried "Accepted!"

it finished had Nicholl quickly, very uttered was word this although But
time. same the at

two the to hands his out holding Ardan, Michel cried bravo!" "Hurrah!
me allow friends, my arranged, is affair the that now "And adversaries.
djeuner_." _Allons fashion. French you treat to




XXII. CHAPTER

STATES. UNITED THE OF CITIZEN NEW THE


termination. singular its and duel the about heard America all day That
proposition unexpected his European, chivalrous the by played part The
two the of acceptation simultaneous the difficulty, the solved which
the and France which to continent lunar the of conquest that rivals,
to tended concert--everything in march to going were States United
enthusiastic how known well is It popularity. Ardan's Michel increase
grave where country a In individual. an about get will Yankees the
in it draw and carriage dancer's a to themselves harness magistrates
they If treated. was Frenchman bold the how judged be may it triumph,
all but none, had he because probably was it horses his out take not did
citizen no was There him. upon showered were enthusiasm of marks other
to according unam_, pluribus mind:--_Ex and heart him join not did who
States. United the of motto the

all from Deputations rest. minute's a not had Ardan Michel day that From
receive to forced was He incessantly. him worried Union the of parts
he counted; be not could shook he hands The no. or would he whether them
of consequence in hoarse became voice his out, worn completely soon was
in lips his from escaped only and speeches, innumerable his
the after gastro-enterite a caught nearly he and sounds, unintelligible
intoxicated have would success This Union. the to proposed he toasts
_spirituelle_ a in stay to managed he but first, the from man another
demi-inebriety. charming and

the of that him, assailed that sort every of deputations the Amongst
the of conqueror future the to owed they what forget not did "Lunatics"
America, in enough numerous creatures, poor these of some day One moon.
Some country. native their to him with return to asked and him to went
Michel to it teach to wished and "Selenite," speak to pretended them of
promised and mania, innocent their to himself lent willingly who Ardan,
moon. the in friends their to messages their take to

them; dismissed having after Barbicane, to he said folly!" "Singular
intelligence. great of men of possession takes often that folly a "and
very many that me told Arago, _savants_, illustrious most our of One
and excited much became conceptions their in people reserved and wise
them. occupied moon the time every singularities incredible to way gave
maladies?" upon moon the of influence the in believe you Do

Club. Gun the of president the answered little," "Very

say to that, facts some preserved has history yet and either, not do "I
people epidemic, an during 1693, in Thus astonishing. are least, the
an during January, of 21st the on numbers greatest the in perished
only and eclipses, moon the during fainted Bacon celebrated The eclipse.
six relapsed VI. Charles King emersion. entire its after himself to came
moon. full or new the at either 1399, year the during madness into times
the follow that maladies the amongst epilepsy ranked have Physicians
be to appeared often have maladies Nervous moon. the of phases
the when convulsions had who child a of speaks Mead it. by influenced
an underwent persons insane that remarked Gall opposition. in was moon
the of epochs the at month, every in twice disorder their of accession
made sort this of observations thousand a Lastly, moon. full and new
of Queen the that prove to tend somnambulism and fevers malignant upon
maladies." terrestrial upon influence mysterious a has Night

Barbicane. asked why?" how? "But

Arago what is you tell can I thing only the "Why, Ardan. answered "Why?"
is it because is it Perhaps Plutarch. after centuries nineteen repeated
true." not

the of any escape not could Ardan Michel triumph his of height the In
entertainments of Managers man. celebrated a to incidental annoyances
him show to dollars million a him offered Barnum him. exhibit to wished
States. United the of towns different the in animal curious a as

his way, that in curiosity public satisfy to refused he though Still,
in honour of place the occupied and world, the over all went portraits
medallions. to size life from sizes all of made were proofs albums;
standing, bust, positions--head, all in hero the possess could one Every
thousand hundred Fifteen back. three-quarters, profile, full-face,
money get to occasion fine a been have would it and taken, were copies
a for hairs his sold had he If it. by profit not did he but relics, by
fortune! his make to enough remained have would there apiece dollar

the On him. displease not did popularity this truth, the tell To
and public, the of disposition the at himself put he contrary,
witticisms, his repeated They universe. entire the with corresponded
perpetrate. not did he those especially

infinite an What too. women the but him, for men the all he had only Not
to fancy a taken had he if made have might he marriages good of number
and day portraits his before dreamt especially maids Old "settle!"
night.

hundreds, by companions female found have would he that certain is It
air. the into up him following of condition the imposed had he if even
no had he But everything. of afraid not are they when intrepid are Women
lunar the upon Franco-Americans of race a transplanting of intention
refused. he so continent,

of daughter a with Adam of part the play "to he, said mean," not do "I
serpents!" with meet might I there. up Eve

often too triumph, of joys the from withdraw could he as soon As
He Columbiad. the to visit a pay to friends his with went he repeated,
since ballistics in learned very getting was he Besides, that. it owed
His quanti_. _tutti and Maston, J.T. Barbicane, with lived had he
artillerymen brave these to repeating in consisted pleasure greatest
joking always was He murderers. learned and amiable only were they that
and it, admired greatly he Columbiad the visited he day The it. about
him hurl to soon was that mortar gigantic the of bore the to down went
Night. of Queen the towards

is which anybody, hurt not will cannon "that he, said least," "At
engines your to as But cannon. a of part the on astonishing very already
them!" about me to talk don't kill, and smash, burn, destroy, that

When Maston. J.T. by made proposition a here report to necessary is It
Michel accept Nicholl and Barbicane heard Club Gun the of secretary the
four. of party a make and them, join to resolved he proposition Ardan's
him made refuse, to having at grieved Barbicane, go. to asked he day One
J.T. passengers. many so carry not could projectile the that understand
be to him advised who Ardan, Michel to went despair, in Maston,
hominem_. _ad arguments two or one adding resigned,

but offended, be not must "you him, to said he fellow," old see, "You
in yourself present to incomplete too are you ourselves, between really,
moon." the

cripple. valiant the cried "Incomplete!"

there. up inhabitants with meet should we Suppose friend. brave my "Yes,
them teach here, on goes what of idea sorry a them give to want you Do
in time our of part best the employ we that them show is, war what
globe a upon that and limbs, and arms breaking and other each devouring
where and inhabitants, of millions thousand hundred a feed could that
you friend, worthy my Why, millions? hundred twelve hardly are there
door!" the to shown us have would

be will "you Maston, J.T. replied pieces," to smashed arrive you if "But
I." as incomplete as

pieces." in arrive not shall we "but Ardan, Michel answered "Certainly,"

had October, of 18th the on tried experiment, preparatory a fact, In
most the to rise given and results, best the with attended been
at shock the of effect the know to wishing Barbicane, hopes. legitimate
from mortar 32-inch a for sent departure, projectile's the of moment the
Harbour, Hillisboro of quay the upon installed was It Arsenal. Pensacola
its of shock the and sea, the into fall might bomb the that order in
its of shock the upon experiment to wished only He deadened. be fall
arrival. its of that not departure,

curious this for care greatest the with prepared was projectile hollow A
the of made springs of network a upon put wadding thick A experiment.
nest. wadded a quite was It inside. it lined steel best

his that regretting Maston, J.T. said it!" in go can't one pity a "What
venture. the make to him allow not did size

screwed lid, a of means by closed was which bomb, charming this Into
the to belonging squirrel a then cat, large a first put they down,
of. fond very was Maston J.T. which Club, Gun the of secretary perpetual
giddy, be to likely not animal, little this how know to wished they But
journey. experimental this support would

then was It bomb. the and powder of lbs. 160 with loaded was mortar The
fired.

majestic a described rapidity, with rose immediately projectile The
a with then and feet, thousand a about of height a attained parabola,
waves. the into fell curve graceful

fell; it where spot the to sent was vessel a instant, an losing Without
handles the to cable-chains fastened and water under sank divers skilful
not had minutes Five board. on hoisted rapidly was which bomb, the of
of unscrewing the and up shut were animals the time the between elapsed
lid. prison their

they and vessel, the upon were Nicholl and Maston, Barbicane, Ardan,
to easy interest of sentiment a with operation the at assisted
rather out, sprang cat the before opened hardly was bomb The understand.
returned just had it if as looking not and lively, quite but bruised
The squirrel. the of seen was nothing, But expedition. arial an from
companion. travelling its eaten had cat The discovered. then was truth

and squirrel, poor his of loss the at grieved very was Maston J.T.
science. of martyrology the in it inscribe to proposed

were fear and hesitation all experiment this after be, may that However
perfect to further destined were plans Barbicane's besides, end; an at
shock. the of effect the entirely almost destroy and projectile, the
start. to but do to more nothing was There

of President the from message a received Ardan Michel later days Two
appreciated. much he which honour an Union, the

the Fayette, La countryman, chivalrous his of example the After
United the of "Citizen of title the him upon bestowed had government
America." of States




XXIII. CHAPTER

COMPARTMENT. PROJECTILE THE


immediately interest public completed was Columbiad celebrated the After
the transport to destined vehicle new the projectile, the upon centred
his in that forgotten had one No space. across adventurers bold three
the of modification a for asked Ardan Michel 30th September of despatch
committee. the of members the by out laid plans

the of form the that reason with thought then Barbicane President
atmosphere the crossing after for, importance, slight of was projectile
therefore had committee The vacuum. with meet would it seconds, few a in
do and over and over turn might ball the that so form, round the chosen
was that vehicle, a into made be to had it as soon as But liked. it as
he squirrel-fashion; travel to want not did Ardan Michel thing. another
car the in as dignity much as with down feet and up head up go to wished
gambols. unseemly without but course, of quicker balloon, a of

of Co., and Breadwill of firm the to sent therefore, were, plans New
The delay. without them execute to recommendation the with Albany,
sent and November, of 2nd the on cast was modified, thus projectile,
Railway. Eastern the by Hill Stony to immediately

destination. of place its at accident without arrived it 10th the On
lively most the with awaited Nicholl and Barbicane, Ardan, Michel
take to were they which in compartment" "projectile this impatience
world. new a of discovery the for passage their

a metal, of piece magnificent a was it that acknowledged be must It
industrial the to honour greatest the did that production metallurgic
been had aluminium that time first the was It Americans. the of genius
as regarded justly be might result which mass, a large so in obtained
sun. the of rays the in sparkled projectile precious This prodigious.
easily might it top, conical its with shape imposing its in it Seeing
that towers extinguisher-shaped those of one for taken been have
It castles. their of angles the at put Ages Middle the of architects
weathercock. a and loopholes wanted only

come _cap--pie_ armed man a see "to Ardan, Michel exclaimed expect," "I
little a with there; in lords feudal like be shall We it. of out
Selenites--that of army whole a against own our hold could we artillery
moon!" the in any are there if is,

Barbicane. asked you?" pleases vehicle the "Then

an as it examining was who Ardan, Michel answered certainly," yes! "Yes,
its slender, more little a not is form its that regret only "I artist.
some group, metal a by terminated be to ought it graceful; more cone
and wings outspread with it from escaping salamander a ornament, Gothic
beak." open

little was mind positive whose Barbicane, said use?" the be would "What
art. of beauties the to sensitive

or use, the understand never will you afraid am I Barbicane, friend "Ah,
ask!" not would you

companion." brave my events, all at me, tell "Well,

we all in art little a put to always ought we think I friend, my "Well,
Chariot_?" Child's _The called play Indian an know you Do do.

Barbicane. answered name," by even "Not

that then, "Learn, Ardan. Michel continued that," at surprised not am "I
wall the piercing of act the in when who, robber a is there play that in
the in hole his make shall he whether consider to stops house, a of
Barbicane, friend me, tell Well, bird. a or flower, a lyre, a of shape
that condemned have you would judge his been had you epoch that at if
robber?"

a as "and Club, Gun the of president the answered hesitation," "Without
too." burglar

you why is That Barbicane. friend him, acquitted have should I "Well,
me." understand never could

artist." valiant my try, even not will "I

our of exterior the "as Ardan, Michel continued least," at "But,
to allowed be shall I desired, be to much leaves compartment projectile
to suitable luxury all with and choose, I as inside the furnish
earth." the from ambassadors

entirely do can "you Barbicane, answered Michel," brave my that, "About
please." you as

had Club Gun the of president the agreeable the to passing before But
the lessening for invented had he means the and useful, the of thought
intelligence. perfect with applied were shock the of effects

be would spring no that unreasonably, not himself, to said had Barbicane
famous his during and shock, the deaden to powerful sufficiently
difficulty great this solving by ended had he Wood Skersnaw in promenade
this him render to water upon depended He fashion. ingenious an in
how:-- is This service. signal

water with feet three of depth the to filled be to was projectile The
worked easily which disc, wooden water-tight a support to destined
the that raft this upon was It projectile. the of walls the within
was it mass, liquid the to As place. their take to were travellers
would shock departing the which partitions horizontal by divided
the to lowest the from water, of sheet each then break; successively
thus projectile, the of part upper the in valves by escaping highest,
powerful extremely with furnished itself disc, the and spring, a making
broken successively had it until bottom the strike not could buffers,
violent a feel doubtless would travellers The partitions. different the
shock first the but mass, liquid the of escape complete the after recoil
spring. a powerful so by deadened entirely almost be would

weigh would feet square 541 of surface a on feet three that true is It
Columbiad the in accumulated gas of escape the but lbs; 11,500 nearly
weight; of increase that conquer to thought Barbicane suffice, would
second, a than less in water that all out send would shock the besides,
weight. normal its regain soon would projectile the and

he how and imagined, had Club Gun the of president the what is This
work, This recoil. the of question great the solved had he thought
was firm, Breadwill the of engineers the by comprehended intelligently
the gone, water the and produced once effect the executed; marvellously
away take and partitions broken the of rid get easily could travellers
departure. of moment the at them bore that disc mobile the

thick a with lined were they projectile, the of sides upper the to As
as supple as springs steel best the upon put leather, of wadding
even not were wadding this under hidden escape-pipes The watch-springs.
seen.

been having shock first the deadening for precautions imaginable All
be to stuff" bad "very of made be must they said Ardan Michel taken,
crushed.

order In high. feet twelve and wide feet nine was outside projectile The
less little a made been had sides the assigned weight the pass to not
the all support to have would it as thicker, bottom the and thick
pyroxyle. the of deflagration the by developed gases the of violence
thicker with made always are howitzers cylindro-conical and Bombs
bottoms.

of wall the in opening narrow a was metal of tower this to entrance The
hermetically closed It boilers. steam of "man-hole" the like cone, the
screw powerful by inside fastened plate aluminium an of means by
at prison mobile their leave therefore could travellers The pressure.
Night. of Queen the reached had they as soon as will

road. the on see to necessary was it everything; not was going But
thick four were wadding the under fact, In easier. was Nothing
projectile, the of wall circular the into let two footlights, lenticular
travellers The cone. its in fourth the and part, lower its in third the
were they earth the journey their during observe therefore, could,
of spaces constellated the and approaching, were they moon the leaving,
departure of shocks the against protected were skylights These sky. the
by move to easy was it which grooves, solid into let plates by
could projectile the in contained air the means that By them. unscrewing
observations. make to possible was it and escape, not

greatest the with worked set, admirably appliances, mechanical these All
the in intelligent less themselves shown not had engineers the and ease,
compartment. projectile the of arrangement

and water the contain to destined were fastened solidly Lockers
procure even could they travellers; three the for necessary provisions
case special a in up stored gas of means by light and fire themselves
turn to was do to had they All atmospheres. several of pressure a under
six for vehicle comfortable this warm and light would gas the and tap, a
even or life, to essential things the of none that seen be will It days.
Ardan, Michel of instincts the to thanks More, wanting. were comfort, to
art; of objects of form the under useful the to joined was agreeable the
room if projectile his of studio artist's veritable a made have would he
persons three that suppose to mistaken be would It wanting. been not had
of surface a had It tower. metal that in space for restricted be would
a occupiers its allowed and high, feet 10 nearly was and feet, square 54
their at much so been have not would They movement. of liberty certain
States. United the of compartment railway comfortable most the in ease

there solved, been having lighting and provisions of question The
in confined air the that evident was It air. of question the remained
respiration travellers' the for sufficient be not would projectile the
oxygen the all hour one in consumes fact, in man, each days; four for
two and companions, two his Barbicane, air. of litres 100 in contained
2,400 hours twenty-four every consume would take, to meant he that dogs
projectile the in air The lbs. 7 to equal weight a or oxygen, of litres
of that method, simple very a By How? renewed. be therefore, must,
the during Ardan Michel by indicated Regnault, and Reiset Messrs.
meeting. the of discussion

of parts twenty-one of principally composed is air the that known is It
of act the in happens what Now azote. of parts seventy-nine and oxygen
the of oxygen the absorbs Man phenomenon, simple very A respiration?
azote the out throws and life, sustaining for adapted eminently air,
its of cent, per five nearly lost has out breathed air The intact.
the acid, carbonic of volume equal nearly a contains then and oxygen,
the by blood the of elements the of combustion the of product definitive
space confined a in that therefore, happens, It it. in breathed oxygen
by replaced is air the of oxygen the all time certain a after and
gas. deleterious essentially an acid, carbonic

conserved being azote the this, to reduced then was question The
carbonic the destroy To 2. absorbed; oxygen the remake To intact--1.
potash of chlorate of means by do to easier Nothing out. breathed acid
of form the under appears which salt a is former The potash. caustic and
transformed is it 400 of temperature a to heated when crystals; white
given is contains it which oxygen the and potassium, of chlorine into
oxygen--that of lbs 7 give potash of chlorate of lbs. 18 Now freely. off
twenty-four for travellers the to necessary quantity the say, to is
hours.

in mixed acid carbonic for affinity great a has it potash, caustic to As
the upon seize to it for order in it shake to sufficient is it and air,
of absorption the for much So potash. of bicarbonate form and acid
acid. carbonic

to back giving of certain were they methods two these combining By
Messrs. chemists, two The qualities. life-giving its all air vitiated
success. with experiment the made had Regnault, and Reiset

vili_. anima _in made been only had experiment the said be must it But
could man how knew one no be, might accuracy scientific its Whatever
it. bear

question grave this where meeting the at made observation the was Such
the about doubt no leave to meant Ardan Michel discussed. was
to offered he and air, artificial this of means by living of possibility
departure. the before trial the make

by claimed energetically was proof the to it putting of honour the But
Maston. J.T.

I least "the artilleryman, brave the said you," with going not am I "As
week." a for projectile the in live to be will do can

with. complied was wish His him. refuse to ungracious been have would It
was potash caustic and potash of chlorate of quantity sufficient A
having then week; a for provisions with disposition, his at placed
after a.m., 6 at November of 12th the on friends, his with hands shaken
20th the before prison his open to not them recommended expressly having
was which of plate iron the projectile, the into crept he p.m., 6 at
shut. hermetically

The ascertain. to impossible was It week? that during happened What
from noise interior any prevented walls projectile's the of thickness
outside. the reaching

was plate the precisely, o'clock six at November, of 20th the On
were they But uneasy. rather were Maston J.T. of friends the removed;
formidable a shouting voice joyful a hearing by reassured promptly
hurrah!

a in cone the of summit the on appeared Club Gun the of secretary The
attitude. triumphant

fat! grown had He




XXIV. CHAPTER

MOUNTAINS. ROCKY THE OF TELESCOPE THE


subscription the after year, preceding the of October of 20th the On
the credited had Club Gun the of president the closed, was list
a of construction the for necessary sums the with Observatory Cambridge
to enough powerful be to was telescope This instrument. optical vast
nine least at being object an moon the of surface the on visible render
wide. feet

telescope, a and field-glass a between difference important an is There
tube a of composed is field-glass A here. recall to well is it which
an called glass convex a extremity upper its at carries which
ocular, called glass second a extremity lower its at and object-glass,
luminous the from rays The applied. is observer the of eye the which to
upside image an form refraction by and glass, first the traverse object
which ocular, the with at looked is image This focus. its at down
each at closed therefore, is, field-glass the of tube The it. magnifies
glasses. ocular the and object the by extremity

rays The extremity. upper its at open is contrary, the on telescope, The
concave a strike and it, into freely penetrate observed object the from
their thence From focussed. are they say, to is mirror--that metallic
the to back them sends which mirror, little a with meet rays reflected
produced. image the magnify to as way a such in ocular

and part, principal the plays refraction field-glasses in Thus
to given refractors of name the Hence telescope. the in does reflection
in difficulty the All latter. the to given reflectors and former, the
the of making the in lies instruments optical these of execution the
mirrors. metallic or glass of made be they whether object-glass,

these experiment great its made Club Gun the when epoch the at Still
The results. magnificent gave and perfected singularly were instruments
poor his with stars the observed Galileo when distant far was time
century 16th the Since most. the at times seven magnified which glass,
considerable in lengthened and widened had instruments optical
depth a to gauged be to spaces stellar the allowed they and proportions,
that at work at instruments refracting the Amongst before. unknown
the Russia, in Observatory Poulkowa the of glass the were period
French the of that width, in inches 15 measured which of object-glass
and large, equally object-glass an with furnished Lerebours, optician
object-glass an with furnished Observatory, Cambridge the of that lastly
diameter. in inches 19

gigantic and power remarkable of known were two telescopes, Amongst
length, in feet 36 was Herschel, by constructed first, The dimensions.
times; 6,000 magnified it inches; 6 feet 4 of object-glass an had and
Park, Parsonstown in Birrcastle, at Ireland, in raised second, the
width the and feet 48 was tube its of length the Rosse; Lord to belonged
an required had it and times, 6,400 magnified it feet; 6 mirror its of
necessary apparatus the place to which on masonry of erection immense
tons. 12-1/2 weighed which instrument, the working for

the dimensions colossal these notwithstanding that seen be will it But
numbers; round in times 6,000 exceed not did obtained power magnifying
only would and miles, 39 within moon the bring only would power that now
objects these unless perceived be to diameter in feet 60 objects allow
elongated. very were

long, 15 and wide feet 9 projectile a with deal to had they space in Now
a that for and least, at miles five within brought be to had moon the so
necessary. was times 48,000 of power magnifying

were They Observatory. Cambridge the to propounded problem the was Such
remained only there so difficulties, financial by stopped be to not
difficulties. material

field-glasses. and telescopes between choose to had they all of First
a have they object-glasses equal With advantages. some had latter The
the traverse that rays luminous the because power, magnifying greater
metallic the on reflection the than absorption by less lose glasses
is glass to given be can that thickness the but telescopes; of mirror
pass. to rays luminous the allow not does it thick too for limited,
excessively is glasses vast these of construction the Besides,
years. by measured time, considerable a demands and difficult,

inappreciable an glasses, by given better are images although Therefore,
which of light the moon, the observe to is question the when advantage
is which telescope, the employ to decided they reflected simply is
only power; magnifying greater a of capable is and execution in prompter
the traversing by intensity their of much lose rays luminous the as
the of one on instrument the up set to resolved Club Gun the atmosphere,
the of depth the diminish would which Union, the of mountains highest
strata. arial

observer's the at placed glass the that seen been has it telescopes In
this bears which object-glass the and power, magnifying the produces eye
greatest the and diameter largest the has that one the is best the power
larger much be must it times 48,000 magnify to order In distance. focal
the for difficulty, the lay There Rosse. Lord and Herschel of those than
operation. delicate very a is mirrors these of casting

Lon France_, de _Institut the of _savant_ a before years some Happily,
of polishing the which by means invented just had Foucault,
metallic the replacing by easy and prompt very became object-glasses
it. plating and required size the glass of piece a taking by mirror

for Herschel by invented method the to according fixed be to was It
the Slough, at astronomer the of instrument great the In telescopes.
the of bottom the at inclined mirror the by reflected objects of image
placed. was eyeglass the where extremity other the at formed was tube
tube, the of end lower the at placed being of instead observer, the Thus
down looked he eyeglass his with there and end, upper the to hoisted was
doing of advantage the had combination This cylinder. enormous the into
the to image the back send to destined mirror little the with away
therefore twice; of instead once reflected only thus which glass, ocular
feeble, less was image the extinguished, rays luminous fewer were there
observation the in advantage precious a obtained, was light more and
made. be to was that

the to According begun. was work the upon, resolved being This
new the of tube the staff, Observatory Cambridge the of calculations
diameter. in feet 16 mirror its and long feet 280 be to was reflector
telescope the to comparable not was it colossal so was it Although
some construct to proposed Hooke astronomer the which long feet 10,000
presented apparatus an such of up setting the Nevertheless ago. years
difficulties. great

high a upon be must It settled. promptly was site its of question The
States. the in numerous not are mountains high and mountain,

two contains only country great this of system orographical the fact, In
magnificent the flows which amongst height, average of chains
they if rivers" of "king the call would Americans the which Mississippi,
whatever. royalty any admitted

in which, of point highest very the Apalachians, the rise east the On
feet. 5,600 of altitude moderate very the exceed not does Hampshire, New

which chain immense that Mountains, Rocky the however, are, west the On
South of coast west the follows Magellan, of Straits the at begins
Isthmus the crosses Cordilleras, or Andes the of name the under America
of shores very the to America North of whole the up runs and Panama, of
Sea. Polar the

look would Himalayas or Alps the and high, very not are mountains These
only is summit highest their fact, In disdain. with them upon down
of summit highest the and 14,439, is Blanc Mont whilst high, feet 10,701
sea. the of level the above feet 26,776 is Himalayas the

Columbiad, the as well as telescope, its that wished Club Gun the as But
be to obliged were they Union, the of States the in up set be should
was material necessary the all and Mountains, Rocky the with content
Missouri. of territory the in Peak Long's of summit the to sent

kind every of difficulties the relate could language nor pen Neither
of prodigies the and overcome, to had engineers American the that
massive stones, Enormous accomplished. they that skill and audacity
of portions huge and corner-clamps, heavy wrought-iron, of pieces
30,000 nearly weighing object-glass, an with raised be to had cylinder
in feet 10,000 than more for snow perpetual of line the above lbs.,
fearful forests, impenetrable prairies, desert crossing after height,
savage of midst the in and population, of centres all from far rapids
and, problem, insoluble an becomes life of detail every which in regions
Less obstacles. these all over triumphed genius American nevertheless,
of month the of days last the in works the beginning after year a than
280 of height a to air the in rose reflector gigantic the September,
ingenious an scaffolding; iron enormous an from hung was It feet.
the of point every towards moved easily be to it allowed arrangement
their during other the to horizon one from stars the follow to and sky,
space. across journey

at pointed was it time first The dollars. 400,000 than more cost had It
they would What uneasy. and curious both felt observers the moon the
48,000 objects magnified which telescope this of field the in discover
oceans? and lakes, towns, animals, lunar of flocks Populations, times?
all upon and with, acquainted already not was science that nothing No,
determined be could moon the of nature volcanic the disc her of points
precision. absolute with

Gun the by used being before Mountains, Rocky the of telescope the But
of power its to Thanks astronomy. to services immense rendered Club,
limits, utmost their to explored were sky the of depths the penetration,
rigorously be could stars of number great a of diameter apparent the
Crab the resolved staff, Cambridge the of Clarke, Mr. and measured,
to able been never had reflector Rosse's Lord which Taurus, in nebula
do.




XXV. CHAPTER

DETAILS. FINAL


ten place take to was departure supreme The November. of 22nd the was It
happy a to it bring to remained still operation One later. days
infinite exacting operation perilous and delicate a termination,
laid had Nicholl Captain which of success the against and precautions,
gun the of loading the than less nothing fact, in was, It bet. third his
had Nicholl gun-cotton. of lbs. 400,000 of it into introduction the and
a large so of handling the that perhaps, reason, without not thought,
any in that and catastrophes, grave cause would pyroxyle of quantity
the under itself of ignite would mass explosive eminently this case
projectile. the of pressure

the of carelessness the by increased dangers grave also were There
cigar cannon their load to used war, Federal the during who, Americans,
not did and succeeding, on heart his set had Barbicane But mouth. in
them made workmen, best his chose therefore he port; in founder to mean
precautions and prudence of dint by and superintendence, his under work
side. his on success of chances the all put to managed he

inclosure the to once at charge his all bring to not care took he First
in packed carefully little by little brought it had He Hill. Stony of
packets into divided been had pyroxyle of lbs. 400,000 The cases. sealed
the by carefully made cartridges large 800 made which lbs., 500 of
they and ten, contained case Each Pensacola. of artisans cleverest
means that by Town; Tampa of railroad the by other the after one arrived
the in once at pyroxyle of lbs. 500 than more never were there
workmen by unloaded was case each arrived it as soon As inclosure.
the of orifice the to transported cartridge each and barefoot, walking
the by worked cranes of means by them lowered they which into Columbiad,
fires least the and excluded, been had steam-engine Every men.
to necessary was it November in Even round. miles two for extinguished
at worked they So sun. the of ardour the from gun-cotton this preserve
apparatus, Rhmkorff's of means by vacuum a in produced light by night
Columbiad. the of depths the into brightness artificial an threw which
fastened regularity, utmost the with arranged were cartridges the There
them to spark electric the communicate to destined wire a by together
simultaneously. all

this to set be to was fire that electricity of means by was it fact, In
isolating by surrounded wires, single these All gun-cotton. of mass
the at pierced hole narrow a at one single a into rolled were material,
thick the crossed they there placed; be to was projectile the height
the in vent-holes the of one by surface the to up came and wall metal
the Hill, Stony of summit the at arrived Once purpose. on made masonry
pile powerful a met miles two of distance a for poles on supported wire
would, It apparatus. non-conducting a through passing Bunsen of
apparatus the of knob the finger the with press to enough be therefore,
to fire set to and established, once at be to current electric the for
this that say to necessary hardly is It gun-cotton. of lbs. 400,000 the
moment. last the at done be to only was

of bottom the at placed were cartridges 800 the November of 28th the On
worry, what But succeeded. had operation the of part That Columbiad. the
had vain In undergo! to had Barbicane President struggles and anxiety,
sightseers curious day every Hill; Stony to entrance forbidden he
came folly, to imprudence pushing some, and palisading, the over climbed
into himself put Barbicane gun-cotton. of bales the amongst smoked and
ability, his of best the to him seconded Maston J.T. rages. daily
cigar-ends still-lighted the up picking and away intruders the chasing
people 300,000 than more for task, rude about--a threw Yankees the which
escort to himself offered had Ardan Michel palisades. the round pressed
in cigar a with him caught having but gun, the of mouth the to cases the
this giving was he whom to intruders the out drove he whilst mouth his
not could he that saw Club Gun the of president the example, unfortunate
specially him have to obliged was and smoker, intrepid this upon depend
watched.

blew nothing artillerymen, for even Providence a being there last, At
Captain of bet third The terminated. happily was loading the and up,
of work the remained still There imperilled. much therefore was Nicholl
the on it placing and Columbiad the into projectile the introducing
gun-cotton. of bed thick

the for necessary objects the operation this beginning before But
a were There waggon-compartment. the in order with placed were journey
he as do to Ardan Michel allowed had they if and them, of many good
the for reserved space the all up filled have soon would he pleased
to wished Frenchman amiable the that all imagine can one No travellers.
interfered, Barbicane But trifles. useless of heap moon--a the to carry
necessary. strictly the but all refused and

the in placed were telescopes and barometers, thermometers, Several
instrument-case.

transit, their during moon the examining of desirous were travellers The
an took they world new this of survey the facilitate to order in and
Selenographica_, _Mappa the Moedler, and Boeer by map excellent
masterpiece a as upon looked justly is which plates, four in published
exactitude scrupulous with represented It observation. and patience of
the towards turned moon the of portion that of details slightest the
on depicted were watersheds, peaks, craters, valleys, Mountains, earth.
Mounts from names, and positions, faithful dimensions, exact their in it
of side eastern the on rise summits highest whose Leibnitz, and Doerfel
Polar North the into extends which Frigoris_, _Mare the to disc, the
regions.

they for travellers, the for document precious a therefore, was, It
it. upon foot setting before country the study could

and powder with fowling-pieces three and rifles three also took They
quantity. great in shot

"Both Ardan. Michel said deal," to have may we whom with know not do "We
take therefore, must, we visit; our at displeased be may beasts and men
precautions." our

pickaxes, by accompanied were defence personal of instruments The
garments mentioning without tools, indispensable other and saws, spades,
the to regions polar the of cold the from temperature, every to suitable
zone. torrid the of heat

of animals of number certain a take to liked have would Ardan Michel
see not did he as species, every of female and male not sorts, different
any or alligators, tigers, serpents, acclimatising of necessity the
moon. the in beasts noxious other

or ass cow, or ox animals, useful some "but Barbicane, to he said "No,"
use." great of be and landscape the in well look would horse,

Gun the of president the answered Ardan," dear my you, with agree "I
in both differs It Ark. Noah's not is projectile our "but Club;
possibility." of bounds the in remain us let so object, and dimensions

should travellers the that agreed was it discussions long after last At
to belonging dog sporting excellent an them with take to content be
Several strength. prodigious of Newfoundland vigorous a and Nicholl
indispensable the amongst included were seeds useful most the of cases
several taken have would Ardan Michel him, allowed had they If objects.
trees, little dozen a took he way Any in. them sow to earth of sacks
the of corner a in placed and straw in enveloped carefully were which
projectile.

were they for provisions, of question important the remained Then
Barbicane barren. absolutely moon the finding against provide to obliged
to added, be must it But year. a for enough took he that well so managed
and meat of consisted provisions these that astonishment, prevent
and pressure, hydraulic by volume smallest their to compressed vegetable
much not was there elements; nutritive of quantity great a included
expedition. an such in particular too be to do not would it but variety,
months two for water and brandy of gallons fifty about also was There
one no astronomers, of observations latest the to according for, only,
to As moon. the in water of quantity large a of presence the doubted
of inhabitants the that believe to insane been have would it provisions,
about doubt no had Ardan Michel there. up food find not would earth the
gone. have not would he had he If it.

completely be not shall "we friends, his to day one he said "Besides,"
forget to not care take will they and earth, on friends our by abandoned
us."

Maston. J.T. answered certainly," "No,

Nicholl. asked mean?" you do "What

still be Columbiad our not "Will Ardan. answered simple," more "Nothing
conditions favourable in is moon the that time every then, Well, there?
year--could a once about say, to is perigee--that of not if zenith, of
should we which provisions with loaded projectile a us send not they
date?" fixed a by expect

Certainly idea. bad a all at not is "That Maston. J.T. cried "Hurrah!"
you." forget not will we

the from regularly news have shall we see you Thus you. upon depend "I
means find not do we if awkward very be shall we part our for and globe,
earth." on friends good our with communicate to

superb his with Ardan Michel that confidence such inspired words These
said he What him. with Club Gun whole the carried have would assurance
been have would it and success, of sure and elementary, simple, seemed
three the follow to hesitate to earth this to attachment sordid
expedition. lunar their upon travellers

was water the projectile the in placed were objects different the When
laid purposes lighting for gas the and partitions the between introduced
two for potash caustic and potash of chlorate enough took Barbicane in.
machine ingenious extremely An delay. unforeseen feared he as months,
The motion. in air good for elements the put automatically working
to was do to left thing only the and ready, was therefore, projectile,
difficulty. and perils of full operation an gun, the into it lower

There Hill. Stony of summit the to taken was projectile enormous The
well. metal the over suspended it held and it seized cranes enormous

the under break to were chains the If moment. anxious an was This
the ignite inevitably would mass a such of fall the weight enormous
gun-cotton.

the afterwards hours few a and happened, sort the of nothing Happily
veritable a bed, pyroxyle its on rested projectile-compartment
the ram to was pressure its of effect only The pillow. fulminating
strongly. more gun the of charge

to dollars 3,000 of sum the handing captain, the said lost," have "I
Barbicane. President

travelling his from money this receive to wish not did Barbicane
to wished who Nicholl, to way give to obliged was he but companion,
earth. the leaving before engagements his all fulfil

now, you for wish I thing one but is "there Ardan, Michel said "Then,"
captain."

Nicholl. asked that?" is "What

shall we means that By wagers. two other your lose may you that is "It
road." the on stopped be to not sure be




XXVI. CHAPTER

FIRE!


not did projectile the if for day, fatal the came, December of 1st The
eighteen than more p.m., 40s. and 46m. 10h. at evening very that start
simultaneous same the present would moon the before elapse would years
perigee. and zenith of conditions

the winter of approach the notwithstanding magnificent; was weather The
of three which earth that radiance its in bathed and brightly shone sun
world. new a for leave to about were inhabitants its

the preceded that night the during badly slept people many How
heavy the with oppressed were breasts many How day! ardently-longed-for
of heart the only except anxiety with beat hearts All waiting! of burden
usual his in came and went person impassible This Ardan. Michel
preoccupation. unusual any denoted him in nothing but way, business-like
a upon Turenne of sleep the was peaceful--it been had sleep His
battle. the before night the gun-carriage

extended which prairie, the covered crowd innumerable an dawn early From
hour an of quarter Every Hill. Stony round reach could eye the as far as
_Tampa the to According sightseers. fresh brought Tampa of railroad the
Floridian upon day that were spectators of millions five Observer_, Town
soil.

the round tents in living been had crowd this of part greater The
been since has which town a of foundations the laid and inclosure,
tents, and cabins, huts, with bristled ground The Town." "Ardan's called
enough numerous population a sheltered habitations ephemeral these and
Europe. of cities largest the rival to

at spoken was language every represented; was earth upon nation Every
of Tower the at tongues of confusion the like was It time. same the
absolute in mixed society American of classes different the There Babel.
merchants, agents, sailors, cultivators, Bankers, equality.
ease. primitive with other each elbowed magistrates and cotton-planters,
the Indiana; of farmers the with fraternised Louisiana of creoles The
Virginians, haughty and elegant the Tennessee, and Kentucky of gentlemen
of butchers the and Lakes the of trappers half-savage the with joked
Panamas, and beavers white broad-brimmed in appeared They Cincinnati.
elegant in draped manufactories, Opelousa the from trousers, cotton blue
extravagant and colours, brilliant of boots in cloth, cru of blouses
fingers, ten their on cravats, cuffs, shirt-fronts, upon shirt-frills;
chains, diamonds, pins, rings, of assortment an ears, their in even
Wife, taste. bad the equalled which of cost the trinkets, and buckles,
followed, accompanied, dress, rich less no in servants, children,
who masters, and fathers, husbands, their surrounded and preceded,
families. innumerable their amidst patriarchs the resembled

dishes the devour people these all see to sight a was it meal-times At
to menacing appetite an with eat, and States, Southern the to peculiar
a to repugnant be would that food the Florida, of provisioning the
fish-chowder, monkey-flesh, frogs, fricasseed as such stomach, European
steaks. raccoon and opossum, underdone

numerous. were food indigestible this accompanied that liquors The
or bar-rooms the through resounded buy to vociferations and Shouts
of bottles and decanters, tankards, glasses, with decorated taverns,
straws. of bundles and sugar, pounding for mortars shapes, marvellous

salesmen. the of one out roars "Mint-julep!"

nose. his through another shouts sangaree!" "Claret

one. shouts "Gin-sling!"

another. cries Brandy-smash!" "Cocktail!

skilful these shouted style?" latest the in mint-julep real buy "Who'll
lemon, sugar, the another to glass one from passing rapidly salesmen,
which pine-apple fresh and cognac, water, ice, crushed mint, green
drink. refreshing this compose

spices the by thirsty made throats to addressed sounds, these Generally
of 1st this on But roar. deafening one into mingled consumed, they
drinking, and eating of thought one No rare. were cries these December
taken not had who crowd the in spectators many were there p.m. 4 at and
national the even fact, significant more much A lunch! customary their
Thimbles, emotion. general the by allayed was gaming for passion
the that testified and wrappings, their in left were cards and skittles,
attention. all absorbed day the of event great

precedes which that like agitation noiseless dull, a nightfall Until
indescribable An crowd. anxious the through ran catastrophes great
hearts. all of beating the stopped and minds, all oppressed uneasiness
over. it wished one Every

The broken. suddenly was silence heavy this o'clock seven about However,
her saluted hurrahs of millions Several horizon. the above rose moon
broke welcome of Shouts appointment. the to punctual was She apparition.
clear a in peacefully shone Phoebe blonde the whilst parts, all from
rays. affectionate most her with crowd enraptured the caressed and sky,

they When appeared. travellers intrepid three the moment that At
instantaneously, Unanimously, intensity. in redoubled cries the appeared
spectators, the all from escaped States United the of song national the
a like rose throats, hearty of 5,000,000 by sung Doodle," "Yankee and
atmosphere. the of limits farthest the to tempest roaring

last the ended, was hymn the outburst, irresistible this after Then,
the over floated murmur silent a and degrees, by away died harmonies
crowd. profoundly-excited

the into stepped had Americans two the and Frenchman the meantime the In
by accompanied were They pressing. was crowd the which round inclosure
European the by sent deputations and Club, Gun the of members the
orders. last his giving calmly and coolly was Barbicane observatories.
walked back, his behind crossed hands and lips compressed with Nicholl,
clothed ease, his at always Ardan, Michel step. measured and firm a with
at pouch legs, his on gaiters leather with suit, travelling perfect a in
mouth, his in cigar a velvet, maroon of garment vast in side, his
of full was He prodigality. princely with hand the of shakes distributed
worthy the upon pranks playing joking, laughing, gaiety, inexhaustible
worse, is what and, "French," word, a in was, and Maston, J.T.
second. last the till "Parisian,"

the in places their take to come had moment The struck. o'clock Ten
to door-plate the descent the for mechanism necessary the projectile;
the over hung scaffolding and cranes the of removal the down, screw
time. some took Columbiad, the of mouth

of that by second a of tenth the to chronometer his set had Barbicane
the to fire setting with entrusted was who Murchison, engineer the
the in up shut travellers the spark; electric the of means by powder
mark to going was which needle impassive the watch thus could projectile
departure. their of instant precise the

in touching; was scene The come. had farewell saying for moment The
found had Maston J.T. touched. felt Ardan Michel gaiety his of spite
for kept doubtless, had, he that tear ancient an eyelids dry his under
president. dear his of forehead the upon it shed He occasion. the

time!" still is "There he. said too?" go I "Suppose

Barbicane. answered fellow," old "Impossible,

in installed were companions travelling three the later moments few A
of mouth the and door-plate, the down screwed had and projectile, the
sky. the towards freely rose liberated, entirely Columbiad, the

in up walled definitively were Ardan Michel and Barbicane, Nicholl,
vehicle. metal their

paroxysm? its at then emotion universal the predict could Who

her on outshining purity, limpid of firmament a in rising was moon The
the over passed she stars; the of fire twinkling the passage
the between halfway nearly now was and Twins, the of constellation
zenith. the and horizon

of breath a not was There scene. that all over hung silence frightful A
dared Hearts crowd! the from breathing of sound a Not earth! the on wind
Columbiad. the of mouth gaping the on fixed was eye Every beat. not

seconds forty Hardly chronometer. his of needle the watched Murchison
lasted one each and struck, departure of moment the before elapse to had
century! a

occurred thought the and shudder, universal a was there twentieth the At
vehicle the in up shut travellers audacious the that crowd the all to
were cries isolated Some seconds! terrible these counting likewise were
heard.

"Thirty-five!--thirty-six!--thirty-seven!--thirty--eight!--thirty-nine!
Fire!!!" --forty!

and knob electric the upon finger his pressed immediately Murchison
Columbiad. the of depths the into spark electric the hurled

give could nothing which of report, superhuman unheard-of, fearful, A
immediately was volcanoes, of eruption the or thunder even not idea, an
the of bowels the from up sprang fire of spout immense An produced.
a caught persons few very and heaved soil The crater. a from if as earth
the amidst air the cleaving victoriously projectile the of glimpse
smoke. flaming




XXVII. CHAPTER

WEATHER. CLOUDY


in height prodigious a to rose flame of pyramid the when moment the At
incalculable an for and Florida, of whole the up lighted it air the
of extent considerable a over night for substituted was day moment
miles hundred a for perceived was fire of column immense This country.
one than more and Atlantic, the from and Gulf the from sea, at out
his in meteor gigantic this of apparition the noted captain ship's
log-book.

veritable a by accompanied was Columbiad the of discharge The
the of gases The depths. very its to shaken was Florida earthquake.
with strata atmospheric the back forced heat, by expanded powder,
air. the through waterspout a like passing violence, tremendous

were children and women, men, legs; his on remained spectator one Not
tumult, terrible a was there storm; a in wheat of ears like down thrown
who Maston, J.T. injured. seriously were people of number large a and
backwards yards twenty thrown was fore, the to kept imprudently very had
hundred Three fellow-citizens. his of heads the over bullet a like
thunderstruck. though as and deafened temporarily were people thousand

uprooting cabins, and huts over throwing after current, atmospheric The
the off trains the throwing miles, twenty of radius a within trees
and avalanche an like town the upon burst Tampa, as far as railway
and Mary St. of church the others amongst houses, hundred a destroyed
were port the in vessels the of Some Exchange. the of edifice new the
and high stranded were them of ten and sunk, and other each against run
cotton. of threads like chains their breaking after dry

beyond and still, farther extended devastations these of circle the But
westerly the by aided recoil, The States. United the of limits the
American the from miles 300 than more at Atlantic the on felt was winds,
have not could Fitzroy Admiral even which tempest, unexpected An shores.
Several violence. unheard-of with ships the upon broke foreseen,
furl to time had they before whirlwind of sort a by seized vessels,
of Harold_, _Childe the others amongst sunk, were sails, their
lively of object the was which catastrophe regrettable a Liverpool,
recriminations.

of affirmation the by except warranted not is fact the Lastly--although
the projectile the of departure the after natives--half-an-hour few a
the noise, dull a heard they that pretended Sierra-Leone of inhabitants
the crossing after which, waves, sonorous the of displacement last
coast. African the on away died Atlantic,

and wounded the lessened, once tumult The Florida. to return to But
frenzy, of sort a in shouted and crowd--rose the all short, deaf--in
Several Nicholl!" for Hurrah Barbicane! for Hurrah Ardan! for "Hurrah
of species every and telescopes with armed air, in nose men, of millions
in feelings, and contusions forgetting space, into looked field-glass,
to not was it vain; in sought they But projectile. the at look to order
The Peak. Long's from telegrams the await to resolved they and seen, be
in post his at was Belfast, M. Observatory, Cambridge the of director
persevering and skilful this to was it and Mountains, Rocky the
entrusted. been had observations the that astronomer

soon done, be could nothing which against phenomenon, unforeseen an But
test. rude a to impatience public put to came

covered became sky the changed; suddenly before, fine so weather, The
of displacement a great so after otherwise be not could It clouds. with
of quantity enormous the of dispersion the and strata atmospheric the
order natural All pyroxyle. of lbs. 200,000 of combustion the from gases
in for that, in astonishing nothing is There disturbed. been had
been has atmosphere the of state the that noticed been has it sea-fights
discharge. artillery the by changed suddenly

a clouds, thick with covered horizon an upon rose sun the day next The
which and sky, and earth between hung curtain impenetrable an and heavy
It Mountains. Rocky the of regions the as far as extended unfortunately
the of parts all from rose complaints of concert A fatality. a was
the disturb to chosen had men as and notice, no took Nature But globe.
consequences. the to submit must they gun, their with atmosphere

of veil thick the pierce to tried one every day first this During
all were they besides, trouble; the for rewarded was one no but clouds,
on for sky, the at up looking by it see could they supposing in mistaken
of then, was projectile the globe the of movement diurnal the of account
antipodes. the of line the past shooting course,

dark, earth--a the enveloped again night when be, might that However
horizon; the above moon the see to impossible was night--it impenetrable
bold the from purpose on hiding was she that thought been have might it
and possible, therefore, was, observation No her. at shot had who beings
intelligence. disastrous the confirmed Peak Long's from despatches the

had who travellers, the succeeded, had experiment the if However,
at due were p.m., 40s. 46m. 10h. at December, of 1st the on started
it time that to up as that so midnight; at 4th the on destination their
people small, so body a observe to difficult been have all, after would,
muster. could they patience the all with waited

been have would it midnight, till p.m. 8 from December, of 4th the On
have would which projectile, the of trace the follow to possible
the But moon. the of disc shining the on speck black a like appeared
who public, the exasperated and cloudy, imperturbably remained weather
mundi_! gloria transit _Sic herself. showing not for moon the at swore

an make to wished He Peak. Long's for out set despair, in Maston, J.T.
at arrived had friends his that doubt not did He himself. observation
had projectile the that heard had one No journey. their of goal the
not did Maston J.T. and earth, upon island or continent any upon fallen
with oceans the of any into fallen have could it that moment a for admit
covered. parts three is earth the which

old the of telescopes large The weather. same the 5th the On
fixed invariably Foucault--were and Rosse, Herschel, of world--those
but Europe, in magnificent was weather the for Night, of Queen the upon
useful any prevented instruments these of weakness relative the
observation.

of parts three devoured Impatience reigned. weather same the 6th the On
the dissipating for proposed were means insane most The globe. the
air. the in accumulated clouds

not did but revived Hopes little. a clear to seemed sky the 7th the On
vault starry the defended clouds thick evening the in and long, last
eyes. all against

moon the a.m., 9.11 at 11th, the on fact, In grave. became now Things
every decline would she delay this After quarter. last her enter would
would observation of chances the clear should sky the if even and day,
a only show then would moon the fact, lessened--in considerably be
becoming by end would and disc, her of portion constantly-decreasing
rays whose sun, the with set and rise would she say, to is new--that
to obliged be therefore, would, They invisible. quite her make would
full be would she till p.m., 12.43 at January, of 3rd the till wait
observation. for ready and again

commentaries, thousand a with reflections these published newspapers The
angelic with itself arm must it that public the tell to fail not did and
patience.

to if as moment, a for appeared sun the 9th the On change. no 8th the On
wounded, and hisses, with received was It Americans. the at jeer
rays. its of miserly very was it reception, a such by doubtless,

were fears and mad, went nearly Maston J.T. change. no 10th the On
its in preserved well so then until brain his for entertained
cranium. gutta-percha

tropical to peculiar tempests frightful those of one 11th the on But
away swept winds east Terrific atmosphere. the in loose let was regions
the evening the in and there, long so been had which clouds the
constellations limpid the amidst majestically rode moon the of half-disc
sky. the of




XXVIII. CHAPTER

STAR. NEW A


a like burst expected impatiently so news the night same That
darting thence and Union, the of States United the over thunderbolt
globe. the of wires telegraphic the all along ran it Atlantic the across
of reflector gigantic the to thanks perceived, been had projectile The
Peak. Long's

Cambridge the of director the by up drawn notice the is following The
great the of conclusion scientific the resumes It Observatory.
Club:-- Gun the by made experiment

12th. December Peak, "Long's

Observatory. Cambridge the of Staff the "To

by perceived was Hill Stony of Columbiad the by hurled projectile "The
p.m., 8.47 at December of 12th the on Maston J.T. and Belfast Messrs.
quarter. last her entered having moon the

side, the to deviated has It goal. its reached not has projectile "The
attraction. lunar by detained be to enough near but

extreme of one circular a to changed movement rectilinear its "There
orbit, elliptical an in moon the round drawn been has it and velocity,
satellite. her become has and

star. new this of elements the determine to able been yet not have "We
distance The known. is rotation or translation of speed its Neither
at estimated be may moon the of surface the from it separates which
miles. 2,833 about

modification a to as consideration into taken be may hypotheses two "Now
things:-- of state this in

her, towards it drawing by end will moon the of attraction the "Either
journey, their of goal the reach will travellers the and

gravitate will orbit, immutable an in maintained projectile, the "Or
time. of end the till disc lunar the round

the now until but day, some point this settle will "Observation
of that than result other no had has Club Gun the of experiment
star. new a with system solar our providing

BELFAST." "J

a What to! rise gave _dnouement_ unexpected this discussions What
of investigations the for reserved future the mystery of full situation
this men, three of devotion and courage the to Thanks science!
appearance, in enough futile moon, the to bullet a sending of enterprise
are which of consequences the result, immense an had just had
have they if satellite, new a in imprisoned travellers The incalculable.
they world; lunar the of part least at form end, their attained not
eyes human time first the for and Night, of Queen the around gravitate
and Barbicane, Nicholl, of names The mysteries. her all penetrate can
for annals, astronomical in celebrated ever for be would Ardan Michel
human of circle the widening of desirous explorers, bold these
lives their risked had and space, into rushed audaciously had knowledge,
times. modern of experiment strangest the in

the throughout spread there known, made once Peak Long's from notice The
the to go to possible it Was horror. and surprise of feeling a universe
had they for not, Certainly earth? the of inhabitants bold these of aid
limits the crossing by humanity of pale the of outside themselves put
procure could They creatures. terrestrial His on Creator the by imposed
but year; one for provisions had they months; two for air themselves
question. terrible this at palpitated hearts hardest The after?

One desperate. was situation the that admit not would alone man One
and audacious, friend--devoted, their was it and confidence, had alone
Maston. J.T. brave they--the as resolute

the henceforth was domicile His them. of sight lose to not resolved He
the as soon As reflector. immense the horizon Peak--his Long's of post
of field the in her framed immediately he horizon the above rose moon
and instant, an for her of sight lose not did he telescope; his
with watched he spaces; stellar the across her followed assiduously
silver, of disc her over projectile the of passage the patience eternal
with communication perpetual in remained man worthy the reality in and
day. one again seeing of despair not did he whom friends, three his

"as listen, would who one any to he said them," with correspond will "We
they and them, from news have shall We allow. will circumstances as soon
men. ingenious are them--they know I Besides, us. from news have will
art, of resources the all space into them with carry three Those
and accomplished, be can everything those With industry. and science,
difficulty." the of out get will they that see will you

MOON.") THE "AROUND SEE SEQUEL, (FOR

windows."] lateral the through thus watched "They [Illustration:

* * * * *




MOON. THE ROUND

* * * * *




INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER. PRELIMINARY

AS SERVE TO WORK THIS OF PART FIRST THE OF ACCOUNT SHORT A CONTAINING
SECOND. THE TO PREFACE


singularly was world entire the 186---- year the of course the During
of annals the in precedent without experiment scientific a by excited
artillerymen of circle a Club, Gun the of members The science.
putting of idea the had war, American the after Baltimore at established
moon--by the with moon--yes, the with communication in themselves
the of promoter the Barbicane, president, Their her. to bullet a sending
Cambridge the of astronomers the consulted having enterprise,
the for necessary precautions the all took subject, this on Observatory
the by practicable declared enterprise, extraordinary the of success
public a solicited having After people. competent of majority
its began it francs, of 30,000,000 nearly produced which subscription
labours. gigantic

the observatory, the of members the by up drawn plan the to According
country some in up set be to was projectile the hurl to destined cannon
to order in latitude south or north of 28 and 0 the between situated
an with endowed be to was bullet The zenith. the at moon the at aim
December of 1st the on Hurled second. a yards 12,000 of velocity initial
was it evening, the in eleven to seconds twenty and minutes thirteen at
December of 5th the on departure its after days four moon the to get to
her at be would she instant very the at precisely, midnight at
86,410 exactly at or earth, the to nearest say, to is perigee--that
distance. leagues'

Major Barbicane, president, the Club, Gun the of members principal The
held _savants_, other and Maston, J.T. secretary, the Elphinstone,
were bullet the of composition and form the which in meetings, several
the and cannon, the of nature and disposition the as well as discussed,
decided--1, was It employed. be to powder the of quantity and quality
of diameter a with aluminium, of obus an be should projectile the that
weigh to was it and thick, inches 12 be to were sides its inches; 800
feet 900 Columbiad cast-iron a be should cannon the that 2, lbs.; 19,250
charge the that 3, ground; the in once at cast be should and long,
developing by which, gun-cotton, of lbs. 400,000 of consist should
easily it carry would projectile, the under gas of litres 6,000,000,000
Night. of Queen the towards

engineer, the by aided Barbicane, President settled, questions These
west 7' 5 and lat. north 7' 27 in Florida in site a chose Murchison,
cast was Columbiad the labour of marvels after that there was It long.
successfully. quite

the Increased which occurred incident an when pass that at were Things
enterprise. great this to attached interest

asked audacious, as witty as artist an Parisian, regular a Frenchman, A
and moon the reach to order in bullet the in up himself shut to leave
adventurer's intrepid This satellite. terrestrial the of survey a make
with received was America, in arrived He Ardan. Michel was name
President reconciled triumph, in carried was meetings, held enthusiasm,
the of pledge in and Nicholl, Captain enemy, mortal his to Barbicane
projectile. the in him with embark to them persuaded he reconciliation

It changed. was bullet the of form The accepted. was proposition The
arial of species this furnished They cylindro-conical. became
the break to partitions breakable and springs powerful with compartment
for water year, one for provisions with filled was It shock. departing
gave and made apparatus automatic An days. some for gas and months, some
At travellers. three the of respiration the for necessary air the out
the of one on up set telescope gigantic a had Club Gun the time same the
projectile the which through Mountains, Rocky the of summits highest
then was Everything space. through journey its during followed be could
ready.

extraordinary an amidst fixed, time the at November, of 30th the On
first the for and place, took departure the spectators, of concourse
the for globe terrestrial the left beings human three time
goal. their reaching of certainty the almost with regions interplanetary

and Barbicane, President Ardan, Michel travellers, audacious These
hours ninety-seven in journey their accomplish to were Nicholl Captain
reach not could they consequently seconds; twenty and minutes thirteen
precise the at midnight, at December, of 5th the until disc lunar the
some as 4th, the on not and full, be would moon the that moment
out. given had newspapers wrongly-informed

the by produced detonation the occurred; circumstance unexpected an But
terrestrial the disturbing of effect immediate the had Columbiad
This accumulated. vapour of quantity enormous an where atmosphere,
during hidden was moon the for indignation, general excited phenomenon
contemplators. her of eyes the from nights several

set travellers, three the of friend greatest the Maston, J.T. worthy The
Belfast, J. Honourable the of company the in Mountains Rocky the for out
Long's of station the reached and Observatory, Cambridge the of director
apparently, moon, the brought which up set was telescope the where Peak,
wished Club Gun the of secretary honourable The leagues. two within to
friends. audacious his contained that vehicle the himself for observe to

observation all prevented atmosphere the in clouds of accumulation The
even was It December. of 10th and 9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th, the during
January of 3rd the before place take could observation no that thought
the on quarter last her entering moon, the for year, following the in
trace the allow to surface her of enough show not that after would 11th,
followed. be to projectile the of

the during tempest strong a satisfaction, general the to last, at But
and atmosphere, the cleared December of 12th and 11th the between night
sky. the of background dark the on visible distinctly was half-moon the

J.T. by Station Peak Long's from sent was telegram a night same That
Observatory. Cambridge the of staff the to Belfast and Maston

the p.m., 8.47 at December, of 11th the on that announced telegram This
by perceived been had Hill Stony of Columbiad the by hurled projectile
its from deviated had bullet the that Maston, J.T. and Belfast Messrs.
had but goal, its reached not had and cause, unknown some through course
its that attraction; lunar by retained be to enough near gone
was it that and one, circular a to changed been had movement rectilinear
her become had and moon, the round orbit elliptical an describing
satellite.

been yet not had star new this of elements the that added telegram The
three in star a taking observations, three fact, calculated--in
stated it Then them. determine to necessary are positions, different
surface lunar the from projectile the separating distance the that
miles. 4,500 or leagues, 2,833 about at estimated be" "might

of attraction the hypothesis:--Either double following the with ended It
reach would travellers the and day, the carrying by end would moon the
would orbit, immutable an in fixed projectile, the or goal; their
time. of end the to disc lunar the around gravitate

It fate? travellers' the be would what alternatives these of either In
supposing even But time. some for enough provisions had they true is
they would how success, with crowned were enterprise bold their that
earth? the reach ever them of news Would return? ever they Could return?
time, the of writers learned most the by upon debated questions, These
public. the interested intensely

too by upon meditated be to ought which made be here may remark A
speculative purely a announces _savant_ a When observers. impatient
is one No prudence. much too with act cannot he public the to discovery
a make who those and satellite, a or comet a either discover to obliged
ridicule. public to justly themselves expose case a such in mistake
Maston J.T. impatient what is that and wait; to better is it Therefore
which, telegram the world the to sending before done have to ought
this about communication last the contained him, to according
enterprise.

later:--1. verified sorts, two of errors contained telegram the fact, In
the from projectile the of distance the concerning observation of Errors
was it December of 11th the of date the upon for moon, the of surface
or seen, had Maston J.T. which that and it, perceive to impossible
A 2. Columbiad. the from bullet the be not could saw, he thought
a it making for projectile, said the of fate the to as error theoretic
of laws the of contradiction absolute an was moon the of satellite
mechanics. rational

be might Peak Long's of astronomers the by made only hypothesis One
yet any travellers--if the when case the foresaw that one the realised,
to as so attraction lunar the with efforts their unite existed--should
disc. the of surface the reach

the survived had bold, were they as intelligent as men, these Now
bullet-carriage their in journey their and departure, at shock terrible
singular most its in as well as dramatic most its in related be will
previsions, and illusions many to end an put will account This details.
to incidental circumstances various the of idea just a give will it but
scientific Barbicane's relief in set will and enterprise, an such
of audacity humorous the and resources, industrial Nicholl's instincts,
Ardan. Michel

losing was Maston J.T. friend worthy their that prove will it Besides,
the watched he telescope, gigantic the over bending when, time his
regions. planetary the across moon the of course




I. CHAPTER

P.M. 10.47 TO P.M. 10.20 FROM


said Nicholl and Barbicane, Ardan, Michel struck, o'clock ten When
dogs, two The earth. the upon left they friends numerous the to good-bye
were continents, lunar the upon race canine the acclimatise to destined
approached travellers three The projectile. the in imprisoned already
the to them lowered crane a and tube, iron enormous the of orifice the
bullet. the of covering conical

aluminium the into down them let purpose on made opening an There
the of mouth the and outside, up drawn was tackling crane's The vehicle.
scaffolding. last its of cleared instantly Columbiad

closed he projectile the in were companions his and Nicholl as soon As
Other inside. down screwed plate strong a of means by opening the
skylights. the of glasses lenticular the covered plates closely-fitting
in were prison, metal their in inclosed hermetically travellers, The
darkness. profound

ourselves make us "let Ardan, Michel said companions," dear my now, "And
of best the make to how know and myself, man domestic a am I home. at
for invented not was gas light; a have us let First lodgings. any
moles!"

his of sole the on match a struck fellow light-hearted the which Saying
there which in receptacle, the of burner the to it applied then and boot
for pressure, strong under stored hydrogen, carbonised enough was
six and days six or hours, 144 for bullet the heating and lighting
nights.

a of aspect the presented projectile the lighted, gas the Once
the divans, circular with furnished walls, padded with room comfortable
dome. a of shape the in was which of roof

solidly were utensils, and instruments, weapons, it, in objects The
impunity. with shock parting the bear to order in sides the to fastened
so of success the insure to taken been had precaution possible Every
experiment. an bold

satisfied quite himself declared and everything, examined Ardan Michel
quarters. his with

the had I if and prison, travelling a "but he, said prison," a is "It
years' hundred a on it take would I window the to nose my put to right
do you something of thinking are You Barbicane. smiling, are You lease!
our be may prison this that yourself to say you Do communicate. not
which Mahomet's, for it change not would I be; it let coffin Our coffin?
move!" not does and space, in hangs only

making were Nicholl and Barbicane thus, talking was Ardan Michel Whilst
preparations. last their

travellers three the when chronometer Nicholl's by p.m. 10.20 was It
was chronometer This bullet. their in up walled definitely were
Murchison. engineer, the of that by second a of tenth the to regulated
it. at looked Barbicane

thirteen at ten; past minutes twenty is "it he, said friends," "My
that at Columbiad; the to fire set will Murchison eleven to minutes
still therefore, have, We spheroid. our leave shall we precisely minute
earth." upon remain to minutes seven-and-twenty

methodical the answered seconds," thirteen and minutes "Twenty-six
Nicholl.

minutes twenty-six "in good-humouredly; Ardan Michel cried well!" "Very
political or moral grave discuss can We done. be can things of lots
are employed well minutes Twenty-six them. solve even and questions,
a of seconds few A nothing. doing of years twenty-six than more worth
crowd a of existence whole the than precious more are Newton a or Pascal
imbeciles." of

President asked eternal?" talker that, from conclude you do what "And
Barbicane.

Ardan. answered minutes," twenty-six have we that conclude "I

Nicholl. said only," "Twenty-four

Ardan; answered captain," brave like, you if then, "Twenty-four,
investigate--" might we which during minutes, "twenty-four

of plenty have shall we journey our "during Barbicane, said "Michel,"
of think must we Now questions. deepest the investigate to time
starting."

ready?" not we "Are

deaden to taken be to precautions some still are there But "Certainly.
possible!" as much as shock first the

elastic partitions movable between placed water-cushions not we "Have
sufficiently?" us protect to enough

quite not am I "but gently; Barbicane answered Michel," so, hope "I
sure!"

quite not is He hopes! "He Ardan. Michel exclaimed joker!" the "Ah,
deplorable this make to encased are we till waits he And sure!
out." get to ask I acknowledgment!

Barbicane. asked means?" what "By

train, the in are We difficult. be would "it Ardan, Michel said "Well!"
minutes." twenty-four in heard be will whistle guard's the and

Nicholl. ejaculated "Twenty!"

they Then seconds. few a for another one at looked travellers three The
them. with imprisoned objects the all examined

where is now question "The Barbicane. said place," its in is "Everything
The shock. departing the support to best as so ourselves place can we
blood the prevent must too--we important be must assume we position
heads." our to violently too rushing

Nicholl. said true," is "That

the to action the suit to ready always Ardan, Michel answered "Then,"
circus." the at clowns the like heads our on stand will "we word,

resist thus shall we sides; our on lie us let "but Barbicane; said "No,"
whether matter much not will it starts bullet the When better. shock the
front." in or inside are we

Michel answered reassured," more am I matter' much 'not to comes it "If
Ardan.

Barbicane. asked Nicholl?" idea, my of approve you "Do

a-half." and minutes thirteen "Still captain. the answered "Entirely,"

marking chronometer a is "he Michel; exclaimed man," a not is "Nicholl
in--" holes eight with and seconds, the

making were they and him, to listening longer no were companions his But
looked They imaginable. coolness the all with preparations last their
and train the in places their taking travellers methodical two like
of indeed, wonders, One possible. as comfortable as themselves making
of approach the which to made, are hearts American these materials what
pulsation. single a add not does danger frightful most the

projectile. the in placed been had made, solidly and thick beds, Three
formed that disc the of centre the in them placed Barbicane and Nicholl
few a down lie to were travellers three the There flooring. movable the
departure. their before minutes

his round turned quiet, remain not could who Ardan, meanwhile the In
and friends his to talking cage, a in animal wild a like prison narrow
some had he noticed be will it whom to Satellite, and Diana dogs, his
names. significant these given before time

to going are "You them. exciting he, cried Satellite!" up, Diana! "Up,
be! can earth the of dogs the well-behaved how dogs Selenite the to show
will I here back come ever we If race. canine the to honour do will That
rage." the all become will that 'moon-dogs' of cross-breed a back bring

Barbicane. said moon," the in dogs any are there "If

horses, are there as same "the Ardan, Michel affirmed some," are "There
hens." some find shall we anything wager I hens. and asses, cows,

Nicholl. said none," find we dollars hundred a bet "I

"But, Nicholl. with hands shaking Ardan, answered captain," "Done,
funds the for president, the with bets three lost have you by-the-bye,
and succeeded, casting the provided, were enterprise the for necessary
six makes accident--that without loaded was Columbiad the lastly,
dollars." thousand

to seconds six and minutes "Twenty-three Nicholl. answered "Yes,"
eleven."

you over is hour an of quarter another before Well, captain. hear, "I
president, the to dollars thousand nine another over make to have will
thousand five and burst, not will Columbiad the because thousand four
air." the into miles six than higher rise will bullet the because

I "and pocket, coat his striking Nicholl, answered dollars," the have "I
pay." to want only

but be; could never I what order, of man a are you see I Nicholl, "Come,
very be cannot bets of series your that you tell to me allow
you." to advantageous

Barbicane. asked "Why?"

the and burst, have will Columbiad the first the win you if "Because
your you pay to there be not will Barbicane and it, with bullet
dollars."

Barbicane answered Bank," Baltimore the in deposited is wager "My
heirs." his to go will it Nicholl of default in "and simply;

much as you admire "I Ardan. Michel cried are!" you men practical "What
you." understand not do I as

Nicholl. said eleven," to minutes "Eighteen

Barbicane. answered more," minutes five "Only

in up shut are we "And Ardan. Michel replied minutes!" short five "Yes,
bullet this under and long! feet 900 cannon a of bottom the at bullet a
of lbs. 1,600,000 than more worth gun-cotton, of lbs. 400,000 are there
and hand in chronometer his with Murchison, friend And powder! ordinary
is knob, electric the on finger his and hand the on fixed eye his
regions." planetary the into us hurl to seconds the counting

us "Let tone. grave a in Barbicane said enough!" Michel, "Enough,
moment. supreme a from us separate only seconds few A ourselves. prepare
friends." my hands, Your

appear. to wished he than moved more Ardan, Michel cried "Yes,"

hands. shook companions bold three The

president. religious the said us!" help "God

the of centre the in beds their on down lay Nicholl and Ardan Michel
floor.

captain. the murmured eleven," to minutes "Thirteen

down lay and gas, the out put rapidly Barbicane more! seconds Twenty
companions. his beside

the beating chronometer the by broken only was silence profound The
seconds.

the under projectile, the and felt, was shock frightful a Suddenly
deflagration the by developed gas of litres 6,000,000,000 of impulsion
space. into rose pyroxyle, the of




II. CHAPTER

HALF-HOUR. FIRST THE


the Had shock? frightful the of effect the was What happened? had What
happy a by attended been projectile the of constructors the of ingenuity
the springs, the to thanks deadened, shock the of effect the Was result?
they Had partitions? movable the and water-cushions, the buffers, four
11,000 of velocity initial the of impulsion frightful the over triumphed
of thousands the question the evidently was This second? a metres
object the forgot They themselves. asked scene exciting the of witnesses
of one Suppose travellers! the of thought only and journey, the of
the of glimpse a get to able been instance--had for Maston, them--J.T.
seen? have he would what projectile, the of interior

Its bullet. the in profound was obscurity The then. Nothing
a break, a not was There perfectly. resisted had sides cylindro-conical
the by hurt not was projectile admirable The them. in dint a or crack,
it as liquefied, being of instead powders, the of deflagration intense
aluminium. of shower a into feared, was

few A whole. the on disorder little very was there interior the In
important most the but roof, the to up hurled violently been had objects
were fastenings Their shock. the from suffered have to seem not did
intact.

the of smashing the by bottom the to down crushed disc, movable the On
Did motionless. lay bodies three water, the of escape the and partitions
projectile the Was breathe? still Ardan Michel and Nicholl, Barbicane,
space? into corpses three carrying coffin metal a but nothing

bodies these of one bullet the of departure the after minutes few A
in succeeded and head, its up lifted arms, its out stretched moved,
a uttered himself, felt He Ardan. Michel was It knees. its upon getting
said-- then "Hum," sonorous

others!" the for Now complete. Ardan, "Michel

His stand. not could he but up, get to wanted Frenchman courageous The
him. blinded head, his to up sent violently blood, his vacillated; head
man. drunken a like felt He

of bottles two drinking been had I though as feel "I he. said "Brrr!"
swallow!" to agreeable so not was that only Corton,

his rubbing and times, several forehead his across hand his passing Then
voice-- firm a in out called he temples,

Barbicane!" "Nicholl!

the that indicate to sigh a even Not answer. No anxiously. waited He
Same call. his reiterated He beat. still companions his of hearts
silence.

the from fallen had they though as seem "They he. said devil!" "The
imperturbable the with added he Bah!" heads! their upon story fifth
his upon get can Frenchman a "if shake, could nothing that confidence
feet. their upon getting in difficulty no have will Americans two knees,
subject." the on light a have us let all, of first But,

and calm, became blood His streams. in him to back come life felt Ardan
his restored efforts Fresh circulation. ordinary its resumed
pocket, his of out match a took up, getting in succeeded He equilibrium.
The gas. the lighted he burner the to it putting then it; struck and
Besides, escaped. not had gas The damaged. least the in not was meter
Michel case, the been this had and it, betrayed have would smell the
filled medium a in match a lighted have impunity with not could Ardan
a produced have would air, the in mixed gas, The hydrogen. with
shock a what finished have would explosion an and mixture, detonating
begun. perhaps had

companions. two his over down bent Ardan lighted was gas the as soon As
top, the on Nicholl other, the upon one thrown were bodies Their
underneath. Barbicane

him rubbed and divan, a against up him propped captain, the raised Ardan
Nicholl, reanimated skilfully, administered friction, This vigorously.
seized mind, of presence his recovered instantly eyes, his opened who
him-- round looking then and hand, Ardan's

asked. he Barbicane?" "And

you, with began "I tranquilly. Ardan Michel answered turn," in "Each
Barbicane." to go I'll Now top. the on were you because Nicholl,

and Club Gun the of president the raised Nicholl and Ardan said, That
his than more suffered have to seemed Barbicane divan. a on him put
the that find to glad was Nicholl but bleeding, was He companions.
a was It shoulder. his in wound slight a from came only hemorrhage
closed. carefully he which scratch, simple

which himself, to came he before time some was Barbicane Nevertheless,
friction. their spare not did who friends, two his frightened

breast the to ear his putting Nicholl, said however," breathing, is "He
man. wounded the of

habit the in is who man a like breathing is "he Ardan, answered "Yes,"
might." your all with rub Nicholl, Rub, daily. it doing of

and will a such with work to set practitioners improvised two the And
his opened He senses. his to came last at Barbicane that well so managed
words first his and friends, two his of hands the took up, sat eyes,
were--

on?" going we are "Nicholl,

about thought yet not had They another. one at looked Ardan and Nicholl
for not travellers, the for been had anxiety first Their projectile. the
vehicle. the

Ardan. Michel repeated on?" going we are really, "Well,

Nicholl. asked Florida?" of soil the on resting tranquilly we are "Or

Ardan. Michel added Mexico?" of Gulf the of bottom the at "Or

Barbicane. President cried "Impossible!"

recalled immediately friends two his by suggested hypothesis double This
energy. and life to him

the of immovability apparent The question. the decide yet not could They
them prevented exterior the with communication of want the and bullet
space. through falling was projectile the Perhaps out. it finding
or earth, the upon fallen had it distance short a rising after Perhaps
the of narrowness the which fall a Mexico, of Gulf the into even
possible. rendered peninsula Floridian

solve to necessary was It interesting. problem the grave, was case The
energy moral his by and excited, Barbicane, possible. as soon as it
profound A listened. and up stood weakness, physical his over triumphing
shut to sufficient was padding thick the But outside. reigned silence
struck circumstance one However, earth; on noises the all out
was projectile the of interior the in temperature The Barbicane.
envelope the from thermometer a out drew president The high. singularly
Fahr. 81 showed instrument The it. consulted and it protected that

oozes heat stifling This moving! are we exclaimed--"yes, then he "Yes!"
against friction by produced is It projectile. our of sides the through
in moving already are we because diminish; soon will It atmosphere. the
cold." intense endure shall we suffocated almost being after and space,

already are we that say to mean you "do Ardan, Michel asked "What!"
atmosphere?" terrestrial the beyond

but wants now It me. to Listen Michel. doubt, slightest the "Without
started. we since minutes eight already is It eleven. to minutes five
six friction, by diminished been not has velocity initial our if Now,
atmosphere of leagues sixteen the pass to us for enough be would seconds
spheroid." our surround which

the reckon you do proportion what in "but Nicholl; answered so," "Just
friction?" by speed of diminution

diminution "This Barbicane. answered one-third," of proportion the "In
If, calculations. my to according much so is it but considerable, is
get we when metres, 11,000 of velocity initial an had have we therefore,
may that However metres. 7,332 to reduced be will it atmosphere the past
and--" space, that cleared already have we be,

two his lost has Nicholl "friend Ardan, Michel said then," "And
five burst, not has Columbiad the because dollars thousand bets--four
height greater a to risen has projectile the because dollars thousand
out." shell Nicholl, therefore, miles; six than

It afterwards. pay "and captain, the answered first," it prove must "We
I that and exact, are calculations Barbicane's that possible quite is
into come has hypothesis another But dollars. thousand nine my lost have
wager." the cancel may it and mind, my

quickly. Barbicane asked that?" is "What

catch not did powder the other or reason some for that supposition "The
started." not have we and fire,

supposition a is "that Ardan, Michel cried captain," heavens! "Good
the by stunned half been not we Have serious! not is It me! of worthy
president's the not Does life? to back you bring not I Did shock?
blow?" the from bleed still shoulder

question." one ask to me allow "but Nicholl, replied Michel," "Agreed,

captain." it, "Ask

been have certainly must which detonation, the hear you "Did
formidable?"

it." hear not did certainly "I surprised, much Ardan, answered "No,"

Barbicane?" you, "And

either." not did "I

Nicholl. asked that?" of make you do "What

the hear not we did "why president; the murmured indeed!" "What
detonation?"

was Here disconcertedly. rather another one at looked friends three The
and however, fired, been had projectile The phenomenon. inexplicable an
detonation. a been have must there

the open us let "so Barbicane, said are," we where first know must "We
panel."

that screws The accomplished. immediately was operation simple This
skylight right-hand the of plates outer the on bolts the fastened
and outside, driven were bolts These coach-wrench. the to yielded
them let that hole the up corked indiarubber with wadded obturators
a like hinges its upon back fell immediately plate exterior The through.
An appeared. hole the covered that glass lenticular the and port-hole,
projectile, the of side other the in made been had light-port identical
could firmament The bottom. the in fourth a and dome, the in another
through firmament directions--the opposite four in observed be therefore
the through directly more moon the or earth the and windows, lateral the
bullet. the of opening lower or upper

uncovered the to rushed immediately companions his and Barbicane
surrounded darkness Profound it. illuminated light of ray No port-hole.
exclaiming-- Barbicane prevent not did darkness This projectile. the

not are we No, again! earth the on fallen not have we friends, my "No,
up going are we Yes, Mexico! of Gulf the of bottom the at immersed
and darkness, the in shining are that stars those at Look space! through
us!" and earth the between lies that darkness impenetrable the

voice. one with Nicholl and Ardan Michel cried hurrah!" "Hurrah!

the left had projectile the that proved darkness thick the fact, In
have would moon, the by lighted brilliantly then ground, the for earth,
upon resting been had they if travellers the of eyes the before appeared
the beyond passed had projectile the that also proved darkness This it.
reflected been have would air the in light diffused the for atmosphere,
also was reflection which projectile, the of sides metallic the on
light-port, the of glass the upon shone have would light This wanting.
The possible. longer no was Doubt darkness. in was glass that and
earth. the quitted had travellers

Nicholl. said lost." have "I

Ardan. answered it," upon you congratulate "I

of bundle a taking captain, the said dollars," thousand nine are "Here
pocket. his of out notes

money. the took he as Barbicane asked receipt?" a have you "Will

regular." more is "it Nicholl; answered mind," not do you "If

his in been had he if as phlegmatically and seriously as And
and memorandum-book his out drew Barbicane President counting-house,
it, signed it, dated pencil, in receipt a wrote page, clear a out tore
pocket-book. his into carefully it put who captain, the to it gave and

without companions two his to bowed and hat his off took Ardan Michel
his away took circumstances such under formality Such word. a speaking
American. so anything seen never had He speech. of power

the to back went Nicholl and Barbicane over, business their Once
clearly out stood stars The constellations. the at looked and light-port
could moon the side this from But sky. the of background dark the upon
the to gradually rising west, to east from moves she as seen, be not
say-- Ardan made absence Her zenith.

us?" fail to going she Is moon? the "And

her at is spheroid "Our Barbicane, answered yourself," frighten not "Do
opposite the open must We side. this from her see cannot we but post,
light-port."

set to window one abandon to going was Barbicane when moment very the At
a of approach the by attracted was attention his one, opposite the clear
which of dimensions colossal the disc enormous an was It object. shining
was earth the towards turned face Its estimated. be not could
of light the reflecting moon small a like looked It lighted. brilliantly
describe to seemed and speed, prodigious at advanced It one. large the
To projectile. the of passage the across right orbit an earth the round
of movement a added was object this of translation of movement the
celestial all like behaving therefore was It itself. upon rotation
space. in abandoned bodies

projectile?" Another that? is "Whatever Ardan. Michel cried "Eh!"

surprised body enormous this of apparition The answer. not did Barbicane
had have would which possible was collision A uneasy. him made and him
its from deviate projectile the making by either results, deplorable
attractive the by up caught be or earth, the upon back fall and route
asteroid. the of power

three these of consequences the seized rapidly had Barbicane President
success the prevent fatally would other or way one in which hypotheses,
which object, the watching silently were companions His attempt. his of
optical certain a through and approached, it as larger prodigiously grew
it. upon rushing were projectile the if as seemed it illusion

line!" the on collision a be will "there Ardan; Michel cried gods!" "Ye

extreme, was terror Their back. drew instinctively travellers three The
a at passed asteroid The seconds. few a hardly long, last not did it but
not disappeared, and projectile the from yards hundred few a of distance
side its because but course, its of rapidity the of account on much so
darkness absolute the with confounded suddenly was moon the to opposite
space. of

of sigh a uttering Ardan, Michel cried you!" to journey good "A
little poor a allow to enough large infinitude not "Is satisfaction.
which globe pretentious that was What fear? without about go to bullet
us?" against knocked nearly

Barbicane. answered know!" "I

everything." know you course! "Of

the that large so "but Barbicane; said asteroid," simple a is "It
satellite." a of state the in it kept has earth the of attraction

moons two has earth the "Then Ardan. Michel exclaimed possible!" it "Is
Neptune?" like

but have to supposed generally is she though moons, two friend, my "Yes,
the that great so speed her and small so is moon second this But one.
into taking by was It her. perceive cannot earth the of inhabitants
was Petit, M. astronomer, French a that perturbations certain account
calculate and satellite second this of existence the determine to able
accomplishes asteroid this observations, his to According elements. its
only. minutes twenty and hours three in earth the round revolution its
speed." prodigious implies That

asked satellite?" this of existence the admit astronomers all "Do
Nicholl.

they have we like it met had they if "but Barbicane; answered "No,"
have would which asteroid, this By-the-bye, longer. any doubt not could
determine to us allows us, against knocked it had us embarrassed much
space." in position our

Ardan. said "How?"

at exactly were we it met we where and known, is distance its "Because
globe." terrestrial the of surface the from kilometres 8,140

express the beats "That Ardan. Michel cried leagues!" 2,000 than "More
earth!" the called globe pitiable the of trains

his consulting Nicholl, answered did," it think should "I
we since minutes thirteen only o'clock, eleven is "it chronometer;
continent." American the left

Barbicane. said minutes?" thirteen "Only

were velocity initial our if "and Nicholl; answered all," is "That
hour." an leagues 10,000 nearly make should we constant

one "but president; the said friends," my well, very all is "That
of detonation the hear not we did remains--why still question insoluble
Columbiad?" the

still Barbicane, and stopped, conversation the answer an of want For
second the of covering the lowering with himself occupied reflecting,
the glass the through and succeeded, operation His light-port. lateral
light. brilliant with projectile the of interior the filled moon
rendered thus was that gas the out put man, economical an like Nicholl,
of observation the obstructed which of brilliance the and useless,
space. planetary

longer no rays, Her purity. incomparable with shone then disc lunar The
shone globe, terrestrial the of atmosphere vapoury the by filtered
the of air interior the saturated and glass the through clearly
firmament the of curtain black The reflections. silvery with projectile
ether of void this in which moon, the of brilliancy the doubled really
The stars. neighbouring the eclipse not did diffusion to unfavourable
human no that aspect--one different a quite presented seen, thus sky,
imagine. could eye

men audacious these interest what with understood readily be will It
earth's The journey. their of goal supreme the moon, the contemplated
zenith, the neared insensibly translation, of movement her in satellite,
hours ninety-six about reach to was she which point mathematical a
seen not were relief, in object any or plains, and mountains Her later.
was void the across light her but earth; the from than plainly more
platinum a like shone disc The intensity. incomparable with developed
which earth the about all forgotten already had travellers The mirror.
feet. their beneath flying was

globe. vanished the to attention drew first who Nicholl Captain was It

we As it. to ungrateful be not must "We Ardan. Michel answered "Yes!"
the see to want I it. reach looks last our let country our leaving are
eyes!" our from completely disappears it before earth

himself occupied companion, his of desires the satisfy to Barbicane,
one the projectile, the of bottom the at window the clearing with
floor movable The directly. earth the observe could they which through
to taken was bottom the to sent had projection of force the which
the against placed carefully pieces, its difficulty; without not pieces,
half window, bay circular a appeared Then use. of be still might sides,
with filled was It bullet. the of part lower the in cut wide, yard a
was it Under settings. brass with strengthened thick, inches five glass
the and out taken screws The bolts. by down held plate, aluminium an
was communication visual and back, fell plate the withdrawn, bolts
exterior. and interior between established

opaque. seemed and dark, was It glass. the upon knelt Ardan Michel

earth?" the where's "but he, cried "Well,"

Barbicane. said is," it "There

crescent?" silvery that streak, thin "that Ardan, cried "What!"

the at full, is moon the when time, days' four In Michel. "Certainly,
only will She new. be will earth the her, reach shall we minute very
soon will which crescent, slender a of form the under us to appear
impenetrable in days some for buried be will she then and disappear,
darkness."

of slice thin the at staring Ardan, Michel repeated earth!" the "That
planet. natal his

earth, The correct. was Barbicane President by given explanation The
in was She quarter. last her entering was projectile, the from at looked
background dark the on outlined clearly was crescent her and octant, her
atmosphere, her of thickness the by bluish made light, Her sky. the of
then crescent This crescent. lunar the of that than intense less was
enormous an like looked It dimensions. considerable under itself showed
lighted, vividly more points, Some firmament. the across stretched arch
high of presence the announced part, concave its in especially
are which spots, black under sometimes disappeared they but mountains;
clouds of rings were They disc. lunar the of surface the on seen never
spheroid. terrestrial the round concentrically placed

produced that with identical phenomenon, natural a of dint by However,
terrestrial the of contour the octants, her in is she when moon the on
through visible slightly appeared disc entire Its traced. be could globe
The moon. the of that than appreciable less light, pale of effect an
this When understand. to easy is intensity lessened this of reason
which rays solar the by caused is it moon the on produced is reflection
solar the by caused was it Here satellite. her upon reflects earth the
is light terrestrial Now earth. the upon moon the from reflected rays
the of account on light lunar than intense more times thirteen
the in that follows it Hence bodies. two the in volume of difference
less is disc earth's the of part dark the light pale the of phenomenon
of intensity the because disc, moon's the of that than outlined clearly
stars. two the of power lighting the to proportion in is phenomenon the
more a form to seems crescent terrestrial the that added be must It
irradiation. of effect pure disc--a the of that than curve elongated

of darkness profound the pierce to trying were travellers the Whilst
eyes. their before shone stars falling of shower brilliant a space,
streaked atmosphere, the with contact by inflamed meteors, of Hundreds
disc the of part cloudy the lined and trails, luminous with darkness the
the and perihelion, her in was earth the epoch that At fire. their with
that stars shooting these to propitious so is December of month
Ardan, Michel But hour. an 24,000 as many as counted have astronomers
was earth the that believe to preferred reasoning, scientific disdaining
children. three her of departure the fireworks finest her with saluting

inferior an darkness, the in lost globe the of saw they all was This
a as sets or rises planets grand the for which world, solar the of star
now was it space, in point Imperceptible star! evening or morning simple
their all left had they where globe this crescent, fugitive a only
affections.

heart, in united yet speaking, not friends, three the time long a For
velocity. decreasing uniformly with on went projectile the while watched
body of fatigue it Was them. of possession took sleep irresistible Then
passed hours last the of excitement the after for Doubtless, mind? and
in. set inevitably must reaction earth, upon

sleep." to go us let sleep, must we "as Michel, said "Well,"

profound in buried soon were three all beds, their upon Stretched
slumber.

hour an of quarter a than more for unconscious been not had they But
loud a in companions, his waking and, rose, suddenly Barbicane when
cried-- voice

it!" found "I've

bed. of out jumping Ardan, Michel asked found?" you have "What

Columbiad!" the of detonation the hear not did we reason "The

Nicholl. said "Well?"

sound." than quicker went projectile our because was "It




III. CHAPTER

POSSESSION. TAKING


three the given, once explanation correct certainly but curious This
a found have they would Where sleep. profound a into again fell friends
the in houses earth, Upon in? sleep to place peaceful more or calmer
the of surface the upon shock every feel country the in cottages or town
In movement. perpetual in are waves, the by rocked ships, sea, At globe.
of strata fluid the upon oscillate incessantly balloons air, the
void absolute in travelling alone, projectile This densities. different
inhabitants. its to repose absolute offered silence, absolute amidst

been perhaps, have, would adventurers three the of sleep The
them awakened not had noise unexpected an if prolonged indefinitely
departure. their after hours eight December, of 2nd the on a.m. 7 about

bark. distinct very a was noise This

immediately. up getting Ardan, Michel cried dogs!" the is It dogs! "The

Nicholl. said hungry," are "They

them." forgotten have "we Michel; answered so," think should "I

Barbicane. asked they?" are "Where

and Terrified divan. the under cowering found was animals the of One
moment the until corner a in remained had it shock, first the by stunned
hunger. of feeling the with along voice its recovered had it

not retreat, the from came that sheepish, rather still Diana, was It
gracious most his with her encouraged Ardan Michel urging. without
words.

in noted be will destiny your child; my said--"come, he Diana," "Come,
god the to companion you made have would Pagans annals! cynegetic
being of worthy are You Roch! St. to friend Christians and Anubis,
gave Jupiter that puppy the like hell, of king the for bronze in carved
that efface will celebrity Your kiss! a of price the as Europa beautiful
through rushing are You heroes. Bernard St. and Montargis the of
dogs! Selenite of Eve the be perhaps, will, and space, interplanetary
God beginning the 'In saying, Toussenel's there up justify will You
Diana, Come, dog!' the him gave was, he weak how seeing and man, created
here!" come

plaintive uttering slowly, out came not, or flattered whether Diana,
moans.

Adam?" is where but Eve, see "I Barbicane. said "Good!"

somewhere. here is He off. far be "can't Ardan, Michel answered "Adam,"
Satellite!" here, Satellite! called! be must He

decided, was It moaning. continued Diana appear. not did Satellite But
before set was dish appetising an and wounded, not was she that however,
complaining. her stop to her

time long a search to obliged were They lost. seemed he Satellite, to As
the of compartments upper the of one in him discovering before
him hurled had rebound inexplicable rather a where projectile,
condition. pitiable a in was animal poor The violently.

danger!" in is acclimatisation "Our Michel. said devil!" "The

fractured been had head His lowered. carefully was dog unfortunate The
a such survive to him for difficult seemed it and roof, the against
he where cushion, a on stretched comfortably was he Nevertheless, shock.
once. sighed

your for responsible are "we Michel; said you," of care take will "We
Satellite." poor my of paw a than arm an lose rather would I existence.

it drank who animal, wounded the to water some offered he saying So
greedily.

earth the watched attentively travellers the bestowed, attentions These
a by terminated disc pale a like appeared only earth The moon. the and
volume its but evening, previous the of that than smaller crescent
perfect a forming gradually was which moon, the of that with compared
enormous. remained circle,

start not did we sorry really am "I Ardan; Michel said then "_Parbleu_!"
in was globe our when say, to is full--that her at was earth the when
sun!" the to opposition

Nicholl. asked "Why?"

new a under seas and continents our seen have should we "Because
darker, seas the rays, solar the under shining continents aspect--the
have to like should I world! the of maps certain upon figure they like
yet never has man of eye the which upon earth the of poles those seen
rested!"

the full been had earth the if "but Barbicane, answered daresay," "I
the amidst invisible say, to is new--that been have would moon
to want we goal the see to us for better is It sun. the of irradiation
from." started we place the than reach

when besides, "and Nicholl; Captain answered Barbicane," right, are "You
long the during time of plenty have shall we moon the reached have we
like men harbours that globe the leisure at consider to nights lunar
us."

us like more not are they now "But Ardan. Michel cried us!" like "Men
us by peopled world new a of inhabitants are We Selenites. the than
man a is Barbicane and Barbicane, like man a am I projectile! alone--the
the are we and ends, humanity us of outside and us Beyond Nicholl. like
simple become we moment the until microcosm this of population only
Selenites."

captain. the replied hours," eighty-eight about "In

Ardan. Michel asked means?" "Which

Nicholl. answered eight," half-past is it "That

why reason a of shadow the find to fail "I Michel, answered well," "Very
_illico_." breakfast not should we

without it in live not could star new the of inhabitants the fact, In
of laws imperious the to submitted then stomachs their and eating,
himself declared Frenchman, of quality his in Ardan, Michel hunger.
gas The him. with disputed one no that function important an cook, chief
the and purposes, cooking for heat of degrees necessary the gave
banquet. first this of elements the furnished provision-locker

the to due broth, excellent of cups three with began breakfast The
prepared tablets, Liebig precious three of water hot in liquefaction
of slices Some ruminants. Pampas the of morsels choicest the from
tender as press, hydraulic the by compressed them, succeeded beefsteak
Paris the of butchers the from come just had they if as succulent and
even were they it have would man, imaginative an Michel, Anglais. Caf
rosy.

amiable the as ones," natural the than "fresher vegetables, Preserved
of cups some by followed were and meat, the succeeded observed, Michel
beverage, This fashion. American butter, and bread of slices and tea
which of quality, first the of tea from made was excellent, pronounced
the of disposition the at cases some put had Russia of Emperor the
travellers.

bottle fine a out ferreted Ardan meal, the to ending worthy a as Lastly,
compartment. provision the in be to "happened" that burgundy "Nuits" of
satellite. her and earth the of union the to it drank friends three The

of hill-sides the upon distilled had it wine generous the if as And
feast. the in help to determined was sun the enough, not were Burgundy
by cast shadow of cone the from emerged moment that at projectile The
lower the upon directly fell rays sun's the and globe, terrestrial the
moon the of orbit the which angle the of account on bullet, the of disc
earth. the of that with makes

Ardan. Michel exclaimed sun!" "The

it." expected "I Barbicane; answered course," "Of

space into earth the by thrown shadow of cone "the Michel, said "But,"
moon." the beyond extends

into refraction atmospheric the take not do you if beyond "Much
shadow that in enveloped is moon the when "But Barbicane. said account,"
the and earth, the sun, bodies--the heavenly three the of centres the
moon full the with coincide nodes the Then line. straight a in moon--are
eclipse an during started had we therefore, If, eclipse. an is there and
dark, the in accomplished been have would journey our all moon the of
pity." a been have would which

"Why?"

bathed projectile, our void, the in journeying are we although "Because,
there therefore heat; and light their gather will rays, solar the in
way." every in economy precious a gas, of economy be will

there which of brilliancy and temperature the rays, these under fact, In
if as warmed and lighted was projectile the soften, to atmosphere no was
sun the and above moon The summer. to winter from passed suddenly had it
rays. their with it inundated below

Nicholl. said now," here pleasant is "It

soil vegetable little a "With Ardan. Michel cried you!" believe "I
twenty-four in peas green grow could we planet aluminium our over spread
will bullet our of walls the that is that fear, one only have I hours.
melt."

Barbicane. answered friend," worthy my yourself, alarm not need "You
was it while temperature higher much a supported projectile "The
looked it if wonder even not should I atmosphere. the through travelling
meteor." fiery a like spectators the of eyes the to

roasted!" are we think must Maston J.T. "Then

It not. are we that "is Barbicane, answered at," astonished am I "What
foresee." not did we danger a was

simply. Nicholl answered it," feared "I

Michel cried captain!" sublime it, about anything say not did you "And
hand. companion's his shaking Ardan,

projectile the in arrangements his making was Barbicane meantime the In
the that remembered be will It it. leave to going never was he though as
twelve was It square. feet fifty-four was vehicle arial the of base
much not was It interior. the in up fitted admirably and high, feet
in all were which utensils, travelling and instruments the by encumbered
three its to movement of liberty some left it and places, special
bear could floor the of part a into let glass thick The inhabitants.
walked companions his and Barbicane impunity. with weight considerable
it struck which sun, the but floor; solid a upon as well as it upon
from projectile the of interior the lighting rays, its with directly
light. of effects singular produced below,

provision and water the of state the examining by began They
the to thanks damaged, least the in not were They receptacles.
and abundant, were provisions The shock. the deaden to taken precautions
case in precaution this took Barbicane food. year's one for sufficient
moon. the of part barren absolutely an upon arrive should projectile the
to according But months. two for brandy and water enough only was There
and low dense a had moon the astronomers, of observations latest the
and streams there and valleys, deepest its in least at atmosphere, thick
would explorers adventurous the Therefore fail. not could watercourses
year first the and journey, the during thirst or hunger from suffer not
continent. lunar the upon installation their of

all offered also projectile the of interior the in air of question The
oxygen, produce to destined apparatus, Regnault and Reiset The security.
It months. two for potash of chlorate enough with furnished was
keep to obliged was it for gas, of quantity large a consumed necessarily
also. that of abundance was there But 100. to up matter productive the
At automatically. worked It after. looking little wanted apparatus The
of chlorine into changed potash of chlorate the temperature high that
pounds eighteen The contained. it oxygen the all out gave and potassium,
for necessary oxygen of pounds seven the out gave potash of chlorate of
travellers. three the of consumption daily the

acid carbonic the consumed; oxygen the renew to enough not was it But
last the for Now absorbed. be also must expiration by produced gas
this with loaded become had bullet the of atmosphere the hours twelve
blood of elements the of combustion the of product the gas, deleterious
the of state this perceived Nicholl lungs. the into taken oxygen the by
acid carbonic fact, In painfully. palpitate Diana seeing by air
the in noticed be to one the with identical phenomenon a gas--through
by projectile the of bottom the at Grotto--accumulated Dog's famous
therefore down, low was head whose Diana, Poor weight. its of reason
Nicholl Captain But masters. her before it from suffered necessarily
the of floor the on placed He things. of state this remedy to haste made
shook he which potash caustic containing receptacles several projectile
carbonic of greedy very is which matter, this and time, some for about
air. interior the purified thus and it, absorbed completely acid,

and thermometers The begun. then was instruments the of inventory An
thermometer minimum a of exception the with undamaged, were barometers
of out taken was aneroid excellent An broken. was which of glass the
upon acted only was it course Of wall. the upon hung and box padded its
it but projectile; the inside air the of pressure the indicated and by
its moment that At contained. it moisture of quantity the indicated also
fair." "set at was It 25.08. and 25.24 between oscillated needle

It intact. found were which compasses, several brought had Barbicane
needles their circumstances those under that understood easily be will
the at fact, In direction. constant any without random, at acting were
not could pole magnetic the earth the from was projectile the distance
compasses, these But apparatus. the upon action sensible any exercise
case any In phenomena. particular show might disc, lunar the upon taken
like satellite, earth's the whether verify to interesting be would it
influence. magnetical to submitted herself, earth the

sextant a mountains, lunar the of altitude the measure to hypsometer A
for instrument an theodolite, a sun, the of height the take to
these approached--all moon the as used be to telescopes surveying,
condition, good in found and inspected carefully were instruments
shock. initial the of violence the notwithstanding

which tools--of different and spades, utensils--pickaxes, the to As
of kinds various of sacks the collection, special a made had Nicholl
into transplanting upon counted Ardan Michel which shrubs the and grain,
the of corners upper the in places their in were they soil, Selenite
prodigal the which granary, of sort a made was There projectile.
the and known, little very was it in was What filled. had Frenchman
up climbed he time to time From anybody. enlighten not did fellow merry
inspection the store-room, this to walls the in riveted cramp-irons the
re-arranged, and arranged He himself. to reserved had he which of
the all singing boxes, mysterious certain into rapidly hand his plunged
the enliven to song French old some tune of out very voice a in time
situation.

fireworks other and rockets his that interest with noticed Barbicane
they loaded, powerfully for, important, were These damaged. not were
when would, projectile the which with speed the slacken to meant were
attraction, neutral of point the passing after moon the by attracted
rapid less times six be would besides fall This surface. her upon fall
the to thanks earth, the of surface the upon been have would it than
bodies. two the in volume of difference

all they Then satisfaction. general in therefore, ended, inspection The
lower and lateral the at observation of posts their to returned
port-lights.

the of extent the All them. before spread was spectacle same The
marvellous of constellations and stars with swarmed sphere celestial
like sun, the side one On wild! astronomer an make to enough brilliancy,
the of background dark the upon shone furnace, fiery a of mouth the
seemed fires, his back reflecting moon, the side other the On heavens.
in hole a like spot, large a Then world. starry the amidst motionless
the was silver--it of thread slight a by still bordered firmament, the
from and snow-flakes, large like masses nebulous there and Here earth.
of dust impalpable an of formed ring, immense an nadir to zenith
the of star a as counts only sun the which amidst way milky stars--that
magnitude! fourth

of new, so spectacle a off eyes their take not could spectators The
suggested! it reflections What idea. any give could description no which
begin to wished Barbicane soul! the in aroused it emotions unknown What
he and impressions, these of empire the under journey his of recital the
his of beginning the signalised that events the all hourly down noted
rather and large his in tranquilly wrote He enterprise.
handwriting. commercial-looking

of formulae the over looked Nicholl calculating the time that During
dexterity. unparalleled with figures at away worked and trajectories,
to much, answer not did who Barbicane, to sometimes talked Ardan Michel
his understand not did who Diana, to and hear, not did who Nicholl,
and going answers, and questions making himself, to lastly and theories,
leaning sometimes details, thousand a with himself occupying coming,
the of heights the in roosting sometimes port-light, lower the over
the represented he microcosm this In time. the all singing projectile,
represented. worthily was it and loquacity, and agitation French

of lapse correct--the not is expression the rather--for or day, The
supper copious a by ended earth--was upon day a makes which hours twelve
of confidence the shake to nature a of incident No prepared. carefully
of sure already and hope of full so, happened, had travellers the
a at projectile, the whilst peacefully, sleep to went they success,
heavens. the in way its made speed, increasing uniformly




IV. CHAPTER

ALGEBRA. LITTLE A


"night" word the speaking, Correctly incident. without passed night The
sun the to regard in projectile the of position The one. improper an is
bullet, the of bottom the on day was it Astronomically change. not did
words two these recital this in therefore, When, top. the on night and
setting and rising the between time of lapse the express they used are
earth. upon sun the of

because, peaceful more the much so was sleep travellers' The
absolutely seemed projectile the speed, excessive its notwithstanding
However space. through journey its indicated movement No motionless.
sensible any produce cannot it effected, be may place of change rapidly
the when or void, the in place takes it when organism the upon effect
inhabitant What body. travelling the with along circulates air of mass
of rate the at along him carries which speed the perceives earth the of
more felt not is circumstances such under Movement hour? an miles 68,000
repose in is body a When it. to indifferent is object Every repose. than
in When movement. in it puts force foreign some until so remains it
This road. its in not were obstacle some if stop never would it movement
inertia. is repose or movement to indifference

themselves imagine therefore, could, companions his and Barbicane
The projectile. the of interior the in up shut motionless, absolutely
the on themselves placed had they if same the been have would effect
earth the and them, above larger grew which moon, the Without outside.
a in suspended were they sworn have would they below, smaller grew that
stagnation. complete

but joyful a by awakened were they December, of 3rd the morning, That
their of interior the in cock a of crowing the was It noise. unexpected
vehicle.

the of top the to climbed he up; get to first the was Ardan Michel
case. partly-open a closed and projectile

plan!" my spoil will animal "That whisper. a in he said quiet," "Be

awoke. Barbicane and Nicholl meantime the In

Nicholl. said cock?" a that "Was

with you awake to wished "I quickly. Michel answered friends," my "No,
sound." rural that

done have would which cock-a-doodle-do a to vent gave he saying So
gallinaceans. of proudest the to honour

laughing. help not could Americans two The

his at suspiciously looking Nicholl, said that," accomplishment fine "A
companion.

Gallic. very is It country. my in common joke "a Michel, answered "Yes,"
society." best the in it perpetrate We

conversation-- the turning Then

night?" all about thinking been have I what know you do "Barbicane,

president. the answered "No,"

how remarked already have You Cambridge. at friends our "About
impossible therefore, it, find I mathematics. of am I ignorant admirably
what calculate could observatory the of _savants_ our how guess to
the leaving on with endowed be to ought projectile the velocity initial
moon." the reach to order in Columbiad

point neutral that reach to order "in Barbicane, replied mean," "You
this beyond for equal; are attractions lunar and terrestrial the where
fall will projectile the distance, the of 0.9 about at situated point,
merely." weight own its of virtue by moon the upon

the calculate they did how more; once "but Michel; answered well," "Very
velocity?" initial

Barbicane. said easier," is "Nothing

Ardan. Michel asked yourself?" calculation the made have you could "And

from notice the if it determined have could I and Nicholl "Certainly;
trouble." the us saved not had observatory the

head, my off cut sooner might "they Michel, answered fellow," old "Well,
problem!" that solve me made have than feet, my with beginning

tranquilly. Barbicane replied algebra," know not do you "Because

explained have you think You _x_! in dealers you like just that's "Ah,
'algebra.'" said have you when everything

without forge to possible it think you "do Barbicane, replied "Michel,"
ploughshare?" a without plough to or hammer, a

difficult." be would "It

good a and hammer, a or plough a like tool a is algebra then, "Well,
it." use to how knows who one any for tool

"Seriously?"

"Quite."

me?" before tool that use you "Could

you." interest would it "If

our of speed initial the calculated they how me show you could "And
vehicle?"

the of elements the all account into taking By friend. worthy my "Yes,
the of centre the to earth the of centre the from distance the problem,
volume the and earth the of volume the earth, the of radius the of moon,
the of speed initial the what exactly determine can I moon, the of
formula." simple very a by that and be, to ought projectile

formula." the me "Show

by traced really curve the you give not will I Only it. see shall "You
their account into taking by moon, the and earth the between bullet the
bodies both consider will I No. sun. the round translation of movement
us." for sufficient be will that and motionless, be to

"Why?"

problem 'the called problem the solve to seeking be would that "Because
far yet not is calculus integral the which for bodies,' three the of
advanced." enough

have mathematics "then tone; bantering a in Ardan Michel said "Indeed,"
word." last their said not

Barbicane. answered not," "Certainly

further calculus integral the pushed have Selenites the Perhaps "Good!
calculus?" integral the is what By-the-bye, you! than

Barbicane answered calculus," differential the of inverse the is "It
seriously.

obliged." "Much

finished seek you which by calculus a is it otherwise, speak "To
quantities." differential the know you what of quantities

air. satisfied quite a with Barbicane answered least," at clear is "That

and pencil, a and paper of piece a "for Barbicane, continued now," "And
formula." required the found have will I half-an-hour in

looked Nicholl whilst work, his in absorbed became Barbicane said, That
companion. his to breakfast preparing of care the leaving space, into

showed head, his raising Barbicane, before elapsed not had Half-an-hour
the which amidst signs, algebraical with covered page a Ardan Michel
discernible:-- was formula general following

r r m' r 2 2 1
} ---) - --- ( --- + 1 - --- { gr = ) v - (v -
d-r d-x m x 0 2

Michel. asked mean?" that does what "And

zero _v_ minus _v_ of half the "that Nicholl, answered means," "That
prime _m_ plus 1 minus _x_ upon _r_ by multiplied _gr_ equals square
minus _d_ upon _r_ minus _x_, minus _d_ upon _r_ by multiplied _m_ upon
_r_--" minus _x_

Michel cried _p_" upon rearing and _z_ upon galloping _y_ upon "_X_
that, understand you say to mean you "Do laughing. out bursting Ardan,
captain?"

clearer." is "Nothing

want I and pikestaff, a as plain as is "it Ardan, Michel said "Then,"
more." nothing

you now and algebra, wanted "you Barbicane, said laugher," "Everlasting
ears." and head over it have shall

hung!" be rather would "I

was who Nicholl, said Barbicane," solution, good a appears "That
the of integral the is "It _connaisseur_. a like formula the examining
the us give will it that doubt not do I and viva,' 'vis of equation
result." desired

ten give would "I Michel. exclaimed understand!" to like should I "But
understand!" to life Nicholl's of years

square zero _v_ minus _v_ of half "The Barbicane. resumed listen," "Then
viva.'" 'vis the of demi-variation the us gives that formula the is

means?" that what understand Nicholl does and "Good;

so look that signs those "All captain. the answered Michel," "Certainly,
those for language logical most and clearest the form you to cabalistic
it." read to how know who

these of means by "that Michel, asked Nicholl," pretend, you do "And
can you ibis, Egyptian the than incomprehensible more hieroglyphics,
projectile?" the to give to necessary speed initial the find

could I formula that by even "and Nicholl; answered "Incontestably,"
journey." the of point any on at going is it speed what you tell always

honour?" of word your "Upon

"Yes."

president." our as clever as are you "Then

It done. has Barbicane what in consists difficulty the all Michel, "No,
conditions the all account into takes which equation an establish to is
requires and arithmetic, of question a only is rest The problem. the of
rules." four the of knowledge a but nothing

to able been never had who Ardan, Michel answered something," "That's
"A rule: the defined thus who and life, his in addition correct a make
results." various infinitely obtain can you which by puzzle, Chinese

the found have certainly would Nicholl that answered Barbicane Still
it. about thought he had formula

the it study I more the "for Nicholl, said should," I if know not do "I
it." find I correct marvellously more

see will you "and comrade, ignorant his to Barbicane said listen," "Now
signification." a have letters these all that

resigned. looking Michel, said listening," am "I

to earth the of centre the from distance the "is Barbicane, said "_d_,"
the calculate to centres the take must we for moon, the of centre the
attraction."

understand." I "That

earth." the of radius the is "_r_

admitted." radius; "_r_,

are We moon. the of that prime_ _m earth; the of volume the is "_m_
as bodies, attracting two the of volume the account into take to obliged
volume." the to proportion in is attraction the

that." understand "I

a by second a of end the at acquired speed the gravity, represents "_g_
clear?" that Is earth. the of surface the on falling body

Michel. answered stream!" mountain "A

the separates that distance variable the _x_ by represent I "Now
the velocity the _v_ by and earth, the of centre the from projectile
distance." that at has projectile

"Good."

the is equation the in figures which zero _v_ expression the "Lastly,
atmosphere." the from emerges it when possesses bullet the speed

from velocity the calculate to obliged were "you Nicholl, said "Yes,"
is departure at velocity the that before knew we because point, that
atmosphere." the from emerging upon velocity the of 3/2 to equal exactly

Michel. said more!" any understand "Don't

Barbicane. said simple," very is it "Yet

Michel. replied simple," very it find not do "I

terrestrial the of limit the reached projectile our when that means "It
velocity." initial its of one-third lost already had it atmosphere

that?" as much "As

will You atmosphere. the against friction by simply friend, my "Yes,
it resistance more the speed its greater the that understand easily
air." the from with meet would

_v_ your although it, understand I "and Michel, answered admit," I "That
a in nails like head my in about shake square zero _v_ your and two zero
sack."

we finish to now "And Barbicane. continued algebra," of effect "First
different these of quantity known numerical the find to going are
value." their out find say, to is expressions--that

Michel. answered first!" me finish will "You

have others the known; "are Barbicane, said expressions," these of "Some
calculated." be to

Nicholl. said those," calculate will "I

the under earth the of radius the is "_r_ Barbicane, resumed _r_," "And
the say, to is _d_--that departure, of point our Florida, of latitude
equals moon the of centre the to earth the of centre the from distance
radii--" terrestrial fifty-six

calculated. rapidly Nicholl

is perigee--that her at is moon the when metres 356,720,000 makes "That
earth." the to nearest is she when say, to

say, to is _m_--that upon prime _m_ "now Barbicane, said well," "Very
1/81." equals earth the of that to volume moon's the of proportion the

Michel. said "Perfect,"

it whence From metres. 9-1/81 Florida to is gravity, the _g_, "And
equals--" _gr_ that results

metres," square thousand twenty-six and hundred four million "Sixty-two
Nicholl. answered

Ardan. Michel asked next?" "What

the find to going am I figures, to reduced are expressions the that "Now
projectile the that velocity the say, to is zero_--that _v velocity
equal of point the reach to atmosphere the leaving on have to ought
equal make I point that at velocity The velocity. no with attraction
be will is, point neutral the where distance the _x_, and _zero_,
that distance the say, to is _d_--that of nine-tenths the by represented
centres." two the separates

Michel. said so," be to ought it that idea vague some have "I

equals _v_ and _d_, of nine-tenths equals _x_ have, then shall "I
become--" will formula my and _zero_,

paper-- the on rapidly wrote Barbicane

r 10r 1 10r 2
} ---) - --- ( --- --- - 1 { gr 2 = v
d-r d 81 9d 0

quickly. it read Nicholl

cried. he it!" is that it! "That's

Barbicane. asked clear?" it "Is

Nicholl. answered fire!" of letters in written is "It

Michel. murmured fellows!" "Clever

Barbicane. asked now?" understand you "Do

it." with bursting is head "My Ardan. Michel cried understand!" I "If

by multiplied _gr_ 2 equals square zero_ "_v Barbicane, resumed "Thus,"
minus _d_ upon _r_ 10 by multiplied 1/81 minus _d_ 9 upon _r_ 10 minus 1
_r_." minus _d_ upon _r_

bullet the of velocity the obtain to order "in Nicholl, said now," "And
calculate." to only have I atmosphere the from emerges it as

to began difficulties, all overcome to used man a like captain, The
grew multiplications and Divisions rapidity. frightful with calculate
with him followed Barbicane page. the dotted Figures fingers. his under
two his with headache coming a compressed Ardan Michel whilst eyes, his
hands.

minutes' several after Barbicane asked it?" make you do what "Well,
silence.

second." first the in metres 11,051 it make "I

starting. Barbicane, said say?" you do "What

metres." fifty-one and thousand "Eleven

despair. of gesture a with president the cried "Malediction!"

surprised. much Ardan, Michel asked you?" with matter the "What's

diminished already was velocity the moment this at if why matter! "The
been--" have to ought speed initial the friction, by one-third

answered metres!" seventy-six and hundred five thousand "Sixteen
Nicholl.

enough were metres 11,000 that declared Observatory Cambridge the "But
only!" velocity that with started bullet our and departure, at

Nicholl. asked "Well?"

enough!" not was it "Why

"No."

point." neutral the reach not shall "We

devil!" "The

way!" half go even not shall "We

the if as up jumping Ardan, Michel exclaimed boulet_!" d'un "_Nom
globe. terrestrial the against striking of point the on were projectile

earth!" the upon back fall shall we "And




V. CHAPTER

SPACE. OF TEMPERATURE THE


such expected have could Who thunderbolt. a like acted revelation This
went Nicholl it. believe not would Barbicane calculation? in error an
had which formula The correct. were They again. figures the over
the verified, when and, mistrusted, be not could them established
neutral the attaining for necessary metres, 16,576 of velocity initial
right. quite found was point,

about thought one No silence. in another one at looked friends three The
and brow, contracted teeth, set with Barbicane, that. after breakfast
Nicholl port-light. the through looked closed, convulsively fists
murmured-- Ardan Michel calculations. his examined and arms his folded

give would I do! always they way the That's _savants_! like just "That's
it, crush and Observatory Cambridge the upon fall to pistoles twenty
inside!" staff stupid its all with

at Barbicane struck which reflection a made captain the once at All
once.

been have we so morning, the in o'clock seven is "it he, said "Why,"
we and way, half than more come have We road. the on hours thirty-two
of!" know I that yet falling not are

he captain the at glance rapid a after but answer, not did Barbicane
the of distance angular the measure to used he which compass, a took
very a made he port-light lower the through Then globe. terrestrial
Then projectile. the of immobility apparent the from observation exact
some down put he brow, his from perspiration the wiping and rising
out find to wished president the that saw Nicholl paper. upon figures
bullet the of distance the diameter terrestrial the of length the from
anxiously. him at looked He earth. the from

We falling! not are "we time, minutes' few a in Barbicane cried "No!"
the passed have We earth! the from leagues 50,000 than more already are
only been had speed its if at stopped have to ought projectile the point
ascending!" still are We departure! our at metres 11,000

our that conclude must we "so Nicholl; answered evident," is "That
of lbs. 400,000 the of propulsion the under velocity, initial
to explain now can I metres. 11,000 the than greater was gun-cotton,
more at gravitates that satellite, second the with met we why myself
minutes." thirteen than less in earth, the from leagues 2,000 than

Barbicane, added probable," more the much so is explanation "That
the partitions movable our in water the out throwing by "because
once." at all lighter considerably made was projectile

Nicholl. said true," is "That

saved!" are "we Barbicane, cried Nicholl," brave my "Ah,

saved, are we "as tranquilly, Ardan Michel answered then," well "Very
breakfast." have us let

greater been happily had speed initial The mistaken. not was Nicholl
Cambridge the but Observatory, Cambridge the by indicated that than
mistaken. been less no had Observatory

and table to down sat alarm, false their from recovered travellers, The
Their more. talked they much ate they Though merrily. breakfasted
incident." "algebra the after greater was confidence

not we should "Why Ardan. Michel repeated succeed?" not we should "Why
no and us, before obstacles no are there road; the on are We arrive?
to has that ship a of that than free--freer is It route. our on stones
a if Now it! against wind the with balloon a or sea, the with struggle
why pleases, it where ascend balloon a or pleases, it where go can ship
at?" aimed was it goal the reach projectile our not should

Barbicane. said it," reach will "It

only "the Ardan, Michel added nation," American the honour to only "If
that one only succeed--the enterprise an such making of capable nation
now it, of think I now Ah! Barbicane! President a produced have could
as be shall We us? of become will what over, are anxieties our all that
water." stagnant as dull

repudiation. of gestures made Nicholl and Barbicane

only have "You Ardan. Michel resumed friends," my this, foresaw I "But
your at dominoes and cards, backgammon, chess, have I word. the say to
billiard-table!" a want only We disposition.

those?" as trifles such bring you "did Barbicane, asked "What?"

in also but amusement, our for only "not Michel; answered "Certainly,"
inns." Selenite upon them bestowing of intention praiseworthy the

inhabitants its inhabited is moon the "if Barbicane, said friend," "My
it for earth, the of those before years of thousands some appeared
therefore, If, earth. the than older is moon the that doubted be cannot
brains their centuries--if of thousands for existed have Selenites the
we that all invented have beings--they human of that like organised are
lapse the in invent only shall we what even and already, invented, have
have shall we and us, from learn to nothing have will They centuries. of
them." from learn to everything

like artists had have they think you "do Michel, answered "What!"
Raphael?" or Angelo, Michael Phidias,

"Yes."

Hugo?" and Lamartine, Milton, Virgil, Homer, like "Poets

it." of sure am "I

Kant?" and Descartes, Aristotle, Plato, like "Philosophers

it." of doubt no have "I

Newton?" and Pascal, Euclid, Archimedes, like "_Savants_

it." swear could "I

like--Nadar?" photographers and Arnal, like "Clowns

it." of certain am "I

and we, as learned as are Selenites these if Barbicane, friend "Then,
the as far as projectile lunar a hurled not they have why so, more even
regions?" terrestrial

seriously. Barbicane answered it?" done not have they says "Who

us, to than them to easier been have would "it Nicholl, added fact," "In
times six is attraction the because first reasons--the two for that and
which earth, the of surface the on than moon the of surface the on less
projectile the secondly easily; more up go to projectile a allow would
would which 80,000, of instead travel to leagues 8,000 have only would
less." times ten propulsion of force a require

it?" done not they have repeat--why "I Michel, resumed "Then,"

it?" done not have they says repeat--who "I Barbicane, replied I," "And

"When?"

earth." upon appearance man's before ago, centuries of "Hundreds

bullet!" the see to ask I bullet? the is Where bullet? the "And

our of five-sixths covers sea "the Barbicane, answered friend," "My
lunar the that supposing for reasons good five are there hence globe,
the of bottom the at submerged now is fired, been has it if projectile,
epoch the at abyss some down buried was it unless Pacific, or Atlantic
formed." sufficiently not was crust earth's the when

I and everything, to answer an have "you Michel, answered fellow," "Old
believe rather would I hypothesis one is There wisdom. your before bow
are we than older being Selenites the that is that and others, the than
all." at gunpowder invented not have and wiser,

sonorous a by conversation the in share her claimed Diana moment that At
breakfast. her for asked She bark.

and Diana forget us make arguments "our Ardan, Michel said "Ah!"
Satellite!"

it devoured who dog, the to offered immediately was food of dish good A
appetite. great with

this made have to ought "we Michel, said Barbicane," know, you "Do
the all of couple a taken have and Ark, Noah's of sort a projectile
moon." the to us with animals domestic

room had have not should we "but Barbicane, answered doubt," "No
enough."

tighter!" little a packed been have might we "Oh,

horses, and bulls, cows, oxen, "that Nicholl, answered is," fact "The
continent. lunar the on useful be would ruminants those all
a or stable a either projectile our make cannot we Unfortunately
cowshed."

ass, an brought have might "we Ardan, Michel said least," at "But
Silenus old animal patient and courageous the ass, little a but nothing
least the are They asses! poor those of fond am I exhibit. to loved
their during beaten only not are They creation. in animals favoured
death!" their after beaten still are but lifetime,

Barbicane. asked that?" by mean you do "What

of?" drums make to skin his use they don't "Why,

reflection. absurd this at laughing help not could Nicholl and Barbicane
over bending was he them; stopped companion merry their from cry a But
saying-- up rose and niche, Satellite's

ill." longer no is Satellite "Good!

Nicholl. said "Ah!"

tone, pitiful a in added he Now," dead. is "he Michel, resumed "No!"
will you that Diana, poor fear, much very I embarrassing! be will "this
regions!" lunar the in race your of any leave not

He wounds. his survive to able been not had Satellite unfortunate The
looked countenance, of out put much Ardan, Michel dead. stone dead, was
friends. his at

dead the keep can't "We Barbicane. said difficulty," another makes "This
hours." eight-and-forty another for us with dog this of body

hung are port-lights our "but Nicholl, answered not," certainly "No,
throw and them, of one open will We down. let be can They hinges. upon
space." into body the

said-- then and minutes, few a for reflected president The

minute most the take must we but do, must we what is that "Yes,
precautions."

Michel. asked "Why?"

"The Barbicane. answered you," to explain will I that reasons two "For
lose must we which of projectile, the in air the to reference has first
possible." as little as

air!" the renew can we "But

we by-the-bye, and, Michel; oxygen, the renew only can We entirely. "Not
in oxygen this with us furnish not do apparatus the that careful be must
grave cause would it of excess an for quantity, immoderate an
we oxygen the renew can we although But consequences. physiological
and absorb, not do lungs the which medium that azote, the renew cannot
the if escape rapidly would azote the Now intact. remain to ought which
opened." were port-lights

out." Satellite poor throw to necessary time the just "Not

quickly." it do must we but "Agreed;

Michel. asked reason?" second the is what "And

is which cold, exterior the allow not must we that is reason second "The
frozen be should we lest projectile our into penetrate to excessive,
alive."

sun--" the "Still

does it but rays, its absorbs it because projectile our warms sun "The
more no is there air no is there When now. in are we void the warm not
reach not do rays sun's the where and light, diffused is there than heat
that only is outside temperature The cold. and dark both is it directly
the as same the say, to is stars--that the of radiation the by produced
to were sun the day one if be would globe terrestrial the of temperature
extinguished." be

Nicholl. answered that," of fear "No

not be sun the that supposing even "And Ardan. Michel said knows?" "Who
from away farther move will earth the that happen might it extinguished,
it."

ideas!" Michel's of one "that's Nicholl; said "Good!"

went earth the 1861 in that known well is "it Michel, resumed "Well,"
power a with comet a was there suppose Now comet. a of tail the through
might globe terrestrial the sun, the of that than greater attraction of
its become would earth the and star, wandering the towards curve a make
of rays the that distance a such to away dragged be would and satellite,
surface." its on action no have would sun the

consequences the "but Barbicane, answered certainly," happen might "That
suppose." would you as redoubtable so be not would

so?" "How

our upon balanced well pretty be still would cold and heat "Because
by away carried been had earth the if that calculated been has It globe.
greatest its at when felt, have only would it 1861, of comet the
us to sent that than greater times sixteen heat a sun, the from distance
produces lens, strongest the by focussed when which, heat moon--a the by
effect." appreciable no

Michel. said "Well?"

its at that calculated been has "It Barbicane. answered little," a "Wait
heat a borne have would earth the sun, the to nearest when perihelion,
of capable heat, this But summer. of that times 28,000 to equal
have would water, evaporating of and matters, terrestrial vitrifying
excessive the lessened have would which clouds of circle thick a formed
aphelion the of cold the between compensation be would there hence heat,
supportable." probably average an and perihelion, the of heat the and

the of temperature the estimate they do degrees of number what "At
space?" planetary

temperature this that believed was "it Barbicane, answered "Formerly,"
was it diminution thermometric its calculating By low. exceedingly was
Michel's of one Fourier, was It zero. below degrees of millions at fixed
who Sciences_, des _Acadmie the of _savant_ illustrious an countrymen,
the him, to According estimation. juster a to numbers these reduced
Centigrade." 60 than lower get not does space of temperature

whistled. Michel

Barbicane, answered regions," polar the of temperature the about is "It
zero." below Centigrade 56 Reliance--about Fort or Island Melville "at

mistaken not was Fourier "that Nicholl, said proved," be to remains "It
M. Frenchman, another mistaken, not am I If calculations. his in
We zero. below 160 at space of temperature the estimates Pouillet,
that." verify to able be shall

directly striking rays solar the "for Barbicane, answered now," "Not
elevated very a contrary, the on us, give would thermometer our upon
a nights, the during moon, the upon get we when But temperature.
shall we alternately, endures faces its of each which long, fortnight
the in moves satellite our for experiment, the make to leisure have
void."

void?" absolute it "is Michel; asked void?" the by mean you do "What

air." of void absolutely is "It

place?" its in nothing there "Is

Barbicane. answered ether," "Yes,

ether?" is what and "Ah!

which, particles, imponderable of agglomeration an is friend, my "Ether,
as other each from removed far as are dimensions, their to relatively
It physics. molecular on works say so space, in are bodies celestial the
heat and light produce movement vibrating their by that atoms these is
second." a oscillations of billions thirty and hundred four making by

have _savants_ "then Ardan; Michel exclaimed millions!" of "Millions
friend figures, these All oscillations! these counted and measured
nothing say but ear the reach which figures, _savants'_ are Barbicane,
mind." the to

figures." to recourse have to obliged are they "But

An nothing. signifies billion A compare. to better much be would It "No.
that me tell you Example--When everything. explains comparison of object
larger, times 900 Saturn earth, the than larger times 76 is Uranus
not am I larger, times 1,300,000 sun the larger, times 1,300 Jupiter
_Double the of comparisons old the prefer much I So wiser. much
in feet two pumpkin a is sun 'The you, tells simply that Ligoise_
large a Neptune apple, Blenheim a Saturn orange, an Jupiter diameter,
pea, green a Venus pea, a earth the cherry, smaller a Uranus cherry,
Juno, and mustard, of grain a Mercury pin, large a of head the Mars
it what know I Then sand!' of grains fine Pallas and Vesta, Ceres,
means!"

their and _savants_ against Ardan's Michel of tirade this After
set they breath, take to stopping without delivered he which billions,
sailors like space into thrown be to was He Satellite. burying about
sea. the into corpse a throw

to as so quickly act to had they recommended, had Barbicane President As
port-hole right-hand the upon bolts The possible. as air little as lose
made, yard a half about of opening an and unscrewed, carefully were
by worked window, The space. into dog his hurl to prepared Michel whilst
interior the in air of pressure the conquered which lever, powerful a
Satellite and hinges, its upon moved projectile, the of sides the upon
operation the and escaped, air of particle a Scarcely out. thrown was
all of rid get to fear not did Barbicane on later that well so succeeded
way. same the in vehicle the encumbered that rubbish useless the




VI. CHAPTER

ANSWERS. AND QUESTIONS


the reckoning, terrestrial by a.m. 5 at December, of 4th the On
They journey. their on hours fifty-four been having awoke, travellers
time the half than more minutes forty and hours five been only had
more come had they but journey, their of accomplishment the for assigned
their to due was peculiarity This distance. the of seven-tenths than
speed. regularly-decreasing

it bottom, the at port-light the through earth the at looked they When
or crescent No rays. sun's the in drowned spot black a like looked only
would earth the midnight at day next The seen. be to now was light pale
the Above, full. be would moon the when moment precise the at new be
to as so projectile, the by followed line the nearing was Night of Queen
studded was vault dark the around All indicated. hour the at it meet
great the through but slowly; move to seemed which specks brilliant with
much. alter to seem not did size relative their at were they distance
The earth. the from do they as exactly appeared stars the and sun The
powerful very not travellers' the but enlarged; considerably was moon
on observations useful very make to them allow yet as not did telescopes
details. geological or topographical the reconnoitre to or surface, her

especially was talk The conversations. interminable in by went time The
knowledge. particular of contingent his brought Each moon. the about
always Ardan's Michel serious, always were Nicholl's and Barbicane's
incidents the direction, and situation its projectile, The fanciful.
the upon fall its by necessitated precautions the arise, might that
conjecture. for material inexhaustible afforded this all moon,

projectile the to relative Michel's of question a breakfasting Whilst
being of worthy one and Barbicane, from answer curious rather a provoked
recorded.

endowed still whilst stopped suddenly be to bullet the supposing Michel,
the what know to wished velocity, initial formidable its with
been. have would consequences

have could projectile the how see don't "I Barbicane, answered "But,"
stopped." been

Nicholl. answered it," suppose us let "But

president, practical the replied supposition," impossible an is "It
speed its case that in But failed. had impulsion of force the "unless
abruptly." stopped have not would and decreased, gradually have would

space." in body some against struck had it that "Admit

body?" "What

met." we meteor enormous "The

a into broken been have would projectile "the Nicholl, said "Then,"
it." with we and pieces, thousand

alive." burnt been have should "we Barbicane, answered that," than "More

to just us for happen not did it regret "I Michel. exclaimed "Burnt!"
see."

is "It Barbicane. answered vengeance," a with seen have would you "And
is water when movement of modification a only is heat that known now
giving the means it--that to added is heat when say, to is heated--that
particles." its to movement of

Michel. said theory!" ingenious an is "That

phenomena the all explains it for friend, worthy my one, correct a "And
the of oscillation single a movement, molecular only is Heat caloric. of
what But stops. it train a on put is break the When body. a of particles
axles the grease they do Why it? animated which movement the of becomes
movement the from fire catching them prevent to order In wheels? the of
understand?" you Do transformation. by lost

running been have I when example, "For Michel. answered "Admirably,"
Simply stop? to forced I am why sweat, with covered am and time, some
heat." into transformed been has movement my because

Then Michel's. of _rpartie_ this at laughing help not could Barbicane
theory-- his resuming

our to happened have would it collision, a of case "in he, said "Thus,"
striking after cannon-ball metal the to does it as projectile
been had movement its because burning, fall would it armour-plate;
had bullet our if that affirm I consequence, In heat. into transformed
have would annihilated, suddenly speed, its asteroid, the against struck
vapour." into immediately it turn to enough heat produced

be to were earth the if happen would "what Nicholl, asked "Then,"
translation?" of movement her in stopped suddenly

Barbicane, answered point," a such to carried be would temperature "Her
vapour." to reduced immediately be would she "that

many simplify would world the ending of means "that Michel; said "Good,"
things."

Nicholl. said sun?" the upon fall to were earth the suppose "And

a develop would "that Barbicane, answered calculations," to "According
to volume in equal coal, of globes 1,600 by produced that to equal heat
globe." terrestrial the

"of Ardan, Michel replied sun," the for temperature of increase good "A
complain, not probably will Neptune or Uranus of inhabitants the which
planet." their on cold of dying be must they for

heat. produces stopped suddenly movement any friends, my then, "Thus,
an by fed constantly is sun the that supposed it makes theory This
calculated--" been has It surface. its upon bodies of fall incessant

coming." are figures "for Michel, murmured crushed," be shall I "Now

the "that imperturbably, Barbicane continued calculated," been has "It
of that to equal heat produce must sun the upon asteroid each of shock
volume." equal of coal of masses 4,000

Michel. asked sun?" the of heat the is what "And

coal of stratum a by produced be would which that to equal is "It
kilometres." twenty-seven of depth a to sun the surrounding

heat--" that "And

(A hour." an water of myriametres cubic of 2,900,000,000 boil "Could
1 miles 6 or miles, 6.2138 than more rather to equal is myriametre
poles.) 28 furlong

Michel. cried it?" by roasted not are we "And

absorbs atmosphere terrestrial the "because Barbicane, answered "No,"
intercepted heat of quantity the Besides, heat. solar the of four-tenths
total." the of millionth thousand two only is earth the by

our that "and Michel, replied best," the for is all that see "I
breathe, to us allows only not it for invention, useful a is atmosphere
roasting." us prevents actually but

the on same the be not will it unfortunately, "but, Nicholl, said "Yes,"
moon."

they inhabitants any are there "If confident. always Michel, said "Bah!"
enough left have surely will they any longer no are there If breathe.
it where ravines those of bottom the at only if people, three for oxygen
climb not shall we Well, weight! its of reason by accumulated have will
all." is That mountains! the

was which disc, lunar the at look to went up, getting Michel, And
brilliancy. intolerable with shining

there." up hot be must "it he, said "Faith!"

hours." 360 lasts daylight "that Nicholl, answered reckoning," "Without

said duration," same the has night compensation of way by "And
must temperature their radiation, by restored is heat as "and Barbicane,
space." planetary of that be

Nicholl. said truly!" country fine "A

to comical be will It already! there be to like should I mind! "Never
recognise to horizon, the on rise it see to moon, a for earth the have
America 'There's oneself, to say to continents, its of configuration the
of rays the in lost is it till it follow to then Europe;' there's and
eclipses?" any Selenites the have Barbicane, By-the-bye, sun! the

the of centres the "when Barbicane, answered sun," the of eclipses "Yes,
they But middle. the in earth the with line same the on are stars three
a like thrown earth, the which during eclipses, annular merely are
seen." be to part greater the allows disc, solar the across screen

cone the because it "Is Nicholl. asked eclipse?" total no there is "Why
moon?" the beyond extend not does earth the by thrown shade of

the by produced refraction the account into take not do you if "Yes,
account. into refraction that take do you if not atmosphere, terrestrial
apparent the _p_ and parallax horizontal the be _delta_ let Thus,
semidiameter--"

vulgar the speak Do square! zero _v_ of "half Michel, said "Ouf!"
algebra!" of man tongue,

mean "the Barbicane, answered language," popular in then, "Well,
radii, terrestrial sixty being earth the and moon the between distance
to reduced is refraction, of dint by shadow, of cone the of length the
the during that therefore, follows, It radii. forty-two than less
it sends sun the and shade, pure of cone the beyond is moon the eclipses
centre." its from rays also but edges, its from rays only not

when eclipse any there is "why tone, grumbling a in Michel said "Then,"
none?" be to ought there

the and refraction, the by weakened are rays solar the because "Solely
them." of part greater the extinguishes traverse they which atmosphere

for see shall we "besides, Michel; answered me," satisfies reason "That
the that believe you do Barbicane, Now, there. get we when ourselves
comet?" ancient an is moon

idea!" an "What

that of ideas few a have "I conceit, amiable with Michel, replied "Yes,"
kind."

Nicholl. answered Michel," with originate not does idea that "But

plagiarist." a only am I "Then

the of testimony the to "According Nicholl. answered doubt," "Without
the inhabited ancestors their that pretended Arcadians the ancients,
fact, this from Starting satellite. her became moon the before earth
day one orbit its which comet a was moon the think _savants_ certain
terrestrial by retained be to earth the to enough near brought
attraction."

Michel. asked hypothesis?" that in there is truth what "And

kept not has moon the that is proof the "and Barbicane, answered "None,"
comets." accompanies always that envelope gaseous the of trace a

earth's the becoming before moon, the not "might Nicholl, said "But,"
gaseous her all leave to sun the to enough near passed have satellite,
evaporation?" by substances

probable." not is it but Nicholl, friend might, "It

"Why?"

know." don't really I "Because--because,

know!" don't we what with fill might we volumes of hundreds what "Ah,
it?" is time "what continued, he say," I "But Michel. exclaimed

Nicholl. answered o'clock," "Three

like _savants_ of conversation the "in Michel, said goes," time the "How
am I that feel I learned! too getting myself feel I Decidedly us!
knowledge!" of well a becoming

order "in projectile, the of roof the to climbed Michel saying, So
his meanwhile the In pretended. he moon," the observe to better
port-light. lower the through space of vault the watched companions
signalise. to fresh nothing was There

port-light, lateral the approached he again down came Ardan Michel When
surprise. of exclamation an uttered suddenly and

Barbicane. asked now?" matter the is "What

sack flattened of sort a saw and glass the approached president The
This projectile. the from distance yards' some at outside floating
animated consequently was and bullet, the like motionless seemed object
movement. ascensional same the with

the of one it "Is Ardan. Michel said be?" machine that can "Whatever
of radius its in holds projectile our which space of corpuscles
moon?" the as far as it accompany will which and attraction,

specific the that "is Nicholl, answered at," astonished am I "What
bullet, the of that to superior certainly is which body, this of weight
level." its on rigorously so itself maintain to it allows

know not do "I reflection, moment's a after Barbicane, said "Nicholl,"
with level a on keeps it why perfectly know I but is, object that what
projectile." the

pray?" "Why,

is move--which or fall bodies where void the in floating are we "Because
be. may form or weight their whatever speed equal thing--with same the
weight. in differences creates resistance, its by which, air the is It
down throw you objects the tube, a in void create pneumatically you When
space in Here rapidity. same the with fall feathers, or lead either it,
effect." same the and cause same the have you

will projectile the of out throw we all "and Nicholl, said "True,"
moon." the to us accompany

Michel. cried are!" we fools what "Ah!

Barbicane. asked qualification?" this "Why

objects, useful with projectile the filled have to ought we "Because
and out, all them thrown have could We &c. tools, instruments, books,
why it, of think I now But, wake! our in followed have all would they
through space into go we can't Why this? outside walk a take we can't
ether, in suspended thus be to be would it delight What port-light? the
to wings their flap to forced are that birds than even favoured more
them!" sustain

breathe?" to we are how "but Barbicane, said "Agreed,"

inopportunely!" so fail to air "Confounded

of that to inferior being density your Michel, fail, not did it if "But
behind." remain soon would you projectile, the

circle." vicious a is it "Then

vicious." most is that "All

vehicle." our in imprisoned remain must we "And

must." we "Yes,

voice. formidable a in Michel cried "Ah!"

Nicholl. asked you?" with matter the is "What

broken a not is It is! asteroid pretended this what guess I know, "I
planet!" of piece

Nicholl. asked then?" it, is "What

husband!" Diana's is It dog! unfortunate our is "It

quite and nothing, to reduced object, deformed this fact, In
bagpipe a like flattened Satellite of body the was unrecognisable,
mounting! ever for mounting, and wind, without




VII. CHAPTER

INTOXICATION. OF MOMENT A


place took phenomenon logical yet strange logical, but curious a Thus
the of out thrown object Every conditions. singular these under
did. it when stop only and trajectory same the follow would projectile
not could evening whole the which conversation for text a furnished That
they as increased travellers three the of emotion The exhaust.
incidents, unforeseen expected They journey. their of end the approached
present under them astonished have would nothing and phenomena, fresh
projectile, the outdistanced imagination excited Their circumstances.
the But it. feeling their without notably diminished which of speed the
to only had they thought they and eyes, their before larger grew moon
it. touch to hands their out stretch

a.m. 5 at awake wide all were they December, of 5th the day, next The
were calculations the if journey their of last the be to was day That
the at hours, eighteen within midnight, at evening, same That exact.
The disc. brilliant her reach would they moon, full of moment precise
most the journey, their of goal the to them bring would midnight next
the through dawn, early At times. modern or ancient of one extraordinary
with Night of Queen the saluted they rays, her with silvery made windows
hurrah. joyful and confident a

few A firmament. starry the across majestically sailing was moon The
the where space in point precise that reach would she and degrees more
Barbicane observations, own his to According her. meet to was projectile
vast where hemisphere, northern her in her accost should he that thought
the if circumstance favourable rare--a are mountains and extend plains
deep in up stored opinion, received to according was, atmosphere lunar
only. places

landing for suitable more is plain "a Ardan, Michel observed "Besides,"
Mont of summit the on Europe in landed Selenite A mountain. a than upon
at precisely be not would Himalayas, the of peak a on Asia in or Blanc,
destination!" his

remain will projectile the plain a "on Nicholl, added more," is "What
a down roll would it whilst ground, the touched has it after motionless
come not should we squirrels not are we as and avalanche, an like hill
best." the for is all Therefore sound. and safe out

appeared longer no enterprise audacious the of success the fact, In
to wishing not but Barbicane; occupied reflection one Still doubtful.
it. upon silence kept he uneasy, companions two his make

proved hemisphere northern the towards projectile the of direction The
mathematically aim, The modified. slightly been had trajectory its that
the of centre very the into bullet the sent have to ought calculated,
had it because be would it there arrive not did it If disc. lunar
determine nor imagine not could Barbicane it? caused had What deviated.
He upon. go to datum no was there for deviation, this of importance the
the towards them take to be would result only the that however, hoped,
landing. for region suitable more a moon, the of edge upper

contented friends, his to anything saying without therefore, Barbicane,
the if see to trying moon, the observing frequently with himself
would situation the For change. not would projectile the of direction
dragged been aim, its missing bullet, the had terrible so been have
space. interplanetary into fallen and disc lunar the beyond

already disc, a like flat appearing of instead moon, the moment that At
the obliquely her reached had rays sun's the If convexity. her showed
They out. stand mountains high the made have would thrown then shadow
cut that furrows capricious the and craters gaping the seen have could
intense the in levelled was relief all But plains. immense the up
face human a of appearance the give that spots large Those brilliancy.
distinguishable. scarcely were moon the to

amiable the for sorry am I "but Ardan, Michel said face," a be may "It
freckled!" so is face her Apollo, of sister

watched ceaselessly goal their near so travellers the meantime the In
these over walks take them made imagination Their world. new this
to descended They peaks. elevated the climbed They countries. unknown
they thought they there and Here amphitheatres. large the of bottom the
rarefied, so atmosphere an under together kept scarcely seas vast saw
mountains. the from tribute their them poured that water of streams and
for orb this of noise the catch to hoped they abyss the over Leaning
void. the of solitudes the in mute ever

the down noted They remembrances. liveliest the them left day last This
they as them of possession took uneasiness vague A details. least
they if doubled been have would uneasiness This goal. their approached
to insufficient quite appeared It was. speed their slight how felt had
projectile the because was This journey. their of end the to them take
would and decreased, constantly weight Its anything. "weighed" scarcely
terrestrial and lunar the where line that on annihilated entirely be
effects. surprising causing other, each neutralise attractions

not did Ardan Michel preoccupations, his of spite in Nevertheless,
They punctuality. habitual his with meal morning the prepare to forget
by liquefied broth their than excellent more was Nothing heartily. ate
few A meats. preserved these than better Nothing gas. the of heat the
Ardan Michel caused and repast, the crowned wine French good of glasses
to ought sun, ardent this by warmed vines, lunar the that remark to
the way, Any existed. they if is, wines--that generous most the distil
some collection his in forget to not care taken had Frenchman far-seeing
counted he which upon d'Or, Cte and Mdoc the of cuttings precious
particularly.

precision. extreme with worked always apparatus Regnault and Reiset The
of particle a Not purity. perfect of state a in kept was air The
as that, oxygen, the to as and potash, the resisted acid carbonic
of amount small The quality." "first of was said, Nicholl Captain
dryness, its tempered and air this with mixed projectile the in humidity
not do theatres many and apartments York New or London, Paris, many and
well. so conditions hygienic fulfil certainly

going kept be to had apparatus this regularly work to order in But
tried regulators, escape the inspected Michel morning Each regularly.
gone had All gas. the of heat the pyrometer the by fixed and taps, the
began Maston, J.T. worthy the imitating travellers, the and far, so well
their if recognisable be not would they that stout so get to
a in chickens like behaved They months. several lasted imprisonment
fattened. cage--they

the of spectre the saw Barbicane lights port the through Looking
which projectile, the of out thrown objects different the and dog,
perceived she when lamentably howled Diana it. accompanied obstinately
they if as motionless as seemed things the All Satellite. of remains the
ground. solid upon rested had

had us of one if "that Ardan, Michel said friends," my know, you "Do
much been have should we departure at shock recoil the to succumbed
corpse accusing the see You him? of rid get to how to as embarrassed
remorse!" like space in us followed have would

Nicholl. said sad," been have would "That

a take to able being not our is regret I "what Michel, continued "Ah!"
ether, radiant this in float to be would it delight What outside. walk
of thought only had Barbicane If sun! the of rays pure these in bathe to
ventured have should I air-pumps and diving-dresses with us furnishing
summit the on flying-horse a of attitude the assumed have and outside,
projectile." the of

there stayed have not would "you Barbicane, answered fellow!" old "Ah,
by obus an like burst have would you diving-dress; your of spite in long
up goes that balloon a like rather or you, inside air of expansion the
moving are we while this: forget not do and nothing, regret So high. too
the of out promenade sentimental any without do must you void the in
projectile."

He measure. certain a in convinced be to himself allowed Ardan Michel
a was that "impossible;" not but difficult, was thing the that agreed
uttered. never he word

never and another, to subject this from passed conversation The
these under that friends three the to seemed It instant. an languished
warm first the in leaves like heads their into came ideas conditions
spring. of days

this during other each crossed that answers and questions the Amidst
solution. immediate an get not did that one asked Nicholl morning,

shall how but moon, the to go to well very all is "it he, said say," "I
again?" back get we

gravely. Barbicane asked Nicholl?" that, by mean you do "What

a from away getting about ask to inopportune very me to seems "It
Michel. added it," to get you before country

my repeat I but back, draw to want I because question that ask don't "I
back?'" get we shall 'How ask, and question,

Barbicane. answered idea," least the not have "I

should I back come to how known had I "if Michel, said me," for as "And
gone." have not

Nicholl. cried answering," call you what is "That

actual no has question the that add and words, Michel's of approve "I
return. to want we when on, later that about think will We interest.
will." projectile the there, be not will Columbiad the Though

gun!" a without bullet a be, will that good "Much

nor saltpetre, metal, Neither powder! can so and made, be can gun "A
to order in Besides, moon. the of bowels the in wanting be can coal
only will you and conquer, to attraction lunar the only have you return
the by globe terrestrial the on fall to as so go to leagues 8,000 have
weight." of laws simple

more no hear us "Let animated. getting Michel, said enough," is "That
upon colleagues ancient our with communicating to As returning. about
difficult." be not will that earth,

pray?" that, do to we are "How

volcanoes." lunar the by hurled meteors of means "By

that calculated has "Laplace Barbicane. answered Michel," idea, good "A
send to suffice would cannons our of that to superior times five force a
has that volcano no is there Now earth. the to moon the from meteor a
propulsion." of force superior a not

not will and postmen convenient be will "Meteors Michel. cried "Hurrah!"
I now But service! postal the at laugh shall we how And anything! cost
think--"

think?" you do "What

We bullet? our to wire telegraph a fasten not we did Why idea! superb "A
earth!" the with telegrams exchanged have could

"does Nicholl, answered long," leagues 86,000 wire a of weight the "And
nothing?" for go that

Columbiad! the of charge the trebled have should We nothing! for "Yes,
Michel, cried times--greater!" times--five four it made have could We
violent. more and more became voice whose

answered project," your to make to objection slight a is "There
our globe the of rotation of movement the during that is "It Barbicane.
and windlass, a round chain a like it round rolled been have would wire
again." earth the to down us dragged have inevitably would it

nothing have "I Michel, said Union!" the of stars thirty-nine the "By
I now But Maston! J.T. of worthy to-day--ideas ideas impracticable but
certainly will Maston J.T. earth to return not do we if it, of think
us!" to come

courageous and worthy a is "he Barbicane; replied come," will he "Yes!
lying still Columbiad the not Is easier? be could what Besides, comrade.
to wherewith wanting acid nitric and cotton Is soil? Floridian in
of zenith the pass again moon the not Will projectile? the manufacture
same the exactly occupy not she will years eighteen another In Florida?
to-day?" occupies she that place

friends our him with and come, will Maston Michel--"yes, repeated "Yes,"
they and Club, Gun the of members the all and Blomsberry, Elphinstone,
established be will projectiles of trains on Later welcome! be will
Maston!" J.T. for Hurrah moon! the and earth the between

the hear not did Maston J.T. Honourable the if that probable is It
he was What least. at tingled ears his honour his in uttered hurrahs
Long's at Mountains Rocky the in stationed doubt no was He then? doing
If space. in gravitating bullet invisible the discover to trying Peak,
they that acknowledged be must it companions dear his of thinking was he
singular of influence the under that, and him, with behindhand not were
him. to thoughts best their consecrated they exaltation,

the in greater visibly grew that animation the came whence But
questioned. be not could sobriety Their projectile? the of inhabitants
the to attributed be brain the of erethismus strange this Must
of Queen the of proximity that to time, the of circumstances exceptional
secret some to or them, separated only hours few a which from Night
became faces Their system? nervous their on acting moon the of influence
their furnace; a of reverberation the to exposed if as red as
like played lungs their and active, more became respiration
their and flame, extraordinary with shone eyes their forge-bellows;
champagne-cork a like escaped words their loud, formidably became voices
disquieting, became gestures their gas; acid carbonic by forth driven
they say, to strange And, in. them perform to room much so wanted they
mind. the of tension excessive this perceived wise no in

we whether know not do I that tone--"now sharp a in Nicholl said "Now,"
for!" there going are we what know will I moon, the from back come shall

he if as stamping Barbicane, answered for!" there going are we "What
know." don't "I fencing-room; a in were

sonorous a provoked that shout a with Michel cried know!" don't "You
projectile. the in echo

unison in shouting Barbicane, answered idea!" least the not have I "No,
interlocutor. his with

Michel. answered know," I then, "Well,

angry the restrain longer no could who Nicholl, said then," "Speak,
voice. his of tones

his seizing violently Michel, cried me!" suits it if speak shall "I
fire on eyes with Barbicane, said you!" suit must "It arm. companion's
terrible this into us drew who you was "It hands. threatening and
why!" know to wish we and journey,

know will I going, am I where know don't I "now captain, the said "Yes,"
going." am I why

of possession take To high--"why? yard a jumping Michel, cried "Why?"
to State fortieth a add To States! United the of name the in moon the
people them, cultivate to regions, lunar the colonise To Union! the
To industry! and science, art, of wonders the all them take to them,
and are, we than civilised more are they unless Selenites, the civilise
for it done already not have they if republic a into them make to
themselves!"

of empire the under who Nicholl, answered Selenites!" any are there "If
contradictory. very became intoxication inexplicable this

tone. threatening a in Michel cried Selenites?" no are there says "Who

Nicholl. shouted do!" "I

your knock will I or insult that repeat not "do Michel, said "Captain,"
throat!" your down teeth

this and another, one upon rush to about were adversaries two The
when battle, a into degenerate to threatening was discussion incoherent
interfered. Barbicane

back, to back companions two his putting he, said men," unhappy "Stop,
them!" without do will we Selenites, no are there "if

"We that. than them about more care not did who Michel, exclaimed "Yes!"
Selenites!" the Bother Selenites! the with do to nothing have

a found us "Let Nicholl. said ours," be shall moon the of empire "The
three!" of Republic

Michel. cried Congress," the be shall "I

Nicholl. answered Senate," the I "And

Michel. shouted President," the Barbicane "And

Barbicane. answered nation!" the by elected President "No

Michel; exclaimed Congress," the by elected President a then, "Well,
unanimously." you elect I Congress the am I as "and

Nicholl. exclaimed Barbicane!" President for hurrah hurrah! "Hurrah!

Ardan. Michel vociferated hurrah!" "Hip--hip--hip!

as loudly as Doodle" "Yankee up struck Senate and President the Then
"Marseillaise." virile the shouted Congress the whilst could, they

and stamping, mad gestures, maniacal with dance frantic a began Then
howling dance, the in part took Diana clowns. boneless of somersaults
inexplicable An projectile. the of roof very the to jumped and too,
Five heard. were sonority singular of cock-crows and wings of flapping
bats. mad like walls the striking about flew fowls six or

disorganised were lungs whose companions, travelling three the Then
by burnt intoxicated, than more influence, incomprehensible some under
motionless fell fire, on apparatus breathing their set had that air the
projectile. the of bottom the upon




VIII. CHAPTER

LEAGUES. FOURTEEN AND HUNDRED ONE THOUSAND SEVENTY-EIGHT AT


the intoxication, singular that of cause the was What happened? had What
on carelessness Simply disastrous? so prove might which of consequences
time. in remedy to able was Nicholl which part, Michel's

who captain, the minutes, few a lasted which swoon, veritable a After
intellectual his collected soon consciousness, regain to first the was
faculties.

hungry as feel to began he before, hours two breakfasted had he Although
his being, whole His days. several for food tasted not had he if as
point. highest the to excited were stomach, and brain

Michel, from collation supplementary a demanded and therefore, rose, He
therefore, Nicholl, answer. not did and unconscious, still was who
the facilitate to order in tea, of cups some prepare to proceeded
lighting with first himself busied He sandwiches. dozen a of absorption
match. a struck so and fire, a

and extraordinary with burn sulphur the see to surprise his was What
a rose lighted he gas of jet the From brilliancy! unbearable almost
light. electric of floods to equal flame

the light, of intensity This mind. Nicholl's in place took revelation A
his all of excitement extra the himself, in disturbance physiological
all. it understood faculties--he sensitive and moral

exclaimed. he oxygen!" "The

a out giving was tap the that saw he air-apparatus, the over leaning And
but vital, eminently gas, odourless and savourless, colourless, of flood
the in disorders gravest the produces state pure a in which
on. full tap the left had Michel carelessness Through constitution.
the which with oxygen of flow this off turn to haste made Nicholl
the of death the caused have would which and saturated, was atmosphere
combustion. by but suffocation, by not travellers,

to play normal their gave and relieved, was air the afterwards hour An
their from recovered friends three the degrees By lungs. the
a like oxygen their from recover to obliged were they but intoxication;
wine. his from drunkard

not did he incident this in responsibility of share his knew Michel When
the broke intoxication unexpected This disconcerted. least the in appear
its under said been had things foolish Many journey. the of monotony
said. as soon as forgotten been had they but influence,

having for sorry not am "I Frenchman, merry the added "Then,"
friends, my know, you Do gas. captious this of effect the experienced
oxygen-rooms, with up set establishment curious a be might there that
life active more a live might weak are constitutions whose people where
could air the where meetings had we Suppose least? at hours few a during
would managers the where theatres fluid, heroic this with saturated be
of souls the in be would there passion what doses, strong in out it send
of instead if, And enthusiasm! what and fire what spectators, and actors
what it, with saturated be could nation whole a assembly, simple a
exhausted an Of receive! would it life of supplement a what activity,
more know I and nation, strong and great a make would perhaps it nation
oxygen the under itself put to ought that Europe old in state one than
health." its of interest the in _rgime_

on. full still were tap the if as animation much as with spoke Michel
enthusiasm. his damped Barbicane sentence one with But

you perhaps now "but said, he Michel," friend well, very is that "All
from." came concert our in joined that fowls those where us tell will

fowls?" "Those

"Yes."

and hither flying were cock superb a and hens half-a-dozen fact, In
thither.

in them put that oxygen the was "It Michel. cried stupids!" the "Ah,
revolt."

Barbicane. asked fowls?" those with do to going you are what "But

my joke, a of sake the For course! of moon the in them "Acclimatise
I nothing! to come unhappily has that joke a simply president; worthy
How you! telling without continent lunar the on out them let to wanted
pecking poultry terrestrial these see to been have would you astounded
moon!" the of fields the

want don't "you Barbicane, answered boy!" eternal you _gamin_, "Ah,
under were we what always are You senses! your of out you make to oxygen
insane!" always are You gas! this of influence the

Ardan. Michel replied then?" wiser not were we know we do how "Ah!

the repaired friends three the reflection philosophical this After
cage. their in back put were hens and Cock projectile. the in disorder
distinctly companions two his and Barbicane this doing were they as But
phenomenon. fresh a perceived

the of that weight, own their earth the left had they moment the Since
progressive suffered had contained, it objects the and bullet
the in this of experience any have not could they Though diminution.
the and themselves upon effect the when come must moment a projectile,
felt. be would used they instruments and tools

the for weight, of loss this indicated have not would scales course Of
but itself; object the as much as precisely lost have would used weights
of independent is which of tension the weighing-machine, spring a
diminution. this of valuation exact the given have would attraction,

the to proportion in is weight, or attraction, that known well is It
this Hence distances. of square the to proportion inverse in and bulk,
heavenly other the if space, in alone been had earth the If consequence.
to according projectile, the annihilated, suddenly be to were bodies
the from distance its to according less weighed have would law, Newton's
terrestrial the for entirely, weight its losing ever without but earth,
what at matter no felt, itself made have always would attraction
distance.

the when come must moment a dealing, are we which with case the in But
after gravitation, of law the under all at be not would projectile
set be not could effect whose bodies, celestial other the for allowing
zero. as down

the and earth the between was projectile the of trajectory the fact, In
attraction terrestrial earth the from away farther went it As moon.
distances, of square the to proportion inverse in diminished be would
A proportion. same the in augmented be would attraction lunar the but
would attractions two these where reached be therefore, must, point
If all. at weight no have would bullet the and other, each neutralise
been have would point this equal, were earth and moon the of volumes the
their taking by But bodies. two the between distance equal an at reached
this that calculate to easy was it account into bulk of difference
leagues 78,114 at or journey, the of 47/52 at situated be would point
earth. the from

in movement or velocity of principle no had that body a point this At
the by attracted equally being motionless, eternally remain would itself
the than one towards more it drawing nothing and bodies, heavenly two
other.

projectile the calculated exactly been had impulsion of force the if Now
like weight all lost having velocity, no with point that reach to ought
contained. it objects the

themselves. presented hypotheses Three then? happen would What

the passing and velocity, some kept have would projectile the Either
the of virtue by moon the on fall would attraction, equal of point
attraction. terrestrial over attraction lunar of excess

it wanting, being point neutral the reach to sufficient velocity Or
terrestrial of excess the of virtue by earth the on back fall would
attraction. lunar over attraction

point, neutral the reach to velocity sufficient with endowed lastly, Or
the in suspended eternally remain would it it, pass to insufficient but
and zenith the between Mahomet, of coffin pretended the like place, same
nadir.

consequences the explained clearly Barbicane and situation, the was Such
highest the to interested were They companions. travelling his to
point, neutral this reached had they when know to they were How degree.
when moment precise the at earth, the from leagues 78,114 at situated
in be should projectile the in contained objects the nor they neither
weight? of laws the to subject way any

action this that remarked had they though travellers, the now Until
absence. total its perceived yet not had little, by little diminished
from escape tumbler a let having Nicholl a.m., 11 about day, that But
air. the in suspended remained it falling, of instead hand, his

chemistry!" amusing little a is "this Ardan, Michel cried "Ah!"

to left &c, bottles, weapons, objects, different immediately And
by up lifted too, Diana, miracle. by if as suspended hung themselves,
marvellous the trickery, without but reproduced, space, into Michel
Cook. and Maskelyne and Robert-Houdin by effected suspensions

of spite in stupefied and surprised companions, adventurous three The
marvellous, the of domain the into carried reasoning, scientific their
arms their out stretched they When bodies. their of out go weight felt
their on vacillated heads Their them. drop to inclination no felt they
projectile. the of bottom the at kept longer no feet Their shoulders.
men created has Imagination drunkards. staggering like were They
here But shadows! their of deprived others reflection, their of deprived
nothing whom in men made forces, active of neutrality the by reality,
themselves. nothing weighed who and weight, any had

remained and floor the left spring, slight a making Michel, Suddenly
des _Cuisine Murillo's in monk good the like air the in suspended
the in three, all and instant, an in him joined friends two His Anges_.
ascension. miraculous a figured projectile, the of centre

And "No. Michel. cried possible?" it Is likely? it Is believable? it "Is
an what this like us seen have could Raphael if Ah! exists! it yet
canvas!" upon put have could he Assumption

projectile the "If Barbicane. answered last," cannot Assumption "The
the to us draw will attraction lunar the point, neutral the passes
moon."

answered projectile,' the of roof the upon rest will feet our "Then
Michel.

projectile the in gravity of centre the "because Barbicane, said "No,"
gradually." over turn will it and low, very is

certain!" for down upside turned be will things our all "Then

of nothing is "There Nicholl. answered Michel," yourself, alarm not "Do
turn will projectile the move; will object an Not feared. be to kind the
insensibly."

equal of point the cleared has it "when Barbicane, resumed fact," "In
perpendicularly it drag will heavier, relatively bottom, its attraction,
place take should phenomenon a such that order in But moon. the to down
line." neutral the pass must we

the like do us let "Then Michel. cried line!" neutral the "Passing
passage!" our water us equator--let the pass who sailors

a took he Thence wall. padded the to Michel took movement side slight A
and companions, his before space" "in them placed glasses, and bottle
hurrah. triple a with line the saluted they glasses, touching merrily

The hour. an scarcely lasted attractions the of influence This
and bottom, the towards lowered insensibly themselves saw travellers
projectile the of end conical the that remarked he thought Barbicane
an By moon. the towards direction normal the from slightly deviated
was attraction Lunar it. approached side bottom the movement inverse
moon the towards fall The attraction. terrestrial over gaining therefore
(0.03937 millimetre a of that be only could it yet; as insensibly began,
would force attractive the But second. first the in third a and inch),
projectile, the accentuated, more be would fall the increase, gradually
earth, the to cone its present would side, bottom its by down dragged
Selenite the reached it until velocity increasing with fall would and
and enterprise, the of success the prevent could nothing Now surface.
joy. Barbicane's shared Ardan Michel and Nicholl

one them astounded had that phenomena the all about chatted they Then
of laws the of neutralisation the about especially another, after
deduce to wished enthusiasm, of full always Ardan, Michel weight.
imagination. pure only were which consequences

could make should we progress "what cried, he friends," worthy my "Ah!
to us rivets that chain this weight, this of earth upon rid get but we
no be would There liberty! to restored prisoner the be would It her!
order in that, true is it if And legs. or arms in either weariness more
by air the in yourself sustain to earth, the of surface the upon fly to
superior times 150 force a take would it muscles, the of action simple a
us transport would caprice, a will, of act simple a possess, we that to
exist." not would attraction and space, into

suppressing in succeeded they "if laughing, Nicholl, said fact," "In
the change would it anaesthesia, by suppressed is pain like gravitation,
society!" modern of face

and weight destroy us "let subject, his of full Michel, cried "Yes,"
cranks, windlasses, screw-jacks, cranes, more No burdens! more no have
wanted." be will machines other or

nothing weight any had nothing if "but Barbicane; replied said," "Well
Michel; worthy head, your on hat the even not place, its in keep would
Not weight! their by adhere only which of stones the house, your nor
of consequence a only is water the upon stability whose ships, even
in held be longer no would waves whose ocean, the even Not weight.
atmosphere, the even not Lastly, attraction. terrestrial by equilibrium
disperse would together, held longer no being which, of molecules the
space!" into

people positive like nothing is "There Michel. replied pity," a is "That
reality!" to brutally you recalling for

no if "for Barbicane, resumed Michel," yourself, console "Nevertheless,
at are you banished, were weight of laws the which from exist could star
earth." upon than less much is gravity where visit a pay to going least

moon?" "The

less times six weigh objects which of surface the on moon, the "Yes,
to easy very phenomenon a earth, the of surface the upon than
demonstrate."

only lbs. 400 for "Evidently, Michel. asked it?" perceive we shall "And
moon." the of surface the on lbs. 60 weigh

diminished?" be strength muscular our not "Will

six." rise to able be will you yard one jumping of Instead all. at "Not

Michel. cried moon," the in Hercules be shall we "Then

the of height the if because so more the "and Nicholl, replied "Yes,"
be will they globe their of bulk the to proportion in is Selenites
high." foot a hardly

of _rle_ the play to going am I "Then Michel. replied "Liliputians!"
the is That giants! the of fable the realise shall We Gulliver!
world!" solar the visit to planet own one's leaving of advantage

the visit "only Barbicane, answered Gulliver," play to want you if "But
rather is bulk whose Mars, or Venus, Mercury, as such planets, inferior
planets, big the into venture not do But earth. the of that than less
be would _rles_ the there for Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter,
Liliputian." become would you and inverted,

sun?" the in "And

the of that than less times four is density its though sun, the "In
times thousand twenty-four and hundred thirteen is volume its earth,
upon than greater times twenty-seven is there gravitation and greater,
ought inhabitants the kept, proportion Every globe. our of surface the
high." feet hundred two be to average an on

pigmy!" a be only should "I Michel. exclaimed devil!" "The

Nicholl. said giants," the amongst "Gulliver

Barbicane. answered so," "Just

to artillery of pieces some carry to thing bad a been have not would "It
with." oneself defend

the on effect no have would bullets "your Barbicane; replied "Good,"
minutes." few a in ground the to fall would they and sun,

deal!" great a saying "That's

that on great so is "Gravitation Barbicane. answered fact," a is "It
weigh would earth the on lbs. 70 weighing object an that planet enormous
your lbs.! 20 weigh would hat Your sun. the of surface the on lbs. 1,930
weight your continent solar the on fell you if Lastly, lb.! 1/2 cigar
again." up get not could you lbs.--that 5,000 great--about so be would

portable a about carry to have should "I Michel, said devil!" "The
to-day. for moon the with content be us let friends, my Well, crane!
if see shall we on Later figure! great a cut shall we least, at There,
the lift to crane a without drink can't you where sun, the to go will we
mouth." your to glass




IX. CHAPTER

DEVIATION. OF CONSEQUENCES THE


at journey, the of issue the about not if fear, no now had Barbicane
would speed own Its impulsion. of force projectile's the about least
the to return not would it Therefore line. neutral the beyond it carry
hypothesis One attraction. of point the upon motionless remain nor earth
goal its at bullet the of arrival the realised, be to remained only
attraction. lunar of action the under

true, is it planet, a upon leagues 8,296 of fall a was it reality In
it Nevertheless earth. the upon than less times six is gravity the where
to ought precautions all which against one and fall, terrible a be would
delay. without taken be

of purpose the for were some sorts; two of were precautions These
lunar touch would projectile the moment the at shock the deadening
violent. less it make so and shock, the retard to were others ground;

longer no was Barbicane that pity a was it shock, the deaden to order In
at shock the weakened usefully so had that means the employ to able
movable the and spring a as used water the say, to is departure--that
for wanting, was water but existed, still partitions The partitions.
precious be would purpose--that this for reserve the use not could they
soil. lunar the on fail should element liquid the case in

The spring. a for sufficient been have not would reserve this Besides,
which on and departure, their at projectile the in stored water of layer
and depth, in feet three than less no occupied disc, waterproof the lay
the Now square. feet fifty-four than less not of surface a over spread
therefore were They that. of part fifth the contain not did receptacles
shock. the deadening of means effectual this up give to obliged

furnished had water, employing with content not Barbicane, Fortunately
the lessen to destined buffers, spring strong with disc movable the
partitions. horizontal the breaking after bottom, the against shock
and on fitted be to only had they existence; in still were buffers These
as handle, to easy pieces, these All place. its in put disc movable the
mounted. rapidly be could anything, scarcely weighed they

It difficulty. without adjusted were pieces different The done. was This
The tools. of plenty were There screws. and bolts of matter a only was
One legs. its on table a like buffers steel its on fixed soon was disc
was port-hole lower The arrangement. this from resulted inconvenience
the observe to travellers the for impossible be would it and covered,
precipitated being were they whilst opening that through moon
Besides, up. it give to obliged were they But her. upon perpendicularly
lunar vast the perceive still could they openings lateral the through
balloon. a of car the from seen is earth the like regions,

when noon than more was It work. hour's an took disc the of placing This
on observations fresh made Barbicane completed. were preparations the
not had it vexation great his to but projectile, the of inclination the
curve a describing be to appeared it fall; a for sufficiently turned
splendidly shining was Night of Queen The disc. lunar the with parallel
with fire on her setting was day of orb the opposite whilst space, in
rays. his

one. anxious an became soon situation This

Nicholl. said there?" get we "Shall

Barbicane. answered should," we though as act must "We

get shall "We Ardan. Michel replied fellows," faint-hearted are "You
want." we than quicker and there,

occupied he and preparations, his to Barbicane recalled answer This
fall. the retard to destined contrivances the placing with himself

Florida, Town, Tampa in held meeting the at that, remembered be will It
Ardan's Michel and enemy, Barbicane's as appeared Nicholl Captain
broken be would projectile the that said Nicholl Captain When adversary.
of means by fall the retard would he that answered Michel glass, like
arranged. properly fusees

fired being and bottom, the upon resting fusees, powerful fact, In
the of speed the lessen action, recoil a producing by might, outside,
oxygen but true, is it void the in burn to were fusees These bullet.
the like themselves that furnish would they for them, fail not would
by prevented been never has which of deflagration the volcanoes, lunar
moon. the around atmosphere of want the

in up shut fireworks with himself provided therefore had Barbicane
bottom the to on screwed be could which steel, bored of cannons little
bottom; the with level were cannons these Inside projectile. the of
An them. of twenty were There it. beyond foot a half went they outside
was each which with match the light to them allowed disc the in opening
had mixture exploding The outside. place took effect the All provided.
to was therefore, do, to had they All gun. each into rammed already been
cannons these put to and base, the in fixed buffers metallic the up take
exactly. fitted they where place, their in

they taken precaution all and p.m., 3 about ended was work fresh This
wait. to but do to nothing now had

was, It moon. the nearer drew visibly projectile the meantime the In
own its but influence; its to proportion some in submitted therefore,
of result the Perhaps line. oblique an in it inclined also velocity
it But tangent. a become would that line a be would influences two these
the upon normally falling not was projectile the that certain was
to ought weight, its of reason by base, its for moon, the of surface
her. towards turned been have

the resisted bullet his that seeing on increased was anxiety Barbicane's
him--the before was that unknown the was It gravitation. of influence
he that believed _savant_, the He, regions. interstellar the of unknown
to return possible--the were that hypotheses three only the foreseen had
line! neutral the upon stagnation or moon, the upon fall the earth, the
infinite, the of terrors the all of full hypothesis, fourth a here And
resolute a took flinching without it face To inopportunely. up cropped
an or Nicholl, like being phlegmatic a Barbicane, like _savant_
Ardan. Michel like adventurer audacious

have would men Other subject. this on started was Conversation
have would They view. of point practical a from question the considered
however. they, Not to. them take would projectile the where wondered
effect. this produced had that cause the sought They

that?" is how "But Michel. said line," the off are we "So

the all notwithstanding "that Nicholl, answered afraid," much very am "I
The correctly. aimed not was Columbiad the taken, were that precautions
lunar of pale the outside us throw to suffice would error slightest
attraction."

Michel. said badly?" pointed was cannon the "Then

rigorously was cannon "The Barbicane. answered so," think not do "I
was place the of zenith the towards direction its and perpendicular,
her reached have to ought we zenith, the passing moon The incontestable.
me." escapes it but reason, another is There full. the at

Nicholl. suggested late," too arrived have we "Perhaps

Barbicane. said late?" "Too

said Observatory Cambridge the from notice "The Nicholl. resumed "Yes,"
thirteen hours ninety-seven in accomplished be to ought transit the that
moon the time that before that means That seconds. twenty and minutes
have would she after and indicated, point the reached have not would
it." passed

at December of 1st the on started we "But Barbicane. answered "Agreed,"
5th, the on midnight at arrive to ought we and p.m., 25s. 13m. 11h.
is It December. of 5th the is this Now full. is moon the as precisely
to sufficient be to ought half a and hours eight and three, half-past
it?" towards going not we are Why goal. our to us take

answered been," have to ought it than greater was velocity the "Perhaps
it than greater was velocity initial the that now know we "for Nicholl,
be." to supposed was

velocity, of excess "An Barbicane. replied no!" times hundred a "No!
would correct, been have to projectile the of direction the supposing
deviation. a been has There No! moon. the reaching us prevented have not
deviated!" have We

Nicholl. asked what?" through whom? "Through

Barbicane. answered tell," cannot "I

I what know to like you "should Michel, said then Barbicane," "Well,
deviated?" have we why about think

think." you what "Say

a is that deviated, have We know! to dollar a half give not would "I
find soon shall We going. are we where much matter not does It fact.
falling by end shall we space into along carried being are we As out.
another." or attraction of centre some into

Michel of indifference this with contented be not could Barbicane
to wanted he what But future. the about anxious was he that Not Ardan's.
deviated. had projectile his why was price, any at know,

moon, the to sideways course its on kept projectile the meantime the In
by prove even could Barbicane it. with along out thrown objects the and
distance, leagues' 2,000 at only was which moon, the upon landmarks the
not were they that proof fresh uniform--a becoming was speed its that
lunar the over prevailing was impulsion of force Its falling.
taking certainly was projectile the of trajectory the but attraction,
point nearer a at that hoped be might it and disc, lunar the nearer them
fall. a provoke and predominate would weight the

their with on went do, to better nothing having friends, three The
of topography the determine yet however, not, could They observations.
solar the of action the under levelled was relief Every satellite. the
rays.

then moon The p.m. 8 until windows lateral the through thus watched They
on sun The them. from firmament the half hid she that large so looked
projectile the inundated other, the on Night of Queen the and side, one
light. with

only leagues 700 at estimate could he thought Barbicane moment that At
the of velocity The goal. their from them separated that distance the
170 about or second, a yards 200 be to him to appeared projectile
towards turn to tendency a had bullet the of base The hour. an leagues
the but force; centripetal the of influence the under moon the
the that probable became it and predominated, still force centrifugal
which of nature the curve some to change would trajectory rectilinear
determined. be not could

hours The problem. insoluble his of solution the sought still Barbicane
moon, the to nearer drew visibly projectile The result. without by went
at distance short The her. reach not would it that plain was it but
attractive forces, two of result the be would her pass would it which
projectile. the upon acted which repulsive, and

near pass to is that "and Michel, repeated thing," one for pray only "I
secrets." her penetrate to moon the to enough

Nicholl. cried deviate!" projectile our made that cause the "Confound

idea, an with struck suddenly been had he if as Barbicane, said "Then,"
path!" our crossed that asteroid that "confound

Ardan. Michel said "Eh?"

Nicholl. exclaimed mean?" you do "What

our that mean "I convinced, appeared who Barbicane, resumed mean," "I
body." wandering that of influence the to due solely is deviation

Michel. continued us," graze even not did it "But

projectile, our of that with compared bulk, Its matter? that does "What
influence an have to sufficient was attraction its and enormous, was
direction." our upon

Nicholl. said slight," very been have must influence "That

a "upon Barbicane, answered was," it as slight but Nicholl, "Yes,
moon!" the miss us make to enough was it leagues 84,000 of distance




X. CHAPTER

MOON. THE OF OBSERVERS THE


the for reason plausible only the found evidently had Barbicane
modify to sufficient been had it been, had it slight However deviation.
audacious The fatality. a was It projectile. the of trajectory the
anything unless and circumstance, fortuitous a by miscarried had attempt
Would reached. be longer no could disc lunar the happened, unexpected
and physics in problems certain resolve to enough near it pass they
occupied that question only the was This unsolved? then until geology
in held future the fate the to As travellers. bold these of minds the
to was what Yet it. about think even not would they them, for store
A them? failed air when solitudes infinite these amidst them of become
at wandering bullet this in suffocated fall would they and days more few
they and men, intrepid these to centuries were days few a But hazard.
to hoped longer no they moon the observing to moment every consecrated
reach.

was satellite the from projectile the separated then which distance The
as far as conditions, these Under leagues. 200 about at estimated
were travellers the disc, the of details the of visibility the regards
their with earth the of inhabitants the are than moon the from farther
telescopes. powerful

at Rosse Lord by up set instrument the that known fact, in is, It
within to moon the brings times, 6,500 magnifies which Parsonstown,
Peak Long's at up set telescope powerful the and leagues; sixteen
two than less within to moon the brings and times, 48,000 magnifies
sufficiently were diameter in yards twelve objects that so leagues,
distinct.

seen moon, the of details topographical the distance that at then, Thus,
the caught eye The determined. distinctly not were telescope, a without
but "seas," called inappropriately depressions vast those of outline
mountains the of prominence The nature. their determine not could they
of reflection the by produced irradiation splendid the under disappeared
molten of furnace a over leaning if as dazzled eye, The rays. solar the
involuntarily. it from turned silver,

seen. clearly already was orb the of form oblong the However,

the towards turned end small the with egg, gigantic a like appeared It
formation, her of days first the in pliable and liquid moon, The earth.
the of pale the within drawn soon, But sphere. perfect a originally was
By influence. its under elongated became she gravitation, earth's
of centre her form; of purity native her lost she satellite a becoming
fact this from and figure, her of centre the of advance in was gravity
taken have might water and air that conclusion the draw _savants_ some
the from seen never is which moon, the of side opposite the on refuge
earth.

visible only was satellite the of forms primitive the in alteration This
moon the and projectile the between distance The moments. few a for
initial its than less considerably was velocity its visibly; diminished
express our of that than greater times nine or eight but velocity,
obliquity, very its from bullet, the of direction oblique The trains.
or point some at disc lunar the touching of hope some Ardan Michel left
could he No, it. to get not should he that believe not could He other.
a was who Barbicane, But repeated. often he this and it, believe not
logic. pitiless with him answered always judge, better

not are we and fall, a by moon the reach only can We no. Michel, "No,
but influence, moon's the under us keeps force centripetal The falling.
it." from away irresistibly us sends force centrifugal the

hopes. last his of Ardan Michel deprived that tone a in said was This

northern the was approaching was projectile the moon the of portion The
they because one, lower the it make maps selenographic The hemisphere.
telescopes, the by given image the to according up drawn generally are
_Mappa the was Such objects. the reverse they that know we and
This consulted. Barbicane which Moedler and Boeer of Selenographica_
isolated by relieved plains, vast presented hemisphere northern
mountains.

travellers the moment precise that At full. was moon the midnight At
made not had asteroid unlucky the if her upon foot set have to ought
condition the in exactly was orb The direction. their from deviate them
was She Observatory. Cambridge the by determined rigorously
twenty-eighth the of zenith the at and perigee, her at mathematically
Columbiad enormous the of bottom the at placed observer An parallel.
the framed have would horizon the at perpendicularly pointed is it while
axis the through drawn line straight A cannon. the of mouth the in moon
moon. the of centre the through passed have would piece the of

6th and 5th the between night the during that stated be hardly need It
have they Could rest. minute's a take not did travellers the December of
were feelings their All No. world? new a to near so eyes their closed
of earth, the of Representatives see! thought--to one in concentrated
was it themselves, in concentrated all present, and past humanity
and regions lunar these at looked race human the that eyes their through
their filled emotion strange A satellite! its of secrets the penetrated
another. to window one from silently went they and hearts,

made were and Barbicane, by down noted were observations Their
they them control To telescopes. had they them make To exact. rigorously
maps. had

only telescope poor His Galileo. was moon the of observer first The
lunar the pitted that spots the in Nevertheless, times. thirty magnified
recognise to first the was he tail," peacock's a in eyes "like disc
attributed, he which to heights some measure and mountains,
the of diameter the of 20th the to equal elevation an exaggerating,
observations. his of map no up drew Galileo metres. 8,000 or disc,

operations Hevelius--by Dantzig, of astronomer an later years few A
second and first the at month, a twice exact only were which
the of only one-twenty-sixth to heights Galileo's quadrature--reduced
to is it But way. other the exaggeration an was This diameter. lunar
round light The due. is moon the of map first the that _savant_ this
vast indicate spots dark the and mountains, circular form there spots
of extents and mountains these To plains. are reality, in which, seas
of middle the in Sinai a is There denominations. terrestrial gave he sea
Apennines, Alps, the Sicily, of centre the in Etna Arabia, an
&c.--names Caspian, the Sea, Black the Mediterranean, the Carpathians,
configuration the recalled seas nor mountains neither for applied, badly
the on joined spot, white large That globe. the on namesakes their of
be hardly could point, a in terminated and continents vaster to south
of Bay the Peninsula, Indian the of image inverted the as recognised
Another kept. not were names these So Cochin-China. and Bengal,
fresh a proposed better, nature human knowing chartographer,
adopt. to haste made vanity human which nomenclature,

drew He Hevelius. of contemporary a Riccioli, Father was observer This
the mountains lunar the to gave he But errors. of full map rough a up
epoch. own his of _savants_ and antiquity of men great of names

by century seventeenth the in executed was moon the of map third A
is it execution, the in Riccioli of that to superior Cassini; Dominique
but published, were copies smaller Several measurements. the in inexact
as weight by sold was Nationale_ _Imprimerie the in kept long plate the
brass. old

the of map a up drew designer, and mathematician celebrated a Hire, La
engraved. never was which high, yards half a and four moon

the of middle the about Marger, Tobie astronomer, German a him, After
selenographic magnificent a of publication the began century, eighteenth
his but verified; rigorously he which measures, lunar to according map,
this of termination the prevented 1762, in place took which death,
work. beautiful

celebrated their composed Moedler and Boeer Messrs. that 1830 in was It
This projection. orthographical an to according Selenographica_, _Mappa
the only appears, it as such disc, lunar exact the reproduces map
the in correct only are plains and mountains the of configurations
portions, southern or northern the else--in everywhere part; central
compared be cannot foreshortened configurations western--the or eastern
and high yard one map, topographical This centre. the of those with
chartography. lunar of masterpiece a is parts, four into divided

the of reliefs selenographic the cited be may _savants_ these After
Father of works topographical the Schmidt, Julius astronomer German
Rue, la de Waren amateur, English the of sheets magnificent the Secchi,
and Lecouturier Messrs. of projection orthographical on map a lastly and
clear and design correct very of 1860, in up set model fine a Chapuis,
outlines.

lunar the to relating maps different the of nomenclature the is Such
and Moedler and Boeer Messrs. of that two, possessed Barbicane world.
of work his make to were They Lecouturier. and Chapuis Messrs. of that
easier. observer

this for constructed specially glasses marine excellent had They
therefore would they times; hundred a objects magnified They journey.
than less to moon the and earth the between distance the reduced have
not did a.m. 3 towards which distance a at then But leagues. 1,000
obstructed, atmosphere no which medium a in and miles, hundred a exceed
hundred fifteen than less to level lunar the brought instruments these
metres.




XI. CHAPTER

REALITY. AND IMAGINATION


pupils his of one asked professor a moon?" the seen ever you "Have
ironically.

heard have I "but still, ironically more pupil the answered sir," "No,
of." spoken it

the by made been have might pupil the of answer jocose the sense one In
have who are there people many How beings. sublunary of majority immense
a through least it--at seen never have and of spoken moon the heard
satellite! their of map the examined never have even many How telescope!

us strikes peculiarity one map, selenographic comprehensive a at Looking
and earth the of arrangements geographical the to contrast In once. at
lunar the of hemisphere southern more the occupy continents the Mars,
boundary-lines regular and clear such not have continents These globe.
Their Peninsula. Indian the and Africa, America, South of those as
and gulfs in rich are coasts deeply-indented and capricious, angular,
where Sound, the of islands the in confusion the recall They peninsulas.
the upon existed ever has navigation If up. cut excessively is earth the
and difficult exceedingly been have must it moon the of surface
to greatly were hydrographers and mariners Selenite the and dangerous,
the coasts, perilous these upon came they when former the pitied, be
banks. stormy the on surveying marine were they when latter

is Pole South the spheroid lunar the upon that noticed be also may It
a only is there latter the On Pole. North the than continental more much
by continents other the from separated it, capping land of strip slight
probably plains vast the used is "seas" word the (When seas. vast
land the south the On understood.) be must formerly sea the by covered
the that possible therefore, is, It hemisphere. whole the nearly covers
whilst poles, their of one on flag their planted already have Selenites
to unable been have Lambert and d'Urville, Dumont Kane, Ross, Franklin,
globe. terrestrial the on point unknown this reach

all almost are They moon. the of surface the on numerous are Islands
a form to seem and compass, a with traced though as circular, or oblong
Asia and Greece between lying group charming that like archipelago, vast
legends. graceful most its with animated formerly mythology which Minor
into come Carpathos and Milo, Tenedos, Naxos, of names the Involuntarily
the of "clipper" the or Ulysses of ship the seek you and mind, the
Grecian a was it Ardan; Michel to appeared it what was That Argonauts.
imaginative less his of eyes the In map. the on saw he that Archipelago
lands cut-up the rather recalled shores these of aspect the companions
for looked Frenchman the where and Scotia; Nova and Brunswick New of
favourable noting were Americans these fable, of heroes the of traces
of interest the in houses mercantile of establishment the for points
industry. and commerce lunar

conclude must moon the of disposition orographical the on remarks Some
isolated mountains, of chains continents, its of description the
immense an like is moon The watercourses. and amphitheatres, mountains,
done has influence Plutonic where Norway, continual Switzerland--a
the of result the is rugged, profoundly so surface, This everything.
The formed. being was orb the while crust the of contractions successive
phenomena. geological great of study the for propitious is disc lunar
more although surface, its astronomers, some of remarks the to According
there There newer. remained has earth, the of surface the than ancient
action continuous the relief, primitive the deteriorate to water no is
decomposing the air, No levelling. general of sort a produces which of
work, Pluto's There profiles. orographical modifies which of influence
as earth the is It purity. native its all in is Neptune's, by unaltered
soil. of layers with her covered currents and tides before was she

by attracted is eye the continents vast these over wandered having After
aspect and situation, formation, their does only Not seas. vaster still
the occupy seas these earth, upon as but, oceans, terrestrial the recall
but tracts, liquid not are these yet And globe. the of part largest
determine. to soon hoped travellers the which of nature the plains,

with seas pretended these decorated have owned, be must it Astronomers,
Ardan Michel present. at respected has science which names odd least at
up drawn tenderness," of "map a to map this compared he when right was
Bergerac. de Cyrano or Scudery by

the of that like sentiment of map the longer no is "it he, added "Only,"
the parts, two into divided clearly life, of map the is it century; 18th
hemisphere; right the women, the To masculine. other the feminine, one
left!" the men, the to

their shrug companions prosaic his made Michel thus spoke he When
another from map lunar the at looked Nicholl and Barbicane shoulders.
their However, friend. imaginative their of that to view of point
not. had he if Judge side. his on reason some had friend imaginative

reason human where Clouds," of "Sea the stretches hemisphere left the In
all by fed Rains," of "Sea the appears off far Not drowned. often so is
man where Tempests," of "Sea the lies Near existence. of worries the
Then, passions. victorious too-often his against incessantly struggles
procession the all and infidelities, treasons, deceptions, by exhausted
The career? his of end the at find he does what miseries, terrestrial of
waters the from drops some by softened scarcely Humours," of "Sea vast
of life the does humours, tempests, rain, Clouds, Dew!" of "Gulf the of
four these in up summed not it is and these? but aught contain man
words?

smaller contains women" "the to dedicated hemisphere right-hand The
of incident every with agree which of names significant the seas,
the bends which over Serenity," of "Sea the is There existence. feminine
happy a back her reflects which Dreams," of "Lake the and maiden, young
of breezes and tenderness of waves its with Nectar," of "Sea The future.
of "Sea the and Crises," of "Sea the Fecundity," of "Sea The love!
and restricted, too perhaps, are, which of dimensions the Vapours,"
all passions, false all where Tranquillity" of "Sea vast that lastly,
of waves the and absorbed, are desires unassuaged all dreams, useless
Death!" of "Lake the into peacefully flow which

these of division singular a What names! of succession strange a What
woman, and man like another one to united moon, the of hemispheres two
the not was And space. through carried life, of sphere a forming and
old the of fancies the interpreting thus in right Michel imaginative
astronomers?

grave his "seas," the on riot ran thus imagination his whilst But
were They geographically. more things at looking were companions
and angles its measuring were They heart. by world new this learning
diameters.

depression immense an was Clouds" of "Sea the Nicholl and Barbicane To
a covering it; on about scattered mountains circular with ground, of
covered it hemisphere, southern the of side western the of part great
and 15, latitude south in was centre its and leagues, square 184,800
the Procellarum_, _Oceanus Tempests, of Ocean The 20. longitude west
square 328,300 of surface a covered disc, lunar the on plain largest
45. longitude east and 10, latitude north in being centre its leagues,
and Kepler of mountains shining admirable the emerge bosom its From
Aristarchus.

chains high by Clouds of Sea the from separated and north, the to More
its having Imbrium_, _Mare Rains, of Sea the extends mountains, of
a of is it 20; longitude east and 35 latitude north in point central
far Not leagues. 193,000 of space a covers and form, circular nearly
44,200 of basin little a Humorum_, _Mare Humours, of Sea the distant
east and 25, latitude south in situated was only, leagues square
this of coast the on lie gulfs three Lastly, 40. longitude
Iris, of Gulf the and Dew, of Gulf the Gulf, Torrid hemisphere--the
mountains. of chains high by inclosed plains little

distinguished was capricious, more naturally hemisphere, "Feminine" The
the north, the towards were, These seas. numerous more and smaller by
76,000 with 0, longitude and 55 latitude north in Frigoris_, _Mare
of Lake and Death of Lake the joined which surface, of leagues square
25 latitude north by Serenitatis_, _Mare Serenity, of Sea the Dreams;
leagues; square 80,000 of surface a comprising 20, longitude west and
north in compact, very and round Crisium_, _Mare Crises, of Sea the
leagues, square 40,000 of surface a 55, longitude west and 17 latitude
the on Then mountains. of girdle a in buried Caspian veritable a
Sea the appeared 25, longitude west and 5 latitude north in equator,
square 121,509 occupying Tranquillitatis_, _Mare Tranquillity, of
of Sea the with south the on communicated sea this surface; of leagues
south in leagues, square 28,800 of extent an Nectaris_, _Mare Nectar,
of Sea the with east the on and 35, longitude west and 15 latitude
hemisphere, this in vastest the Fecunditatis_, _Mare Fecundity,
west and 3 latitude south in leagues, square 219,300 occupying
two lie south the to quite and north the to quite Lastly, 50. longitude
of surface a with Humboldtianum_, _Mare Humboldt, of Sea the seas, more
a with Australe_, _Mare Sea, Southern the and leagues, square 6,500
26,000. of surface

zero the on and equator the across disc, lunar the of centre the In
between hyphen of sort a Medii_, _Sinus gulf, centre the lies meridian,
hemispheres. two the

always surface the Barbicane and Nicholl of eyes the to appeared Thus
different these up added they When satellite. earth's the of visible
measured hemisphere this of surface the that found they figures
of chains volcanoes, for go which of 3,317,600 leagues, square 4,738,160
the form to seems that all word, a islands--in amphitheatres, mountains,
lake, seas, the for leagues 1,410,400 globe--and the of portion solid
was which of all portion, liquid the form to seems that all and marshes,
Michel. worthy the to indifferent perfectly

times a-half and thirteen is hemisphere this that noticed be will It
selenographers it upon yet And hemisphere. terrestrial the than smaller
of worthy surface rugged a is It craters. 50,000 counted already have
have English the which cheese" "green of qualification unpoetical the
it. given

a gave Ardan Michel name disobliging this pronounced Barbicane When
bound.

beautiful the treat century 19th the of Anglo-Saxons the how is "That
the Astarte, charming the Isis, amiable the Phoebe, blonde the Diana,
sister younger the Jupiter, and Latona of daughter the Night, of Queen
Apollo!" radiant the of




XII. CHAPTER

DETAILS. OROGRAPHICAL


the by followed direction the that out pointed been already has It
moon. the of hemisphere northern the towards us taking was projectile
have to ought they which point central that from far were travellers The
deviation. irremediable an suffered not had trajectory their if touched

distance his estimated then Barbicane night. at twelve half-past was It
the of length the than greater rather distance a kilometres, 1,400 at
Pole. North the nearer drew he as diminish must which and radius, lunar
the on but equator, the of altitude the at not then was projectile The
as map the on observed carefully latitude that from and parallel, tenth
the watch to able were companions two his and Barbicane Pole, the as far
circumstances. favourable most the under moon

was kilometres 1,400 of distance this telescopes, using by fact, In
of telescope The leagues. a-half and four or miles, fourteen to reduced
terrestrial the but nearer, still moon the brought Mountains Rocky the
his in Barbicane, Thus power. optical its lessened singularly atmosphere
certain perceive already could glass, his through looking by projectile,
earth. the on observers to imperceptible almost details

know not do "I voice, grave a in president the said then friends," "My
globe terrestrial the see ever shall we whether nor going, are we where
use of be would it day one if as work our do us let Nevertheless, again.
all from free minds our keep us Let fellow-creatures. our to
Cambridge the is bullet This astronomers. are We preoccupation.
observations." our make us Let space. into transported Observatory

faithfully it and precision, extreme with begun was work the said, That
distances variable the at moon the of aspects different the reproduced
orb. that to relation in reached projectile the which

it parallel north 10th the of altitude the at was bullet the Whilst
longitude. east of degree 20th the follow to seemed

which map the of subject the on remark important an placed be may Here
on where, maps, selenographic the In observations. their for used they
the at is south the telescope, the by objects of reversal the of account
should east the that natural seems it bottom, the at north the and top
the If so. not is it However, right. the on west the and left the on be
the appears, she as moon the showed and down, upside turned were map
terrestrial the of inverse the right, west the and left be would east
situated following:--Observers the is anomaly this of reason The maps.
in moon the example--perceive for Europe, hemisphere--in northern the in
the to backs their turn they her at look they When them. from south the
terrestrial a at looking when take they position opposite the north,
the to east the have they north, the to turned being backs Their map.
southern the in observers For right. the to west the and left
on be would moon the of west example--the for Patagonia, hemisphere--in
behind be would south the for right, their on east the and left their
them.

cardinal two these of reversal apparent the for reason the is Such
of observations the following whilst remembered be must this and points,
Barbicane. President

the Moedler, and Boeer of Selenographica_ _Mappa the by Helped
in disc the of portion that survey hesitating, without could, travellers
telescopes. their of field the

Michel. asked now?" at looking we are "What

"We Barbicane. answered Clouds," of Sea the of portion northern the "At
of composed plains those Are nature. its out make to off far too are
immense only they are Or believed? astronomers first the as sand, dry
a grants who Rue, la de Waren Mr. of opinion the to according forests,
out that find shall We moon? the to atmosphere dense very but low very
certain." quite are we till nothing affirm will We on. later

is It maps. the upon traced doubtfully rather is Clouds of Sea "This
by vomited lava of blocks with strewn is plain vast this that supposed
and Purbach, Ptolemy, side, right its on volcanoes neighbouring the
summits the and nearer, sensibly drawing was projectile The Arzachel.
front In visible. distinctly were north the on sea this in close which
in drowned seemed which of top the gloriously, shining mountain a rose
rays." solar the

Michel. asked is--?" mountain "That

Barbicane. answered "Copernicus,"

Michel. said Copernicus," at look a have us "Let

20, longitude east and 9, latitude north in situated mountain, This
moon. the of surface the above feet 11,000 nearly of height a to rises
with it study can astronomers and earth, the from visible quite is It
new the and quarter last the between phase the during especially ease,
and west, to east from lengthways thrown are shadows then because moon,
taken. be to altitudes the allow

southern the in system radiating important most the forms Copernicus
gigantic a like isolated rises It Brahe. Tycho to according hemisphere,
of Sea the on bordering Clouds of Sea the of that over lighthouse
Those rays. splendid its with once at oceans two lights it and Tempests,
without spectacle a made moon, full at dazzling so trails, luminous long
far as stretch and north, the on chains boundary the pass they equal; an
a like projectile, the time, terrestrial a.m., 1 At Rains. of Sea the as
mountain. superb this over hung space, into carried balloon

is Copernicus features. chief its distinguish perfectly could Barbicane
in order first the of mountains annular of series the in comprehended
Kepler of mountains the Like amphitheatres. large the of division the
appears it Tempests, of Ocean the overlook which Aristarchus, and
be to used and light, pale the through point brilliant a like sometimes
like volcano, extinct an only is it But activity. in volcano a for taken
diameter a presented circumference Its moon. the of side that on those
of traces showed glasses The leagues. twenty-two about of
its and eruptions, successive by produced it in stratifications
still were which remains, volcanic with strewn appeared neighbourhood
crater. the in seen

the an amphitheatres of sorts "several Barbicane, said exist," "There
to belongs Copernicus that see to easy is it and moon, the of surface
cones the perceive should we it nearer were we If class. radiating the
fiery many so formerly were which and interior, the in bristle which
lunar the on exception without one and arrangement, curious A mouths.
being amphitheatres, these of surface interior the on presented is disc,
which that to form contrary a plane, exterior the from downward notably
general the that therefore, follows, It present. craters terrestrial
an of fear us gives amphitheatres these of bottom the at curvature
moon." the of that to diameter inferior

Nicholl. asked arrangement?" special this of reason the is "What

Barbicane. answered known," not is "It

difficult be would it think "I Michel. said shines!" it splendidly "How
spectacle!" beautiful more a see to

our of chances the "if Barbicane, answered then," say, you should "What
hemisphere?" southern the towards us take should journey

Ardan. Michel replied still," finer is it say should I "Well,

The amphitheatre. the over right hung projectile the moment that At
its and circle, perfect almost an formed Copernicus of circumference
could inclosure circular second A defined. clearly were ramparts steep
on around spread aspect wild of plain grey A distinguished. be even
amphitheatre, the of bottom the At yellow. appeared relief every which
eruptive three or two instant one for sparkled jewel-case, a in if as
the of sides the north the Towards gems. dazzling enormous like cones
given have probably would which depression a into lowered were crater
crater. the of interior the to access

a note to able was Barbicane plain surrounding the above passed they As
little a others amongst importance, slight of mountains of number large
kilometres twenty-three than more "Gay-Lussac," called mountain circular
elevation one without flat, very was plain the south the Towards wide.
as far as contrary, the on north, the Towards soil. the of projection or
a like was it Tempests, of Ocean the on borders it where place the
hollows and hills the which of storm, a by agitated surface liquid
of whole the Over coagulated. suddenly waves of succession a formed
to converged which trails luminous the ran directions, all in and this,
a over kilometres thirty of width a had Some Copernicus. of summit the
estimated. be not could that length

they but rays, strange these of origin the discussed travellers The
observers. terrestrial than better any nature their determine not could

the of spurs the simply be rays these not "may Nicholl, said "Why,"
vividly?" more sun the of light the reflecting mountains

the of conditions certain in so were it "if Barbicane, answered "No,"
not." do they which shadows, throw would they moon

the with opposition in is sun the when appear only rays these fact, In
oblique. become rays its as soon as disappear they and moon,

imagined?" been have light of trails these of explanation what "But
short stop ever would _savants_ that believe cannot I "for Michel, asked
explanation." of want for

does he but opinion, an uttered has "Herschel Barbicane, answered "Yes,"
it." affirm not

opinion?" his is what mind; "Never

shone which lava cold of streams be must rays these that thought "He
normally." them struck sun the when

pass we if However, certain. less is nothing but true, be may "That
cause the out find to position better a in be shall we Tycho to nearer
radiation." this of

at?" are we height the from seen like, is plain that think you do "What
Michel. asked

Nicholl. answered know," don't "I

looks it spindles, like sharpened lava, of pieces these all with "Well,
want only We pell-mell. down thrown spilikins,' of game immense 'an like
up." them draw to hook a

Barbicane. said life," your in once for serious "Be

of instead "and tranquilly, Michel replied serious," be will "I
an only be then would plain This bones. are they say us let spilikins
a of remains immortal the repose would which upon cemetery immense
better?" comparison that like you Do generations. distinct thousand

Barbicane. answered other," the as good as is "One

Michel. replied please," to difficult are You devil! "The

matter not does "it Barbicane, prosaic the resumed friend," worthy "My
is." it what know don't we when like looks it what

with argue to me teach will "that Michel; exclaimed answer," good "A
_savants_."

the round speed uniform almost with went projectile the meantime the In
dream not did travellers the that imagined easily be may It disc. lunar
every eyes their before lay landscape fresh A rest. minute's a taking of
the of glimpse a caught they morning the in one half-past About instant.
recognised and map, his consulted Barbicane mountain. another of summit
Eratosthenes.

amphitheatres those of one high, metres 4,500 mountain circular a was It
of friends his informed Barbicane satellite. the upon numerous so
circles. these of formation the upon opinion singular Kepler's
cavities crateriform these mathematician, celebrated the to According
man. of hand the by out dug been had

Nicholl. asked for?" "What

rays, solar the of ardour the from themselves preserve to order "In
days." consecutive fifteen during moon the strike which

Michel. said fools!" not were Selenites "The

that probable is it "But Nicholl. answered idea!" singular a was "It
digging for circles, these of dimensions real the know not did Kepler
Selenites." for impracticable labour, giants' been have would them

than less times six is moon the of surface the on weight the if so, "Why
Michel. said earth?" the of surface the upon

Nicholl. replied smaller?" times six are Selenites the if "But

the terminated which Barbicane, added Selenites?" no are there if "And
discussion.

projectile the without horizon the from disappeared soon Eratosthenes
This observation. rigorous a allow to it near sufficiently been having
Carpathians. the from Apennines the separated mountain

distinguished been have mountains of chains several orography, lunar In
Some, hemisphere. northern the over distributed principally are which
hemisphere. southern the of portions certain occupy however,

latitudes their with chains, different these of list a is following The
summits:-- highest their of height the and

metres. deg. deg.
7,603 lat. S. 0 to 84 Doerfel Mounts
7,600 " 0 " 65 Leibnitz "
1,600 " 30 " 20 Rook "
4,047 " 28 " 17 Altai "
3,898 " 20 " 10 Cordilleras "
3,631 " 18 " 8 Pyrenees "
838 " 13 " 5 Oural "
5,847 " 10 " 4 Alembert "
2,021 lat. N. 21 " 8 Hoemus "
1,939 " 19 " 15 Carpathians "
5,501 " 27 " 14 Apennines "
2,746 " 28 " 21 Taurus "
4,171 " 33 " 25 Riphees "
1,170 " 29 " 17 Hercynians "
5,567 " 41 " 32 Caucasia "
3,617 " 49 " 42 Alps "

Apennines, the of that is chains different these of important most The
to inferior yet is and leagues, 150 extends which of development the
run Apennines The earth. the of movements orographical great the of that
the on continued are and Rains, of Sea the of border eastern the along
100 about measures which of profile the Carpathians, the by north
leagues.

these of summit the of glimpse a catch only could travellers The
the but 16; long. east and 10 long. west between lie which Apennines
and long., east 30 to 18 from visible was Carpathians the of chain
distributed. were they how see could they

chain this that Seeing justifiable. very them to seemed hypothesis One
high with and form in circular there and here was Carpathians the of
amphitheatres. important formed anciently it that concluded they peaks,
cataclysm vast the by up broken been have must circles mountainous These
what then looked Carpathians These due. was Rains of Sea the which to
some if would Ptolemy and Arzachel, Purbach, of amphitheatres the
into them transform and ramparts left their down throw to were cataclysm
a metres, 3,200 of height average an present They chains. continuous
fall slopes southern Their Pyrenees. the of certain to comparable height
Rains. of Sea immense the into straight

parallel, lunar 20th the of altitude the at was Barbicane a.m. 2 About
the bears which high, metres 1,559 mountain, little that from far not
only was moon the to projectile the from distance The Pythias. of name
half a and two to telescopes of means by brought kilometres, 1,200
leagues.

immense an like travellers the of eyes the before lay Imbrium" "Mare The
the on them Near distinct. very not were details the which of depression
1,813 at estimated is which of altitude the Lambert, Mount rose left
in Tempests, of Ocean the of borders the upon on, farther and metres,
Euler. of mountain shining the rose 29, long. east and 23 lat. north
surface, lunar the above metres 1,815 only rises which mountain, This
Schroeter. astronomer the by work interesting an of object the been has
mountains, lunar the of origin the out find to trying _savant_, This
to equal looked always crater the of volume the whether himself asked
be to found he this Now it. formed that ramparts the of volume the
of eruption single a that concluded hence he and case, the generally
successive for ramparts, these form to sufficed had matter volcanic
an was alone Euler Mount connection. the destroyed have would eruptions
successive several taken have must it and law, general this to exception
its of that double is cavity its of volume the for it, form to eruptions
inclosure.

whose observers terrestrial to allowable were hypotheses these All
to contented longer no was Barbicane but incomplete; were instruments
the nearer regularly drew projectile his that seeing and them, accept
of least at or it, reaching ultimately of despair not did he disc lunar
formation. its of secrets the out finding




XIII. CHAPTER

LANDSCAPES. LUNAR


lunar 30th the over was bullet the morning the in two half-past At
the by reduced kilometres, 1,000 of distance effective an at parallel
could it that impossible seemed still It ten. to instruments optical
relatively translation, of movement Its disc. the on point any reach
the from distance that At Barbicane. President to inexplicable was slow,
the against it maintain to order in fast been have to ought it moon
also was phenomenon that of reason The attraction. of power
The cause. the for seek to wanting was time besides, inexplicable;
not did they and eyes, their beneath flew surface lunar the on reliefs
detail. single a lose to want

half a and two of distance a at telescopes the through appeared disc The
what earth, the from distance that up taken were aronaut an If leagues.
highest the as tell, can one No surface? its upon distinguish he would
metres. 8,000 exceeded not have ascensions

and Barbicane what of description exact an is however, following, The
height:-- that from saw companions his

Selenographers disc. the on appeared colours different of patches Large
each from distinct quite are They nature. their about agree not do
were oceans terrestrial the if that opinion of is Schmidt Julius other.
the between difference the tell only could observer Selenite a up, dried
as colour of patches by plains continental and oceans terrestrial
the upon sees observer terrestrial a which those as varied distinctly
known plains, vast the to common colour the him, to According moon.
and green with intermingled grey, dark is "seas," of name the under
way. same the in coloured are craters large the of Some brown.

by shared is it selenographer; German the of opinion this knew Barbicane
whilst right, were they that noticed He Moedler. and Boeer Messrs.
the of surface the on colouring grey allow only who astronomers, certain
vivid; very was colour green the places certain In wrong. are moon,
and Serenity of Seas the in so is it Schmidt, Julius to according
interior no with craters wide the remarked likewise Barbicane Humours.
fresh-polished of that to analogous colour, bluish a of are which cones,
and disc, lunar the to belonged really colours These steel. of sheets
some from either think, astronomers certain as result, not did
the or telescopes the of object-glasses the in imperfection
any longer no had Barbicane atmosphere. terrestrial the of interposition
not could and void, the through it at looking was He it. about doubt
this of existence the that considered He error. optical any commit
shades green the were Now science. to proved was colouring different
He atmosphere? dense and low a by up kept vegetation, tropical to owing
certain. be yet not could

A distinct. sufficiently quite tinge, reddish a noticed he on Farther
isolated an of bottom the upon observed been already had colour similar
which Amphitheatre, Lichtenberg the of name the under known inclosure,
But moon. the of border the on Mountains, Hercynian the near situated is
nature. its out make not could he

he for disc, the of peculiarity another about fortunate more not was He
one:-- following the was peculiarity The cause. its out find not could

long some remarked he when president the near watching was Ardan Michel
was It sun. the of rays direct the by up lighted brilliantly lines white
that radiation the from different very furrows, luminous of succession a
lines. parallel in ran They presented. had Copernicus

exclaimed-- readiness, usual his with Michel,

fields!" cultivated are there "Why,

shoulders. his shrugging Nicholl, repeated fields!" "Cultivated

what "But Ardan. Michel replied events," all at fields, "Ploughed
must they oxen gigantic what and be, must Selenites these ploughmen
furrows!" such make to ploughs, their to harness

crevices!" are they furrows, not are "They

you do what "Only docility. with Michel answered be," them let "Crevices
his told soon Barbicane science?" of world the in crevices by mean
were they that knew He crevices. lunar about knew he all companions
disc; lunar the of parts non-mountainous the all upon observed furrows
leagues five to four from were isolated, generally furrows, these that
their and metres, 1,500 to 1,000 from varies width their that only;
their about more nothing knew he But parallel. rigorously are edges
nature. their or formation

attentively. very telescope his through furrows these watched Barbicane
long were They steep. exceedingly were banks their that noticed He
for taken be might they imagination little a with ramparts; parallel
engineers. Selenite by raised fortifications of lines long

line, by cut been had they if as straight as were furrows these of Some
Some parallel. still edges with through curved slightly were others
circular the furrowed Some craters. crossed Some other. each crossed
notably seas, the crossed Some Petavius. or Posidonius as such cavities,
Serenity. of Sea the

of imagination the exercised naturally had Nature of accidents These
discover not did observations earliest The astronomers. terrestrial
to seems Herschel nor Hire, La Cassini, Hevelius, Neither furrows. these
the attracted first 1789 in who Schroeter was It them. known have
such them, studied who followed Others them. to _savants_ of attention
are there present At Moedler. and Boeer, Gruithuysen, Pastorff, as
yet not has nature their counted, been have they though but seventy-six;
than anymore certainly, fortifications not are They determined. been
of surface the on light so water for rivers, dried-up of beds are they
cross often furrows there and ditches, such dug have not could moon the
elevation. great a at craters

and idea, an had Ardan Michel that acknowledged be however, must, It
Schmidt. Julius with it shared he it, knowing without that,

simply be appearances inexplicable these not "may he, said "Why,"
vegetation?" of phenomena

Barbicane. asked mean?" you do way what "In

not may "but Michel, answered president," worthy angry, be not do "Now
trees?" of rows regular be lines black these

Barbicane. said vegetation?" some find to want you "Do

hypothesis My explain! not do men scientific you what explain to want "I
disappear, to seem or disappear, furrows these why explain least at will
epochs." regular at

they?" should "Why

and leaves, their lose they when invisible become might trees "Because
again." grow they when visible

it "but Barbicane, answered fellow," old ingenious, is explanation "Your
admitted." be cannot

"Why?"

moon, the of surface the on season any be to said be cannot it "Because
the of surface the on vegetation of phenomena the consequently, and,
produced." be cannot moon

at there sun the keeps axis lunar the of obliquity slight the fact, In
equatorial the Above latitude. every under altitude equal almost an
and zenith, the occupies invariably almost orb radiant the regions
Therefore, regions. polar the in horizon the of limit the passes hardly
perpetual reigns there position, its to according region, each in
axis whose Jupiter, planet the in as winter, or autumn, summer, spring,
orbit. its upon inclined slightly also is

are They solve. to question difficult a is furrows these of origin The
amphitheatres, and craters the of formation the to posterior certainly
It ramparts. circular their broken and them, crossed have several for
epochs, geographical latest the with contemporary are they that be may
forces. natural of expansion the to owing only are and

40th the of altitude the reached had projectile the meantime the In
than greater be not could that distance a at latitude lunar of degree
leagues two at telescopes the through appeared Objects kilometres. 800
high, metres 505 Helicon, the feet their under rose point this At only.
portion small a inclose which heights, mediocre the were left the on and
Iris. of Gulf the of name the under Rains of Sea the of

than transparent more times 170 be to ought atmosphere terrestrial The
the on observations complete make to astronomers allow to order in is it
no in moving was projectile the void the in But moon. the of surface
What observed. object the and observer the of eye the between lay fluid
powerful most the than distance less a at was Barbicane more, is
Mountains, Rocky the on one the or Rosse Lord of that even telescopes,
for favourable highly circumstances in therefore, was, It give. could
the Yet moon. the of habitability the of question great the solving
distinguish only could He still. him escaped question this of solution
arid north, the towards and, plains, immense the of beds deserted the
his indicated ruin No man. of hand the betrayed labour No mountains.
developed was life that indicated animals of agglomeration No passage.
no anywhere, movement no was There degree. inferior an in even there,
on represented kingdoms three the Of anywhere. vegetation of appearance
the of that on represented was only one globe, terrestrial the
kingdom. mineral the moon--viz.,

after nobody is "there out, put rather looking Ardan, Michel said "So,"
all."

as tree nor animal, man, neither seen have "we Nicholl; answered "No,"
of bottom the at refuge taken has atmosphere the if all, After yet.
opposite the on even or amphitheatres, the of interior the in cavities,
question." the decide cannot we moon, the of face

is man a sight piercing most the for "even Barbicane, added "Besides,"
there if Therefore miles. four than more of distance a at visible not
them." see cannot we but projectile, our see can they Selenites any are

was distance the parallel, 50th the of altitude the at a.m., 11 About
a of outlines capricious the rose left the On miles. 300 to reduced
the on right, the Towards light. full in outlined mountains, of chain
well bottomless and dark vast a like hole black large a was contrary,
soil. lunar the in bored

the which from circle deep a Pluto, or Lake, Black the was hole That
new the and quarter last the between studied conveniently be could earth
east. to west from thrown are shadows the when moon,

It satellite. the of surface the on with met rarely is colour black This
to Endymion, of circle the of depths the in seen been only yet, as has,
bottom the at and hemisphere, northern the in Sea, Cold the of east the
of border eastern the towards equator the upon Grimaldi of circle the of
orb. the

long. east and 51 lat. north in situated mountain, circular a is Pluto
regretted Barbicane wide. thirty and long miles fifty is circle Its 9.
abyss an was There opening. vast this over perpendicularly passing not
with. acquainted become to phenomenon mysterious some perhaps see, to
nothing was There guided. be not could projectile the of course the But
projectile a less much guided, be not could balloon A submit. but do to
inside. are you when

passed. last at was Rains of Sea the of limit northern the a.m. 5 About
the left, the on one the remained, Fontenelle and Condamine La Mounts
60th the from starting disc, the of part That right. the on other
to it brought telescopes The mountainous. absolutely became degree,
of summit the between that to distance inferior an league, one within
peaks with bristling was region this All level. sea the and Blanc Mont
a to degree 70th the about rose Philolaus Mount amphitheatres. and
leagues sixteen crater elliptical an opening metres, 3,700 of height
wide. four and long

strange exceedingly an presented distance, that from seen disc, the Then
also and ones, earthly to different very were landscapes The aspect.
inferior. very

had covering vaporous of absence this atmosphere, no having moon The
surface, its on twilight no is There out. pointed already consequences
a of suddenness the with night, following day and day following night
no is There darkness. profound in lighted or extinguished lamp
from instant one in falls temperature the heat: to cold from transition
space. of cold the to heat water boiling

following:--Absolute the is air of absence this of consequence Another
called is What penetrate. not do rays sun's the where reigns darkness
holds air the that matter luminous the earth, the upon light diffused
produces which dawns, and twilights creates which suspension, in
not does chiaro-oscuro, the of magic the all and penumbrae, shadows,
admit only that contrasts of harshness the Hence moon. the upon exist
the from eyes his shades Selenite a If white. and black colours, two
in as shine stars the and dark, absolutely appears sky the rays solar
nights. darkest the

strange this by friends two his and Barbicane on produced impression The
their use to how know not did They imagined. be well may things of state
in distances respective the seize longer no could They eyes.
of phenomenon the soften not does which landscape, lunar A perspective.
the of landscape-painter a by painted be not could chiaro-oscuro, the
paper. white upon ink of blots but nothing be would It earth.

at then projectile, the when even alter not did things of aspect This
a by moon the from separated only was degree, 80th the of altitude the
less at passed it a.m., 5 at when, even not miles, fifty of distance
the which distance a Gioja, of mountain the from miles twenty-five than
have could they if as seemed It half-a-mile. to reduced telescopes
projectile the long before that impossible appeared It moon. the touched
the where Pole, North the at only if it, against knock not should
of background dark the against outlined clearly were mountains brilliant
jump and port-lights the of one open to wanted Ardan Michel sky. the
thought He leagues? twelve of fall a was What surface. lunar the upon
if for attempt, useless a been have however, would, It that. of nothing
Michel satellite, the on point any reach to going not was projectile the
it reached have not and movement, its by along hurled been have would
either.

disc, the half Only appeared. pole lunar the a.m., 6 moment, that At
half other the whilst travellers, the to appeared lighted, brilliantly
of line the passed suddenly projectile The darkness. the in disappeared
was and darkness, absolute and light intense between demarcation
night. profoundest the into plunged suddenly




XIV. CHAPTER

HALF. A AND HOURS FIFTY-FOUR AND HUNDRED THREE OF NIGHT A


the grazing was projectile the place took phenomenon this moment the At
few A distance. miles' twenty-five that less at Pole, North moon's
darkness absolute the into it plunge to sufficed therefore, had, seconds
gradations without rapidly, so place taken had transition The space. of
seemed orb the that undulations, luminous the of attenuation or light of
gust. powerful a by out blown been have to

wonder-stricken. Ardan, Michel cried disappeared!" melted, has moon "The

so formerly disc, the on appeared had shade or light of ray no fact, In
the by still deeper rendered and complete, was obscurity The brilliant.
lasts which night, lunar of darkness the was It stars. the of shining
result the night, long disc--a the of point each on half a and hours 354
the of rotation and translation of movements the of equality the of
in projectile The earth. the round other the herself, upon one the moon,
the of action the under longer no was shadow of cone satellite's the
rays. solar

could travellers The complete. therefore, was, darkness interior the In
this lighten to necessity the came Hence another. one see longer no
of gas, the economise to be might Barbicane desirous However darkness.
it to recourse have to obliged was he reserve, a small so had he which
then sun the which brilliancy expensive light--an artificial for
refused.

to going is "he Ardan; Michel cried orb!" radiant the take devil "The
nothing." for rays his us giving of instead gas our spend to us force

is it fault, his not is "It Nicholl. said sun," the accuse not must "We
us between screen a like herself putting and coming for fault moon's the
him." and

again. Michel said sun!" the "It's

Nicholl. retorted moon!" the "It's

saying-- by to end an put Barbicane which began, dispute idle An

the is It moon. the nor sun the of fault the neither is it friends, "My
rigorously of instead course its from deviating for fault projectile's
that of fault the is it still, juster be to Or, it. following
direction." first our altered deplorably so which asteroid unfortunate

have us let settled is business that "as Ardan; Michel answered "Good!"
we observations, making in passed entirely night a After breakfast. our
little." a rights to us set to something want

repast the prepared Michel contradiction. no with met proposition This
drank They eating. of sake the for ate they But minutes. few a in
the into away borne travellers, bold The hurrahs. or toasts without
vague a felt rays, of escort accustomed their without space of darkness
the to dear so darkness, "farouche" The hearts. their invade uneasiness
sides. all on them surrounded Hugo, Victor of pen

or hours, 354 night, interminable this about talked they meantime the In
the upon imposed have laws physical which long, days, 15 nearly
of explanation some friends his gave Barbicane moon. the of inhabitants
phenomenon. curious this of consequences and causes the

moon the of hemisphere each if "for he, said is," certainly it "Curious
are we which over one the days, fifteen for light solar of deprived is
a night, long its during enjoy, even not does moment this at moving
moon, no is there word, a In earth. brilliantly-lighted the of sight
the of side one for except spheroid, our to qualification that applying
never Europe example, for earth--if, upon same the was it if Now, disc.
figure can antipodes--you the at visible only was she and moon, the saw
Australia." in arriving on European a of astonishment the yourselves to

moon," the see and go to but nothing for voyage the make would "They
Michel. answered

the to reserved is astonishment "that Barbicane, resumed "Well,"
side a earth, the to moon the of side opposite the inhabits who Selenite
globe." terrestrial the of fellow-beings our to invisible ever for

here arrived had we "if Nicholl, added seen," have should we which "And
later." fortnight a say, to is new--that is moon the when epoch the at

face visible the of inhabitant "an Barbicane, resumed amends," make "To
face. invisible the on detriment the to Nature by favoured singularly is
ray a without long, hours 354 of nights dark has see, you as latter, The
when contrary, the on other, The obscurity. the penetrate to light of
horizon, the under sets fortnight, a for him lighted has which sun, the
earth, the is It rise. orb splendid a horizon opposite the on sees
is which earth, know--the we which moon that than larger times thirteen
thirteen light a sheds which and degrees, two of diameter a to developed
only which earth, the qualifies; atmosphere no which greater, times
reappears." sun the when disappears

perhaps." academical "rather Ardan; Michel said sentence," fine "A

face visible the "that out, put nowise Barbicane, resumed follows," "It
lighted always is it as inhabit, to agreeable very be must disc the of
moon." the or sun the by

the by compensated quite be must advantage "this Nicholl, said "But,"
cause." must light this which heat unbearable

reflected light the for faces, two under same the is inconvenience "This
face invisible this However, heat. of deprived evidently is earth the by
for that say I face. visible the than heat of deprived more still is
understand." not probably would Michel Nicholl; you,

Michel. said you," "Thank

the receives face invisible the "when Barbicane, resumed fact," "In
in is she that say, to is new--that is moon the heat and light solar
is She earth. the and sun the between situated is she that conjunction,
when opposition in occupies she which situation the of account on then,
the from distance her of double the by sun the nearer full, is she
of part two-hundredth the at estimated be may distance this Now earth.
two at numbers, round in or, earth; the and sun the separates which that
sun the nearer is face visible this Therefore leagues. thousand hundred
rays." his receives it when leagues thousand hundred two by

Nicholl. replied right," "Quite

Barbicane. resumed "Whilst--"

companion. grave his interrupting Michel, said me," "Allow

want?" you do "What

explanation." the with on go to want "I

"Why?"

understood." have I that prove "To

smiling. Barbicane, said then," on, "Go

President of gestures and tone the imitating Michel, said "Whilst,"
the sun the by lighted is moon the of face visible the "when Barbicane,
the earth the to regard with situated say, to is full--that is moon
radiant the from it separates which distance The sun. the to opposite
heat the and leagues, 200,000 by numbers round in increased then is orb
less." rather be must receives it which

artist an for Michel, know, you "Do Barbicane. exclaimed done!" "Well
intelligent." are you

the on intelligent all are "we carelessly, Michel answered "Yes,"
Italiens." des Boulevard

on went and companion, amiable his with gravely hands shook Barbicane
the of inhabitants the to reserved advantages few the enumerating
face. visible

which eclipses, sun's the of observations the quoted he others Amongst
must moon the because disc, lunar the of side one from seen be only can
by caused eclipses, These place. take can they before opposition in be
last may moon, the and sun the between earth the of interposition the
its by refracted rays the of account on which, during hours, two
upon spot black a like appear only can globe terrestrial the atmosphere,
sun. the

by ill-treated very is hemisphere invisible "the Nicholl, said "Then,"
Nature."

certain a By it. of whole the not "but Barbicane, answered "Yes,"
moon the centre, its on balancing of sort a liberation, of movement
a like is She earth. the to disc her of half the than more presents
terrestrial the towards is which of gravity of centre the pendulum,
oscillation? that comes Whence regularly. oscillates which and globe,
uniform with animated is axis her on rotation of movement her Because
elliptical an following translation, of movement her whilst velocity,
translation of velocity the perigee the At not. is earth, the round orb
border. western her of portion certain a shows moon the and greater, is
her of morsel a and greater, is rotation of velocity the apogee her At
which degrees, eight about of strip a is It appears. border eastern
is, result The east. the on sometimes west, the on sometimes appears
and hundred five shows moon the parts thousand a of that therefore,
sixty-nine."

will we Selenites, become ever we "if Michel; answered matter," "No
light." like I face. visible the inhabit

the on condensed be should atmosphere "the Nicholl, replied "Unless,"
pretend." astronomers certain as side, other

simply. Michel answered consideration," a is "That

their resumed observers the and concluded, was breakfast meantime the In
all out putting by port-light dark the through see to tried They posts.
the penetrated atom luminous one not But projectile. the in light
obscurity.

the though that it was How Barbicane. preoccupied fact inexplicable One
twenty-five of distance a within moon, the near so been had projectile
he enormous, been had speed its If her? upon fallen not had it miles,
relatively a with But fallen. not had it why understood have would
explained. be not could attraction lunar to resistance the speed slight
some Did force? strange some of influence the under projectile the Was
would it that evident henceforth was It ether? the in it maintain body
going it Was going? it was Where moon. the upon point any touch not
the in along carried it Was disc? the to nearer or from away farther
the in calculate how know, to they were How infinitude? across gloom
solve not could he but anxious, Barbicane made questions these All dark?
them.

some of distance a at perhaps, there, was orb invisible the fact, In
it. see longer any could he nor companions his neither but only, leagues
air, The it. hear not could they surface its on made was noise any If
groans the them to convey to wanting was transmission, of vehicle that
half-granite, already man "a make legends Arabian the which moon that of
palpitating." still but

patient most the exasperate to enough was it that agreed be will It
from hidden was that hemisphere unknown the precisely was It observers.
had later fortnight a or sooner fortnight a which face That eyes. their
then was rays, solar the by up lighted splendidly be, would or been,
another in be projectile the would Where darkness. absolute in lost
Who it? taken have attraction of hazards the would Where fortnight?
say? could

is, moon the of hemisphere invisible the that admitted generally is It
hemisphere. visible the to similar absolutely constitution, its by
Barbicane libration of movements those in seen is it of One-seventh
and plains only were there seen surface the upon Now of. spoke
could They maps. the on those like craters, and amphitheatres mountains,
the supposing yet, And nature. dead and arid same the imagine there
the with that Suppose face? that upon refuge taken have to atmosphere
that Suppose continents? regenerated these to life given had water air
these people animals that Suppose there? persists still vegetation
conditions those under lives still man that Suppose seas? and continents
been have would it were there questions many How habitability? of
the from drawn been have might solutions What solve! to interesting
to been have would it delight What hemisphere! that of contemplation
seen! has eye human no which world that at glance

may darkness this of midst the in travellers the of disappointment The
The prevented. was disc lunar the of observation All imagined. be
no that acknowledged be must it and visible, were alone constellations
in been ever had Secchi, the nor Chacornac, Faye, neither astronomers,
them. observe to conditions favourable such

bathed world, starry this of splendour the equal could nothing fact, In
superb out threw vault celestial the in set Diamonds ether. limpid in
to Cross Southern the from firmament the in take could look One flames.
on years, 12,000 in will which constellations two those Star, North the
polar of _rles_ their resign equinoxes, of succession the of account
Wega to other the hemisphere, southern the in Canopus to one the stars,
infinitude, sublime this in itself lost Imagination northern. the in
the by created star new a like moving was projectile the which amidst
soft a with shone constellations these causes natural From man. of hand
to atmosphere no was there because twinkle not did they lustre;
of degrees different of and dense, unequally strata its with intervene
scintillation. this causes which humidity,

the which upon firmament, constellated the watched long travellers The
painful a But hole. black enormous an made moon the of screen vast
an was This contemplation. their from them drew length at sensation
a with port-lights the of glasses the covered soon which cold, intense
his with projectile the warmed longer no sun The ice. of coating thick
heat This walls. its in up stored heat the lost gradually it and rays,
considerable a and space, into evaporated rapidly radiation by was
was humidity interior The result. the was temperature the of lowering
all prevented and window-panes, the with contact by ice into changed
observation.

17 to fallen had it that said thermometer, the consulting Nicholl,
every notwithstanding Therefore, Fahr). (1 zero below (centigrade)
well as heat seek to obliged was Barbicane economical, being for reason
longer no was bullet the of temperature low The gas. from light as
death. to frozen been have would occupants Its bearable.

Michel said journey," the of monotony the about complain not will "We
times At events! all at temperature in had, have we variety "What Ardan.
the like heat with saturated and light, with blinded been have we
amidst darkness profound into plunged are we Now Pampas! the of Indians
no have We indeed! No, pole! the of Esquimaux the like cold, boreal
honour!" our in things many done has Nature and complain, to right

temperature?" exterior the is "what Nicholl, asked "But,"

Barbicane. answered space," planetary of that "Precisely

for opportunity an be this not "would Ardan, Michel resumed "Then,"
the in bathed were we when attempt not could we experiment that making
rays?" solar

in situated usefully are we "for Barbicane, answered never," or "Now
the whether see and space, of temperature the verify to order
correct." are Pouillet or Fourier of calculations

humidity interior the at "Look Michel. said enough," cold is it way "Any
our of vapour the continues fall this If port-lights. the on condensing
snow." in us around fall will respiration

Barbicane. said thermometer," a get us "Let

no given have would thermometer ordinary an that seen readily be will It
The exposed. be to going was it which in circumstances the under result
below liquid keep not does it for cup, its in frozen have would mercury
spirit a with himself provided had Barbicane But zero. below 44
of minima the gives which system, Walferdin the on thermometer,
temperature. low excessively

an with compared was instrument this experiment the beginning Before
it. employ to prepared Barbicane and thermometer, ordinary

Nicholl. asked it?" manage we shall "How

loss. a at never was who Ardan, Michel answered easier," is "Nothing
follow will it instrument; the out throw rapidly, port-light the "Open
take after hour an of quarter a docility; exemplary with projectile the
in." it

Barbicane. asked hand?" your "With

Michel. answered hand," my "With

hand the "for Barbicane, said it," try not do friend, my then, "Well,
frightful the by deformed and frozen stump, a only be will back draw you
cold."

"Really?"

a with made one like burn, terrible a of sensation the feel would "You
brutally is heat when happens thing same the for iron, red-hot
sure not am I Besides, inserted. is it when as body our from abstracted
us." follow still out thrown objects that

Nicholl. said "Why?"

slightly however atmosphere, any through passing are we if "Because
us prevents darkness the Now delayed. be will objects these dense,
to not order in Therefore, us. around float still they whether verifying
it pull easily so and it, to something tie will we thermometer, our risk
interior." the into back

the of out instrument the threw Nicholl followed. was advice Barbicane's
it that so cord, short very a by it holding port-light, rapidly-opened
yet and second, one open only was window The in. drawn rapidly be could
to projectile the of interior the allow to enough was second one that
cold. frightfully become

freeze to here enough cold is "it Ardan, Michel cried diables!_" "_Mille
bears!" white

the allow to time sufficient than more by, go half-an-hour let Barbicane
The space. of temperature the of level the to descend to instrument
in. drawn rapidly then was thermometer

phial little the into spilt mercury of quantity the calculated Barbicane
said-- and instrument, the of part lower the to soldered

Fahr.) (218 zero!" below centigrade degrees forty and hundred "One

temperature frightful the was Such Fourier. not right, was Pouillet M.
the when continents lunar the of that perhaps Such space! sidereal of
during absorbs she which heat the all radiation by loses night of orb
sunshine. of days fifteen the




XV. CHAPTER

PARABOLA. OR HYPERBOLA


his and Barbicane that astonished be probably will readers Our
in them for store in future the with occupied little so were companions
of Instead ether. of infinitude the in along carried prison, metal their
making in time their lost they going, were they where themselves asking
their in installed comfortably been had they if as just experiments,
studies. own

such above were strong-minded so men that answered be might It
and uneasy, them make not did things little such that considerations,
future. their about think to than do to else something had they that

they projectile--that their of masters not were they that is truth The
the direct can seaman A direction. its alter nor it stop neither could
balloon his give can aronaut an pleases; he as ship his of head
their over authority no had contrary, the on They, movement. vertical
troubling not their Hence them. to possible was manoeuvre No vehicle.
mind. of state go" things "let or themselves,

earth upon called day that during a.m. 8 moment, that at they were Where
and moon, the of neighbourhood the in Certainly December? of sixth the
the upon screen black vast a like appear to her for enough near even
to impossible was it them, separated which distance the to As firmament.
grazed has forces, inexplicable by up kept projectile, The it. estimate
miles' twenty-five than less at satellite the of pole north the
had they since diminished or increased distance that had But distance.
estimate to which by landmark no was There shadow? of cone the in been
was it Perhaps projectile. the of velocity the or direction the either
shadow. pure the leave soon would and disc the from away rapidly going
long before would and it, approaching was it contrary, the on Perhaps,
which atmosphere, invisible the in peak elevated some against strike
the of detriment the to doubtless journey, the terminated have would
travellers.

in rich always Ardan, Michel and subject, this upon began discussion A
lunar by restrained bullet, the that opinion the out gave explanations,
the to on arolite an like moon the on falling by end would attraction,
globe. terrestrial the of surface

fall not do arolites "all Barbicane, answered place," first the "In
Therefore, so. do proportion small a only earth; the of surface the upon
fall shall we that follow necessarily not does it arolites are we if
moon." the upon

enough--" near get we "if Michel, answered "Still,"

by stars shooting seen not you "Have Barbicane. replied "Error,"
epochs?" certain at sky the in thousands

"Yes."

against rubbing by shine only corpuscles, rather or stars, those "Well,
they atmosphere, the through pass they if Now, strata. atmospheric the
It fall. rarely they yet and globe, our from miles 16 than less at pass
and moon, the near very approach may It projectile. our with same the is
it." upon fall not yet

would vehicle our how know to curious am "I Michel, asked then," "But
space." in behave

minutes' some after Barbicane, answered hypotheses," two see only "I
reflection.

they?" are "What

it and curves, mathematical two between choice the has projectile "The
it which with velocity the to according other the or one the follow will
estimate." now cannot I which and animated, is

hyperbola." an or parabola a describe either will it "Yes,

parabola, a describe will it speed some "with Barbicane, answered "Yes,"
hyperbola." an speed greater with and

what once at know "I Ardan. Michel exclaimed words!" grand those like "I
please?" you if parabola, your is what And mean. you

section conic a is parabola "a captain, the answered friend," "My
sides." its of one to parallel plane a by cone a cutting from arising

tone. satisfied a in Michel said "Oh!"

describes." howitzer a of bomb the that trajectory same the about is "It

Michel. asked hyperbola?" an And so. "Just

plane cutting the when cone a of section a by formed curve a is "It
makes." cone the of side the than base the with angle greater a makes

if as tone, serious most the in Ardan Michel exclaimed possible?" it "Is
Captain this, remember "Then event. grave a of informed been had he
to going was hyperbola--I the of definition your in like I what Nicholl,
than understand to easy less still is it that hyperhumbug--is the of say
define." to pretend you word the

They jokes. Ardan's Michel to attention no paid Barbicane and Nicholl
what about eager were They discussion. scientific a into launched had
other the hyperbola, the for was One take. would projectile the curve
_x_'s. with bristling reasons other each gave They parabola. the for
Ardan Michel made which language a in presented were arguments Their
would adversaries the of neither and lively, was discussion The jump.
predilection. of curve his sacrifice

became Ardan Michel until prolonged was dispute scientific This
said-- and impatient,

and hyperbolas your throwing off leave do Cosine, Messrs. say, "I
about thing interesting only the know to want I head. one's at parabolas
well. Very curves. your of other or one follow shall We business. the
to?" us take they will where But

Nicholl. answered "Nowhere,"

nowhere?" "How

indefinitely!" prolonged curves, unfinished are they "Evidently

they if parabola or hyperbola about matter it does What _savants_! "Ah,
space?" into indefinitely us carry both

for art for cared They laughing. help not could Nicholl and Barbicane
more a at discussed been question useless more had Never sake. own its
whether projectile, the that was truth fatal The moment. inopportune
strike never would along, carried parabolically or hyperbolically
moon. the or earth the either against

future? immediate most the in travellers bold these of become would What
when days, few a in would they thirst, or hunger of die not did they If
them killed not had cold the if air, of want for die them, failed gas
first!

excessive the gas, economise to important so was it although Still,
certain a consume to them forced temperature surrounding the of lowness
Happily heat. or light its either without do not could They quantity.
slightly apparatus Regnault and Reiset the by developed caloric the
much spending without and projectile, the of temperature the elevated
degree. bearable a to it raise could they

very become had port-lights the through observation meantime the In
and panes the upon condensed bullet the inside steam The difficult.
glass the of opacity the destroy to obliged were They immediately. froze
the of phenomena several record could they However, rubbing. constant by
interest. highest

stars shooting the atmosphere, any had disc invisible the if fact, In
passed itself projectile the If it. through passing seen be would
storm, echoed--a noise some hear not it might strata, fluid the through
not they Should activity? in volcano a or avalanche, an instance, for
facts, Such mountain? burning a of fulgurations intense the see
obscure the elucidated singularly have would recorded, carefully
standing Nicholl, and Barbicane Thus constitution. lunar the of question
patience. scrupulous with watched port-lights, their at astronomers like

the answer not did It dark. and mute remained disc the then until But
minds. ardent these of interrogations multifarious

enough. correct seemed that reflection a Michel from provoked This

epoch the choose to well do shall we journey, our recommence we ever "If
new." is moon the when

more been have would circumstance "that Nicholl, answered "True,"
be not would sunlight, in bathed moon, the that agree I favourable.
be would earth the hand other the on but passage, the during visible
should we now, are we like moon the round dragged are we if And full.
magnificently disc invisible the seeing of advantage the have least at
up." lighted

it, about think you do "What Ardan. Michel replied Nicholl," said, "Well
Barbicane?"

recommence we ever "if president: grave the answered this," think "I
same the under and epoch, same the at start shall we journey, this
been have not it would goal, our reached had we Suppose circumstances.
night? dark of instead daylight full in continents the find to better
better under made been have installation first our not Would
have could we side, invisible the to As evidently. Yes, circumstances?
So, globe. lunar the on expeditions exploring our in that visited
to ought we But chosen. well was moon full the of time the therefore,
to not ought we it reached have to order in and goal, our reached have
road." our from deviated have

have we "Yet Ardan. Michel said that," to make to answer no is "There
the whether knows Who moon! the seeing for opportunity fine a passed
the than advanced more not are planets other the of inhabitants
satellites?" their of subject the on earth the of _savants_

Ardan's Michel to given been have easily might answer following The
proximity, greater their of account on satellites, other remark:--Yes,
Jupiter, Saturn, of inhabitants The easier. them of study the made have
communication establish to able been have exist, they if Uranus, and
Jupiter of satellites four The easily. more much moons their with
274,700 leagues, 172,200 leagues, 108,260 of distance a at gravitate
the from reckoned are distances these But leagues. 480,130 and leagues,
to 17,000 is which radius, the away taking by and planet, the of centre
much a at is satellite first the that seen be will it leagues, 18,000
the from is moon the than Jupiter of surface the from distance less
Diana near. are four Saturn, of moons eight the Of earth. the of centre
48,191 Enceladus, leagues; 62,966 Thetys, off; leagues 84,600 is
leagues 34,500 of distance average an at is Mimas lastly, and leagues;
only is Ariel, first, the Uranus, of satellites eighteen the Of only.
planet. the from leagues 51,520

experiment an stars, three those of surface the upon Therefore,
less presented have would Barbicane President of that to analogous
the attempted have inhabitants their therefore, If, difficulties.
the with themselves acquainted perhaps, have, they enterprise,
hides satellite their which disc the of half the of constitution
planet, their left never have they if But eyes. their from eternally
earth. the of astronomers the than them about more know not do they

that darkness the in describing was bullet the meantime the In
Was out. find to them allowed landmark no which trajectory incalculable
or attraction lunar of influence the under either altered direction its
a But tell. not could Barbicane orb? unknown some of action the under
and vehicle, the of position relative the in place taken had change
a.m. 4 about it of aware became Barbicane

was projectile the of bottom the that this, in consisted change The
perpendicular itself kept and moon, the of surface the towards turned
this caused had gravitation or attraction The axis. its with
the towards inclined bullet the of part heaviest The modification.
it. towards fallen had it if as exactly disc invisible

their reach to about last at travellers the Were then? falling it Was
in inexplicable landmark, one of observation the And No. goal? desired
nearing not was projectile his that Barbicane to demonstrated itself,
curve. concentric almost an following was it that and moon, the

the on once at all signalised Nicholl which light of flash a was This
be not could point This disc. black the by formed horizon the of limit
gradually grew which flame, reddish a was It star. a for mistaken
nearer getting was projectile the that proof incontestable larger--an
satellite. the of surface the upon normally falling not and it,

Nicholl--"an exclaimed activity!" in volcano a is It volcano! "A
not is then, world, That moon. the of fires interior the of eruption
extinguished." quite

phenomenon the studied who Barbicane, answered eruption!" an "Yes,
volcano?" a not if be it should "What night-glass. his through carefully

that feed to necessary is "air Ardan, Michel said then," "But
the of part that on atmosphere some is there therefore combustion,
moon."

by volcano, A necessarily. not "but Barbicane, answered so," "Perhaps
oxygen, with itself furnish can matters, certain of decomposition the
that that too, me, to seems It void. the into flames up throw so and
combustion the objects of brilliancy and intensity the has deflagration
affirm to hurry a in be not must We oxygen. pure in produced is which of
atmosphere." lunar a of existence the

latitude south of degree 45th the at situated was mountain burning The
of disappointment great the to But disc. the of part invisible the on
from away it dragged described projectile the that curve the Barbicane
exactly not could he therefore eruption, the by signalised point the
this seen been first had it after Half-an-hour nature. its determine
of authentication the Still horizon. the on disappeared point luminous
It studies. selenographic in fact considerable a was phenomenon this
this of interior the from disappeared yet not had heat all that proved
kingdom, vegetable the that affirm may who exists, heat where and globe,
the resisted now until not has itself, kingdom animal the even or
eruption, in volcano this of existence The influences? destructive
the to favourable was _savants_, earthly by established indisputably
moon. the of habitability the of theory

mute a in himself forgot He reflection. in absorbed became Barbicane
was He world. lunar the of destinies mysterious the with filled reverie,
incident fresh a when then, till up observed facts the connect to trying
reality. the to suddenly him recalled

threatening a was it phenomenon; cosmic a than more was incident This
disastrous. be might which of consequences the danger,

an darkness, profound the in ether, the of midst the in Suddenly
of moon burning a but moon, a like was It appeared. had mass enormous
obscurity total the on was it as outlined brilliancy, unbearable almost
filled it that light such threw form, circular a of mass, This space. of
Ardan, Michel and Nicholl, Barbicane, of faces The projectile. the
the like _blafard_, livid, spectral, looked waves, white its in bathed
with impregnated alcohol of light artificial the by produced appearance
salt.

that is Whatever are! we hideous "How Ardan. Michel cried devil!" "The
moon?" wretched

Barbicane. answered bolis," a is "It

void?" the in fire, on bolis, "A

"Yes."

But mistaken. not was Barbicane bolis. a indeed was fire of globe This
light inferior an present earth, the from seen meteors, cosmic these if
magnificently. shone they ether, dark the in here, moon, the of that to
own their of principle the themselves in carry bodies wandering These
deflagration. the to necessary not is air surrounding The incandescence.
at atmosphere our through pass bodies these of certain if indeed, And,
at trajectory their describe others earth, the from leagues three or two
from are meteors these of Some reach. cannot atmosphere the distance a
second, a miles forty of speed a at move and wide, miles two to one
earth. the of movement the from direction inverse an following

at of distance a at darkness the in appeared suddenly star shooting This
a estimate, Barbicane's to according measured, and leagues, 100 least
thirty about of speed the with moved It metres. 2,000 of diameter
would and projectile, the of route the across cut It minute. a leagues
an in larger grew it approached it As minutes. few a in it reach
proportion. enormous

is It imagined! be travellers the of situation the let possible, If
their courage, their of spite In it. describe to impossible
motionless, mute, were they danger, of carelessness their _sang-froid_,
the projectile, Their terror. fearful to prey a limbs, stiffened with
this to on straight running was alter, not could they which of course
seemed They furnace. a of mouth open the than intense more mass, burning
fire. of abyss an towards rushing be to

looked three all and companions, two his of hands the seized Barbicane
still they If asteroid. red-hot the at eyelids half-closed their through
lost! as up themselves given have must they all, at thought

of centuries two bolis, the of appearance sudden the after minutes Two
ball the when it, against strike to about seemed projectile the agony,
void, the in noise any making without but bomb, a like burst fire of
not could air, of strata the of agitation the only is which sound, where
made. be

port-lights. the to rushed he and companions His cry. a uttered Nicholl

rich be would palette what it, describe could pen What spectacle! a What
magnificence? its reproduce to colours in enough

immense an of spreading the or crater, a of opening the like was It
fires. their with space up lit fragments luminous of Thousands fire.
green, red, yellow, were There there. were shade and colour, size, Every
the of remained only There fireworks. multi-coloured of crown a grey,
an each directions, all in carried pieces globe terrible and enormous
white by surrounded some swords, like shining some turn, its in asteroid
dust. cosmic of trail a them behind leaving others vapour,

each against knocked other, each crossed blocks incandescent These
struck some which of fragments, smaller into scattered were and other,
shock. violent the by cracked even was window left Its projectile. the
least the which of bullets, of shower a in floating be to seemed It
instant. an in it annihilate could

for intensity, incomparable of was ether the saturated which light The
it moment certain a At direction. every in it dispersed asteroids these
window, the to Nicholl and Barbicane dragged Michel that bright so was
exclaiming--

visible!" last at is moon invisible "The

that seconds few a for saw illumination, the across three, all And
time. first the for perceived man of eye the which disc mysterious

not could they which distance that across distinguish they did What
very a in formed clouds veritable disc, the across bands Long estimate?
the all only not emerged which from medium, atmospheric restricted
amphitheatres, importance, middling of relief every but mountains,
tracts, immense Then face. visible the on exist as such craters, yawning
in reflected which oceans seas, veritable but plains, arid longer no
space. of fires the of magic dazzling the all mirror liquid their
as such masses, dark vast continents, the of surface the on Lastly,
flash a of illumination rapid the under resemble would forests immense
lightning. of

Could deception? optical an eyes, the of error an illusion, an it Was
superficially so observation that to affirmation scientific a give they
habitability its of question the upon pronounce they Dared obtained?
disc? invisible the of glimpse a slight so after

accidental its out, died gradually space of fulgurations the degrees By
different their by away fled asteroids the lessened, brilliancy
its resumed ether The distance. the in out went and trajectories,
the in shone eclipsed, moment one for stars, the darkness; habitual
caught, been had glimpse a scarcely which of disc, the and firmament,
night. impenetrable the in lost was




XVI. CHAPTER

HEMISPHERE. SOUTHERN THE


quite danger a danger, terrible a escaped just had projectile The
These asteroids? of meeting a such imagined have would Who unforeseen.
were They travellers. the to perils serious prove might bodies wandering
fortunate less which, ether, of sea the in rocks many so like them to
of adventurers these did But avoid. not could they navigators, than
a of spectacle splendid the them given had Nature as No, complain? space
incomparable this as expansion, formidable by shining meteor cosmic
a for lighted had imitate, could Ruggieri no which fireworks, of display
peep, rapid that During moon. the of nimbus invisible the seconds few
atmosphere the Then them. to appeared had forests and seas, continents,
solved, not still Questions particles? life-giving its there give did
curiosity. American by asked eternally

round curve its describing still was bullet The p.m. 3.30 then was It
be to was It meteor? the by modified been again route its Had moon. the
imperturbably curve a describe to however ought, projectile The feared.
opinion the to inclined Barbicane mechanics. of laws the by determined
if However, hyperbola. an not and parabola a be would curve this that
cone the of out come to soon ought bullet the admitted, was parabola the
This sun. the to side opposite the on space the into thrown shadow of
so is moon the of diameter angular the narrow, very is fact, in cone,
the now Until day. of orb the of diameter the to compared small
had speed its Whatever darkness. profound in moved had projectile
occultation of period slight--its been have not could it been--and
been have not would that perhaps but evident, was fact That continued.
which problem fresh a was This course. parabolical rigidly a in case the
of web a in was it as imprisoned veritably brain, Barbicane's tormented
disentangle. not could he which unknown the

Each rest. minute's a taking of thought travellers the of Neither
on light new a throw should which incident unexpected some for watched
to distributed Michel o'clock five About studies. uranographic their
were which meat, cold and bread of morsels some dinner, of way by them,
the port-light, the leaving of thought one no whilst absorbed, rapidly
vapour. of condensation the under incrusted becoming were which of panes

the upon signalised telescope, his with armed Nicholl, p.m., 5.45 About
the by followed direction the in and moon, the of border southern
of screen dark the against outlined points brilliant few a projectile,
a in profiles with peaks sharp of succession a like looked They sky. the
the of line terminal The brilliant. rather were They line. tremulous
octants. her of one in is she when same the looks moon

simple a of question any longer no was There mistaken. be not could They
the nor colour the neither had line luminous that which of meteor,
to hesitate not did Barbicane eruption. in volcano a of nor mobility,
was. it what declare

exclaimed. he sun!" "The

Ardan. Michel and Nicholl answered sun!" the "What!

summit the up lighting itself, orb radiant the is it friends, my "Yes,
are We moon. the of border southern the on situated mountains the of
Pole!" South the approaching evidently

have we "Then Michel. answered Pole," North the passed having "After
satellite." our round all been

Michel." friend "Yes,

curves open more no parabolas, more no hyperbolas, more no have we "Then
fear!" to

curve." closed a but "No,

called--" is "Which

is it spaces interplanetary the in lost being of Instead ellipsis. "An
the round orbit elliptical an describe will projectile the that possible
moon."

"Really!"

satellite." its become will it that "And

Ardan. Michel exclaimed moon," the of "Moon

lost less the none are we that friend, worthy my you, tell must I "Only
account!" that on men

careless the answered way!" pleasanter much and another in but "No,
smile. amiable most his with Frenchman,

the orbit elliptical this describing By right. was Barbicane President
a like moon the round eternally gravitate to going was projectile
microcosm a world, solar the to added star new a was It sub-satellite.
long. before kill would air of want whom inhabitants, three by peopled
the on imposed position the at rejoice not could therefore, Barbicane,
centrifugal and centripetal the of influence double the by bullet
face visible the see to going again were he and companions His forces.
to them for enough long last would existence their Perhaps disc. the of
the by up lighted superbly earth full the time last the for perceive
they globe the to adieu last a throw might they Perhaps sun! the of rays
but nothing be would projectile their Then again! see to more never were
the in circulate which asteroids inert those like dead mass, extinct an
the seeing of that was it them: to remained consolation single A ether.
zones the entering again of that was it light, to returning and darkness
irradiation! solar by bathed

and more out stood Barbicane by recognised mountains the meantime the In
which Leibnitz, and Doerfel Mounts were They mass. dark the from more
moon. the of region circumpolar southern the on stand

with measured been have hemisphere visible the of mountains the All
astonishing, seem doubt, no will, perfection This exactitude. perfect
lunar the of altitude The rigorous. are methods hypsometric the yet and
mountains the of that than determined exactly less no be may mountains
earth. the of

by thrown shadow the measuring of that is employed generally method The
the at sun the of altitude the account into taking whilst mountains, the
the of calculating the allows also method This observation. of moment
since and it, used Galileo moon. the on cavities and craters of depth
success. greatest the with it employed have Moedler and Boeer Messrs.

measuring for used be also may radii, tangent the called method, Another
form mountains the when moment the at applied is It reliefs. lunar
darkness and light between separation of line the on points luminous
are points luminous These disc. the of part dark the on shine which
the of limit the determine which those above rays solar the by produced
luminous the which interval dark the of measure the Therefore phase.
gives them between leave phase the of part luminous the and point
method this that seen be will it But point. the of height the exactly
of separation of line the near mountains the to applied be only can
light. and darkness

mountains lunar the of profile the measuring in consists method third A
only is it but micrometer; a of means by background the on outlined
orb. the of border the near heights the to applicable

shadows, of measurement this that remarked be will it case any In
the strike rays solar the when made be only can profiles or intervals,
her strike they When observer. the to relation in obliquely moon
imperiously is shadow full--all is she when word, a directly--in
possible. longer no is observation and disc, her from banished

the was mountains, lunar the of existence the recognising after Galileo,
shadows the by heights their calculating of method the employ to first
an shown, been already has it as them, to attributed He throw. they
which figures, these reduced singularly Hevelius yards. 9,000 of average
exaggerated. were measures these All doubled. contrary, the on Riccioli,
the nearer approached instruments, perfect more his with Herschel,
of accounts the in sought finally be must it But truth. hypsometric
observers. modern

whole the in selenographers perfect most the Moedler, and Boeer Messrs.
their from results It mountains. lunar 1,095 measured have world,
22 and metres, 5,800 above rise mountains these of 6 that calculations
it metres; 7,603 measures moon the of summit highest The 4,800. above
1,000 are some which of earth, the of those to inferior therefore, is,
of volumes respective the If made. be must remark one But higher. yards
than higher relatively are mountains lunar the compared are orbs two the
moon, the of diameter the of 1/70 form ones lunar The terrestrial. the
a For earth. the of diameter the of 1/140 form only terrestrial the and
lunar a of proportions relative the attain to mountain terrestrial
the Now leagues. 6-1/2 be to ought height perpendicular its mountain,
miles. four not is highest

counts Himalayas the of chain the comparison, by proceed to then, Thus,
and Kunchinjuga, Everest, Mount ones, lunar the than higher peaks three
as high as are moon, the on Leibnitz, and Doerfel Mounts Dwalagiri.
Tycho, Short, Curtius, Casatus, Newton, chain. same the in Jewahir
the and Caucasus of summits principal the Endymion, Blancanus, Clavius,
Blanc Mont to equal mountains The Blanc. Mont than higher are Apennines,
Piccolomini, Rosa, Mount to Catharnia; and Theophylus, Moret, are
Eratosthenes, Macrobus, Cervin, Mount to Harpalus; and Werner,
Cysatus, Bacon, Teneriffe, of Peak the to Delambre; and Albateque,
and Roemer Pyrenees, the in Perdu, Mount to Alps; the and Philolaus,
Furnerius. and Atlas, Hercules, Etna, to Boguslawski;

the of appreciation the allow that comparison of points the are Such
the by followed trajectory the Now mountains. lunar of altitude
the of region mountainous that towards precisely it dragged projectile
orography. lunar of specimens finest the rise where hemisphere southern




XVII. CHAPTER

TYCHO.


thirty than less at Pole South the passed projectile the p.m. 6 At
The Pole. North the at reached already that to equal distance a miles,
described. rigorously being therefore, was, curve elliptical

They sunshine. beneficent the re-entered travellers the moment that At
orb radiant The west. to east from slowly moving stars the more once saw
heat, its also came light its With hurrah. triple a with saluted was
their resumed windows The walls. middle the pierced soon which
by if as melted ice" of "layer Their transparency. accustomed
The economy. of way by extinguished immediately was gas The enchantment.
quantity. habitual its consume to was alone apparatus air

long their after impatiently How good! is "sunshine Nicholl, said "Ah!"
day!" of orb the of reappearance the await must Selenites the nights

brilliant the were, it as "imbibing, Ardan, Michel answered "Yes,"
them." in is life all heat, and light ether,

the from slightly moved projectile the of bottom the moment that At
From orbit. elliptical long rather a describe to order in surface lunar
could friends his and Barbicane full, been had earth the if point, that
remained it irradiation, sun's the in drowned But, again. it seen have
presented eyes, their attracted spectacle Another invisible. absolutely
within to telescopes the by brought moon, the of region southern the by
the all noted and more, no port-lights the left They half-a-mile.
continent. strange the of details

nearly stretching groups separate two formed Leibnitz and Doerfel Mounts
84th the to Pole the from extends group former the Pole; South the to
the from starting second, the orb; the of part eastern the on parallel
Pole. the to latitude of degree 65th the from stretches border, eastern

light of sheets dazzling appeared ridge capriciously-formed their On
the than certainty more With Secchi. Father by signalised those like
their establish to enabled was Barbicane astronomer, Roman illustrious
nature.

he. cried snow," is "It

Nicholl. echoed "Snow?"

how Look frozen. profoundly is which of surface the snow, Nicholl, "Yes,
a intense so give not would lava Cooled rays. luminous the reflects it
as little as moon, the upon air and water is there Therefore reflection.
contested." be longer no can fact the but like, you

notes his again earth the saw Barbicane ever if and be, not could it No,
observations. selenographic in important fact, this to testify would

of plains of midst the in arose Leibnitz and Doerfel Mounts These
amphitheatres of succession indefinite an by bounded extent, moderate
met are which ones only the are chains two These ramparts. circular and
very not are they Relatively amphitheatres. of region the in with
highest the peaks, sharp some there and here out throw only and broken,
metres. 7,603 measures which of

in disappeared relief the and this, all above high hung projectile The
disc. the of brilliancy intense the

of aspect original that travellers the of eyes the to reappeared Then
only colours, of gradation without tone, in raw landscapes, lunar the
this of sight the Still wanting. was light diffused for black, and white
They strangeness. very its of account on curious very was world desolate
breath the by along carried if as region chaotic this above moving were
the down looking feet, their under fly summits the seeing tempest, a of
But holes. mysterious the sounding ramparts, the climbing cavities,
but nothing cities, of appearance no vegetation, of trace no was there
which mirrors, immense like polished streams, lava stratifications,
no was There brilliancy. unbearable with rays solar the reflect
the where one, dead a of everything world, living a of appearance
noiselessly. rushed mountains the of summit the from rolling avalanches
still. wanting was noise but movement, of plenty had They

the that observation, reiterated by fact, the established Barbicane
upon acted been had they although disc, the of borders the on reliefs
uniform a presented region, central the of those to forces different by
same the aggregation, circular same the was There conformation.
arrangements their that supposed be might it Still ground. of accidents
crust malleable still the centre the In analogous. completely not were
earth the and moon the of attraction double the suffered moon the of
the to one from prolonged radius a to according ways inverse in acting
attraction lunar the contrary, the on disc, the of borders the On other.
It attraction. terrestrial the with perpendicular say, to thus been, has
these under produced soil the on reliefs the that therefore, seems,
not, had they Yet form. different a taken have to ought conditions
her of principle the alone herself in found had moon the therefore
influences, foreign to nothing owed She constitution. and formation
action "No Arago's, of proposition remarkable the justified which
relief." her of production the to contributed has moon the to exterior

of image the was world this condition, actual its in be may that However
it. animated ever had life that say to possible being it without death

which to ruins, of heap a recognised he thought however, Ardan, Michel
80th the about in situated was It attention. Barbicane's drew he
made, regularly pretty stones, of heap This longitude. 30 and parallel
long those of one overlooking fortress, vast a of shape the in was
off far Not times. ante-historical in river-beds as served which furrows
Short, called mountain circular the metres 5,646 of height a to rose
ardour, habitual his with Ardan, Michel Caucasus. Asiatic the to equal
the perceived he Below fortress. his of evidences" "the maintained
intact; still portico, a of arch the here town; a of ramparts dismantled
succession a on farther side; their on lying columns three or two there
in aqueduct; an of conduct the supported have must which archpieces, of
the into run bridge gigantic a of pillars sunken the part another
much so with but that, all distinguished He furrow. the of part thickest
his that fanciful, so telescope a through eyes, his in imagination
would who affirm, would who yet And upon. relied be cannot observation
two his what seen really not had fellow amiable the that say, to dare
see? not would companions

discussion. idle an to sacrificed be to precious too were moments The
the in disappeared had pretended, or real whether city, Selenite The
disc, lunar the from away farther get to began projectile The distance.
The jumble. confused a in lost be to began ground the of details the and
still and remained, alone plains and craters, amphitheatres, reliefs,
distinctly. boundary-lines their showed

finest the of one left the to stretched there moment that At
easily Barbicane which Newton, was It orography. lunar in amphitheatres
Selenographica_. _Mappa the to referring by recognised

forms It long. east 16 and lat. south 77 exactly in situated is Newton
to seemed high, metres 7,264 which, of ramparts the crater, circular a
inaccessible. be

mountain that of height the that notice companions his made Barbicane
its of depth the to equal being from far was plain surrounding the above
gloomy a made and measurement, all beyond was hole enormous This crater.
There, reach. never could rays sun's the which of bottom the abyss,
sun the of light the which reigns, darkness utter Humboldt, to according
with it made have would mythologists The break. not could earth the and
mouth. hell's justice

circular the of type perfect most the "is Barbicane, said "Newton,"
the that prove They specimen. no possesses earth the which of mountains,
whilst for causes, violent to due was cooling by moon the of formation
to up thrown were reliefs the fire interior of influence the under
the than lower became and in, dropped bottom the heights, considerable
level." lunar

Ardan. Michel answered no," say not do "I

directly stood projectile the Newton passed having after minutes few A
above high rather passed also It Moret. of mountain circular the over
the reached it p.m. 7.30 about and Blancanus, of summits the
Clavius. of amphitheatre

in situated is disc, the on remarkable most the of one circle, This
7,091 at estimated is height Its 15. long. east and 58 lat. south
the by two to reduced miles, 200 of distance a at travellers The metres.
crater. vast this of arrangement the admire could telescopes,

molehills only "are Barbicane, said volcanoes," terrestrial "The
craters ancient the Measuring moon. the of volcanoes the to compared
be to found are they Etna, and Vesuvius of eruptions first the by formed
measures Cantal the of circle the France In wide. metres 6,000 scarcely
is and miles, forty is island the of circle the Ceylon at miles; five
compared diameters these are What globe. the on largest the considered
moment?" this in over are we which Clavius, of that to

Nicholl. asked width?" its is "What

is amphitheatre "This Barbicane. answered miles," seventy "About
wide!" miles fifty are many but moon, the on largest the certainly

this what imagine you "can Ardan, Michel exclaimed friends," my "Ah,
torrents vomited craters these when like? once was night of orb peaceful
a What flame? of sheets and smoke of clouds with stones, and lava of
is moon This off! falling a what now and formerly, spectacle prodigious
serpents, rockets, the which of fireworks, of case meagre the only now
pieces torn leave only magnificently, off going after wheels, and suns,
such of justification or reason, cause, the tell can Who cardboard. of
cataclysms?"

those contemplating was He Ardan. Michel to listen not did Barbicane
At thick. leagues several mountains wide of formed Clavius, of ramparts
craters, extinct small of hundreds lay cavity immense its of bottom the
15,000 than more peak a by overlooked and sieve, a like soil the making
high. feet

these as arid so Nothing aspect. desolate a had around plain The
be may they so if mountains, of ruins these as sad so nothing reliefs,
ground! the encumbering mountains and peaks of heaps those as called,
place. this in up blown been have to seemed satellite The

Circles, same. the still was chaos the and on, went still projectile The
plains more No incessantly. other each succeeded mountains and craters,
of centre the in Lastly, Norway. or Switzerland interminable seas--an or
mountain splendid most the point, culminating its at region creviced the
gives still posterity which to Tycho, dazzling the disc, lunar the of
astronomer. Danish illustrious the of name the

who one no is there sky, cloudless a in moon full the observing Whilst
Michel hemisphere. southern the on point brilliant this remarked not has
could imagination his metaphors the all employed it, qualify to Ardan,
of centre a light, of focus ardent an was Tycho him To with. him furnish
wheel, fiery a of axle the was It flames! vomiting crater a irradiation,
eye immense an tentacles, silver its with disc the encircling sea-star a
the by hurled star a was It head! Pluto's for made nimbo a fire, darting
surface! lunar the upon fallen and Creator, the of hand

the of inhabitants the that concentration luminous a such forms Tycho
of distance a at are they although telescope, a without it see can earth
its what imagined readily be therefore, will, It leagues. 100,000
fifty at placed observers of eyes the in been have must intensity
only. leagues

Barbicane that unbearable so was brilliancy its ether pure this Across
their of object-glasses the blacken to obliged were friends his and
hardly mute, Then, it. support to order in gas-smoke with telescopes
contemplated. and looked they interjections, admirative few a emitting
their in concentrated were impressions their all sentiments, their All
heart. the in concentrated is emotion, violent under life, as eyes,

and Aristarchus like mountains, radiating of system the to belongs Tycho
terrible the to all of completely most the testified it But Copernicus.
due. is moon the of formation the which to action volcanic

is centre Its 12. long. east and 43 lat. south in situated is Tycho
slightly a affects It wide. miles forty than more crater a by occupied
east the on which ramparts, circular by inclosed is and form, elliptical
It metres. 5,000 of height a from plain exterior the overlook west and
and centre, common a round placed Blancs, Mont of aggregation an is
rays. shining with crowned

incomparable this what represent never could itself Photography
interior its and it to converging projections its all with mountain,
that moon full the during is it fact, In like. really is excrescences,
the disappear, shadows all Then splendour. its all in seen is Tycho
out come proofs all and disappear, perspective of foreshortenings
have would region strange this for circumstance, unfortunate white--an
an only is It exactitude. photographic with reproduce to curious been
of network vertiginous a circles, craters, holes, of agglomeration
this of bubblings the that therefore, understood, be will It crests.
cooling, by Crystallised forms. first their kept have eruption central
under presented formerly moon the which aspect the stereotyped have they
forces. Plutonic of influence the

of summits circular the from travellers the separated which distance The
its survey not could travellers the that great so not was Tycho
of ramparts the forms which embankment the upon Even details. principal
in rose slopes exterior and interior the to hanging mountains the Tycho,
400 or 300 by higher be to appeared They terraces. gigantic like stories
terrestrial of system No east. the on than west the on feet
at built town A fortifications. natural these equal could castrametation
inaccessible. utterly been have would cavity circular this of bottom the

picturesque of ground this over extended marvellously and Inaccessible
It empty. and flat crater this of bottom the left not had Nature relief!
world a it made which system mountain a orography, special a possessed
hills, central cones, the distinguished clearly travellers The apart.
reception the for disposed naturally ground, the of movements remarkable
a for place the was There architecture. Selenite of masterpieces of
the there palace, a of foundations the there forum, a for here temple,
1,500 mountain central a by overlooked whole the citadel, a of plateau
times ten Rome ancient held have would which circuit vast high--a feet
over.

"what sight, the by enthusiastic made Ardan, Michel exclaimed "Ah!"
city, tranquil A mountains! of circle this in built be could towns grand
could misanthropes all How cares! human all from away refuge, peaceful a
social with disgusted those all humanity, of haters all there, live
life!"

simply. Barbicane replied them!" for small too be would It "All!




XVIII. CHAPTER

QUESTIONS. GRAVE


Tycho. of neighbourhood the passed had projectile the meantime the In
scrupulous most the with observed, then friends two his and Barbicane
disperses mountain celebrated the which radii brilliant those attention,
horizon. every on curiously so

caused had phenomenon geological What aureole? radiating this was What
his Under Barbicane. occupied justly question This beams? ardent those
and banks raised with furrows, luminous ran direction, every in eyes,
wide. miles twenty than more others miles, ten some middle, concave
from leagues 300 least at places certain in ran trails shining These
and north-east, east, the towards especially cover, to seemed and Tycho,
as stretched furrows these of One hemisphere. southern the half north,
meridian. 40th the on situated Neander, of amphitheatre the as far
against broke and Nectar of Sea the through off rounding went Another
the towards others leagues; 400 of run a after Pyrenees the of chain the
of Sea the and Clouds of Sea the network luminous a with covered west
Humours.

plains over equally running rays shining these of origin the was What
the centre, common a from started all They high? however reliefs, and
it. from emanated They Tycho. of crater

lava of streams ancient to aspect brilliant their attributed Herschel
received. generally been not has which opinion an cold, the by congealed
of kind a rays inexplicable these in seen have astronomers Other
the of epoch the at out thrown blocks erratic of ranges _moraines_,
Tycho. of formation

rejected who Barbicane, of Nicholl asked so?" be not it should why "And
them. related he that time same the at opinions different these

violence the and lines, luminous these of regularity the "Because
inexplicable. are distance, a such to them send to necessary

the myself to explain easily can "I Ardan. Michel replied bleu_!" "_Par
rays." these of origin

Barbicane. said "Indeed,"

the by caused cracks the be not they should "Why Michel. resumed "Yes,"
glass?" of pane a upon stone a or bullet a of shock

powerful be would hand what "and smiling; Barbicane, replied "Good,"
shock?" a such produce would that stone the hurl to enough

"and in; give not would who Michel, answered necessary," not is hand "A
comet." a is it say us let stone, the to as

worthy My comets! much-abused "those Barbicane; exclaimed comets?" "Ah!
The wanted. not is comet your but bad, not is explanation your Michel,
violent A planet. the of interior the from come have might shock
that make to enough was cooling whilst crust lunar the of contraction
crack." gigantic

Michel answered colic," lunar a like be--something it let "Contraction
Ardan.

English an of opinion the also is "that Barbicane, added "Besides,"
these of radiation the explain to me to seems it and Nasmyth, _savant_,
sufficiently." mountains

Michel. answered fool!" no was Nasmyth "That

admired long spectacle, a such of weary never could who travellers, The
double that in bathed projectile, Their Tycho. of splendours the
of globe a like appeared have must moon, and sun the of irradiation
to cold considerable from passed suddenly therefore, had, They fire.
Selenites. become to them preparing thus was Nature heat. intense

the of question the up brought again idea That Selenites! become To
travellers the could seen, had they what After moon. the of habitability
two his asked Ardan Michel against? or for conclude they Could it? solve
if outright them asked and opinion, their to utterance give to friends
lunar the in represented were animality and humanity that thought they
world.

the opinion my in "but Barbicane, said answer," cannot we think "I
to allowed be to ask I form. that in stated be to not ought question
differently." it state

Michel. answered like," you as it "State

a requires and double, is problem "The Barbicane. resumed it," is "This
inhabited?" been it Has habitable? moon the Is solution. double

habitable." is moon the if see first us "Let Nicholl. said "Right,"

Michel. replied it," about nothing know I truth, the tell "To

state, actual her "In Barbicane. said negative," the in answer I "And
her up, dried mostly seas her atmosphere, slight very certainly her with
alternations abrupt her vegetation, restricted her water, insufficient
not does moon the long, hours 354 days and nights her cold, and heat of
animal the of development the to propitious nor me, to habitable appear
understand we as such existence of needs the for sufficient nor kingdom,
it."

beings for habitable moon the not is "but Nicholl; answered "Agreed,"
us?" to organised differently

will "I Barbicane. replied answer," to difficult more is question "That
the him to seems movement if Nicholl ask I but however, it, do to try
organisation?" what matter no under existence, of result necessary

Nicholl. answered doubt," slightest the "Without

seen have we that be will answer my companion, worthy my then, "Well,
nothing that and yards, 500 of distance a at continent lunar the
no of presence The moon. the of surface the on moving be to appeared
appropriations, by betrayed be would humanity of form what matter
the Everywhere see? we did What ruins. even or constructions, different
therefore, If, man. of work the never Nature, of work geological
have they moon, the upon exist kingdom animal the of representatives
reach. cannot eye the which cavities bottomless those in refuge taken
their of traces left have would they for either, that admit cannot I And
covers. slight, however atmosphere, the which plains the upon passage
that hypothesis only the Therefore visible. nowhere are traces these Now
life." or movement without beings living of one is remains

alive." not are who creatures living say well as just might "You

meaning." no has us for "which Barbicane, answered "Precisely,"

Michel. said opinion," our formulate may we now "Then

Nicholl. answered "Yes,"

meeting Commission, Scientific "the Ardan; Michel resumed well," "Very
arguments its supported having after Club, Gun the of projectile the in
question the upon unanimously decides observed, lately facts fresh upon
inhabited.'" not is moon the moon--'No, the of habitability the of

had he where notebook, his in Barbicane by down taken was decision This
6th. December of sitting the of _procs-verbal_ the written already

on depending question, second the attack us "let Nicholl, said "Now,"
not is moon the if Commission honourable the ask therefore I first. the
inhabited?" been it has habitable,

Ardan. Michel said Barbicane," Citizen "Answer,

to journey this undertake not did "I Barbicane, answered friends," "My
may I satellite. our of habitability ancient the upon opinion an form
I opinion. this in me confirm only observations personal my that add
race human a by inhabited been has moon the that affirm, even I believe,
formed anatomically animals produced has it that ours, like organised
animal, or human races, these that add I but animals; terrestrial like
extinct." ever for are and day, their had have

earth?" the than world older an is moon "the Michel, asked "Then,"

grown has that world a "but conviction, with Barbicane answered "No,"
rapid. more been have deformation and formation whose quickly, more old
violent more much been have matter of forces organising the Relatively
globe. celestial the of interior the in than moon the of interior the in
proves swollen, and tormented, up, broken disc, this of state actual The
gases. only were earth the and moon the origin their In abundantly. this
solid the and influences, different under liquids became gases These
or gas was globe our that certain is it But afterwards. formed was mass
became cooling, by solidified already moon, the when still liquid
habitable."

Nicholl. said that," believe "I

water The atmosphere. by surrounded was "it Barbicane, resumed "Then,"
of influence the Under evaporate. not could element gassy the by in held
took vegetation central, and solar heat, and light, water, air,
certainly and reception, its for prepared continents these of possession
spend not does Nature for epoch, that about itself manifested life
have must habitable marvellously so world a and inutilities, in itself
inhabited." been

of movements the to inherent phenomena "many Nicholl, answered "Still,"
and vegetable the of expansion the prevented have must satellite our
example." for long, hours 354 nights and days The kingdoms. animal

months." six last "they Michel, said poles," terrestrial the "At

inhabited." not are poles the as argument, valuable a not is "That

nights long "the Barbicane, resumed moon," the of state actual the "In
the to insupportable temperature of differences create days and
The times. historical of epoch that at so not was it but constitution,
deposited Vapour mantle. fluid a with disc the enveloped atmosphere
of ardour the tempered screen natural This clouds. of form the in itself
and light Both radiation. nocturnal the retained and lays, solar the
equilibrium was there Hence air. the in themselves diffuse could heat
atmosphere the that now exists longer no which influences the between
you--" astonish shall I Besides, disappeared. entirely almost has

Ardan. Michel said us?" "Astonish

nights the inhabited was moon the when epoch the at that believe I "But
hours!" 354 last not did days and

quickly. Nicholl asked so?" "Why

rotation of movement moon's the then that probable very is it "Because
equality an revolution, of movement her to equal not was axis her on
solar the of action the under disc lunar the of point every puts which
days." fifteen for rays

have movements these not should why "but Nicholl; answered "Agreed,"
actually?" so are they since equal, been

terrestrial by determined been only has equality that "Because
enough powerful was attraction this that know we do how Now, attraction.
still was earth the epoch the at moon the of movements the influence to
fluid?"

been always has moon the that say can who "and Nicholl; replied "True,"
satellite?" earth's the

exist not did moon the "that Ardan, Michel exclaimed say," can who "And
earth?" the before

hypotheses. of field indefinite the in wander to began Imagination
in. them hold to wished Barbicane

insoluble. really problems high, too speculations "are he, said "Those,"
of insufficiency the admit only us Let them. into enter us let not Do
and rotation of inequality the by then and attraction, primordial
as moon the upon other each succeed could nights and days revolution
was life conditions those under even Besides, earth. the upon do they
possible."

the from disappeared quite has "humanity Ardan, Michel asked "Then,"
moon?"

for existed doubtless, having, "after Barbicane, answered "Yes,"
rarefied, becoming atmosphere the gradually Then centuries. of thousands
one will globe terrestrial the like uninhabitable be again will disc the
cooling." by become day

cooling?" "By

became fires interior the "As Barbicane. answered "Certainly,"
disc lunar the and concentrated was matter incandescent the extinguished
came phenomenon this of consequences the degrees By cool. became
of disappearance the and beings organic of disappearance about--the
drawn probably was and rarefied, became atmosphere the Soon vegetation.
so and disappeared, air breathable the attraction; terrestrial by away
uninhabitable, became moon the epoch that At evaporation. by water did
to-day." is it like world dead a was It inhabited. longer no was and

earth?" the for reserved is fate like the that say you "And

probably." "Very

when?" "But

uninhabitable." it made have will crust its of cooling the "When

been melt to globe unfortunate our take will it time the "Has
calculated?"

"Certainly."

reason?" the know you "And

"Perfectly."

impatience." with boil me make _savant_--you sulky us, tell "Then

well is "it tranquilly, Barbicane answered Michel," worthy my "Well,
a of lapse the in suffers earth the temperature of diminution what known
average that calculations, certain to according Now, century.
400,000 of period a after zero to down brought be will temperature
years!"

I again! breathe I "Ah! Michel. exclaimed years!" thousand hundred "Four
only had we that you to listening from imagined I frightened. really was
live!" to years thousand fifty

companion's their at laughing help not could Nicholl and Barbicane
them reminded it, with done have to wanted who Nicholl, Then uneasiness.
settled. be to question second the of

asked. he inhabited?" been moon the "Has

affirmative. the in unanimously was answer The

theories, hazardous somewhat in fruitful discussion, this During
the subject, the on science of ideas general the resumed it although
time same the at equator, lunar the towards rapidly run had projectile
circle the passed had It disc. lunar the from away farther went it that
Then miles. 400 of distance a at parallel, 40th the and Willem, of
the along went it degree, 30th the on right, the to Pitatus leaving
the approached already had it which of Clouds, of Sea the of south
light white the under confusedly appeared amphitheatres Different north.
central a with square almost Purbach, moon--Bouillaud, full the of
indefinable with shone mountain interior whose Arzachel, then crater,
brilliancy.

details the away, farther and farther went projectile the as last, At
the in confounded were mountains the eyes, travellers' the from faded
and fantastical, marvellous, the of remained that all and distance,
remembrance. imperishable the was earth the of satellite wonderful




XIX. CHAPTER

IMPOSSIBLE. THE WITH STRUGGLE A


at looked pensive, and mute companions, his and Barbicane time some For
saw Moses like distance, a from seen only had they which world, this
of position The ever. for away going were they which from and Canaan,
lower its now and modified, was moon the to relatively projectile the
earth. the towards turned was end

bullet the If greatly. him surprised Barbicane, by verified change, This
why orbit, elliptical an in satellite the round gravitate to going was
earth? the to moon the like it towards turned part heaviest its not was
point. obscure an was again There

was it that see could they projectile the of progress the watching By
it which by that to curve analogous an moon the from away following
which ellipsis long very a describing therefore, was, It her. approached
the where attraction, equal of point the to extend probably would
neutralised. are satellite her and earth the of influences

facts the from drew correctly Barbicane which conclusion the was Such
him. with shared friends two his which conviction a observed,

him. upon shower to began immediately Questions

asked point?" neutral the reached have we after us of become will "What
Ardan. Michel

Barbicane. answered unknown!" is "That

suppose?" I suppositions, make can we "But

the of velocity the "Either Barbicane. answered two," make can "We
entirely remain will it and insufficient, be then will projectile
attraction--" double of line that on motionless

replied is," it whatever supposition, other the have rather would "I
Michel.

will it "and Barbicane, resumed sufficient," be will velocity the "Or
of orb the round eternally gravitate and orbit, elliptical its continue
night."

humble the become "to Michel, said revolution," that consoling very "Not
servant. our considering of habit the in are we whom moon a of servants
us?" awaits that future the that is And

answered. Nicholl nor Barbicane Neither

Michel. impatient the asked answer?" not you do "Why

Nicholl. said answer," to nothing is "There

done?" be nothing "Can

the with struggle to pretend you "Do Barbicane. answered "No,"
impossible?"

word?" a such at recoil to Americans two and Frenchman a Ought not? "Why

do?" to want you do what "But

along!" us carrying is that motion the "Command

it?" "Command

it use it; modify or it "stop animated, getting Michel, resumed "Yes,"
plans." our of accomplishment the for

pray?" how, "And

bullets their of masters not are artillerymen If business! your is "That
gunner, the commands projectile the If artillerymen. longer no are they
_savants_, Fine cannon! the into instead rammed be to ought gunner the
me--" induced having after do to what now know don't who truly!

by mean you do What "Induced! Nicholl. and Barbicane cried "Induced!"
that?"

journey The complain. not do "I Michel. said recriminations!" "No
humanly is that all do us let But me. suits bullet The me. pleases
moon." the upon only if somewhere, fall to possible

"but Barbicane, answered Michel," worthy my glad, too be only should "We
it." doing of means no have we

projectile?" the of motion the modify not we "Can

"No."

speed?" its diminish "Nor

"No."

ship?" overloaded an lighten they like it lightening by even "Not

board. on ballast no have "We Nicholl. answered out?" throw we can "What
more on go would projectile lightened a that me to seems it besides, And
quickly."

Michel. said quickly," "Less

Nicholl. replied quickly," "More

his make to wishing Barbicane, answered quickly," less nor more "Neither
take cannot we where void the in moving are we "for agree, friends two
account." into weight specific

only is "there tone; determined a in Ardan Michel exclaimed well," "Very
do." to thing one

Nicholl. asked that?" is "What

who Frenchman, audacious the answered imperturbably breakfast," "Have
difficulties. greatest the to solution that brought always

direction the on influence no have would operation that though fact, In
even and risk, without attempted be might it projectile, the of
the Decidedly stomach. the of view of point the from successfully
ideas. good only had Michel amiable

much of not was hour the but a.m., 2 at therefore, breakfasted, They
amiable an by crowned _menu_, habitual his up served Michel consequence.
heads their into come not did ideas If cellar. secret his of out bottle
of. despaired be must 1863 of Chambertin the

again. began observations over, meal The

at it followed still projectile the of out thrown had they objects The
its in bullet the that evident was It distance. invariable same the
any through passed not had moon the round translation of movement
modified have would objects these of weight specific the for atmosphere,
distances. respective their

earth The globe. terrestrial the of side the on see to nothing was There
two and before, day the midnight at new been having old, day a only was
solar the from disengaged crescent, her before by go to having days
of movement her in as Selenites, the to clock a as serve could rays,
moon the of meridian same the passes always points her of each rotation
hours. twenty-four every

was orb the moon; the of side the on one different a was spectacle The
rays the constellations, innumerable amidst splendour its all in shining
again plains the disc the Upon purity. its trouble not could which of
the of rest The earth. the from seen is which tint sombre the wore
a like out stood Tycho blaze general the amidst and shining, was nimbus
sun.

the of velocity the appreciate to way any manage not could Barbicane
uniformly be must speed this that demonstrated reasoning but projectile,
mechanics. rational of laws the with conformity in diminishing

round orbit an describe would bullet the that admitted being it fact, In
that proves Science elliptical. be necessarily must orbit that moon, the
to exception an is body any round circulation mobile No thus. be must it
of those elliptical, are space in described orbits the All law. that
that sun, their around planets of those planets, their round satellites
Why pivot. central its as serves that orb unknown the round sun the of
arrangement? natural that escape Club Gun the of projectile the should

foci the of one occupy always bodies attracting orbits elliptical in Now
round body the nearer therefore, is, satellite The ellipsis. the of
earth the When another. at is it than moment one at gravitates it which
when aphelion her at and perihelion, her at is she sun the nearest is
most and perigee, her at earth the nearest is moon The distant. most
the enrich which expressions analogous employ To apogee. her at distant
the of satellite a remained projectile the if astronomers, of language
most its at "aposelene" its in is it that said be to ought it moon,
nearest. its at "periselene" its at and point, distant

speed, of maximum its attain to ought projectile the case latter the In
its towards going evidently was it Now minimum. its latter the in
would speed its thinking in right was Barbicane and "aposelene,"
again would it when increase gradually and point, that to up decrease
the if _nil_ absolutely be would even speed That moon. the near draw
attraction. of that with coexistent was point

was he situations; different these of consequences the studied Barbicane
a by interrupted suddenly was he when them of make could he what trying
Ardan. Michel from cry

are!" we fools "what Michel, cried "I'faith!"

why?" "but Barbicane; answered not," are we say don't "I

is that speed the slackening of means simple very some have we "Because
them." use not do we and moon, the from away us taking

means?" those are what "And

rockets." our in recoil of force the utilising of "That

Nicholl. said not?" why "Ah,

"but Barbicane, said true," is it force, that utilised yet not have "We
so." do shall we

Michel. asked "When?"

now position the in that friends, my Remark, comes. time the "When
disc, lunar the to oblique still position a projectile, the by occupied
away farther it take might direction, its altering by rockets, our
to want you moon the is it suppose I Now moon. the to nearer of instead
reach?"

Michel. answered "Essentially,"

a has projectile the influence inexplicable some Through then. "Wait,
probable is It earth. the towards fall end lower its let to tendency
be will summit conical its attraction equal of point the at that
hoped be may it moment that At moon. the towards directed rigorously
under and act, to time the be will That _nil_. be will speed its that
upon fall direct a provoke perhaps, can, we rockets our of effort the
disc." lunar the of surface the

Michel. said "Bravo!"

the passed we as it do not could we and yet, it done not have "We
much too with animated still was projectile the because point, neutral
velocity."

Nicholl. said out," reasoned "Well

our on chance every put "and Barbicane, said patiently," wait must "We
we think to begin again I long, so despaired having after then, side;
goal." our reach shall

these of one No Ardan. Michel from hurrahs provoked conclusion This
the in answered all had they question the remembered madmen daring
not probably is moon the No, inhabited! not is moon the negative--No,
it. reach to could they all do to going were they yet And inhabitable!

moment precise what at solved: be to remained now only question One
the where attraction equal of point that reach projectile the would
card? last their play would travellers

had Barbicane seconds some within to moment that calculate to order In
different the take to and notes, travelling his to recourse have to only
the over going in employed time the Thus parallels. lunar from altitudes
to equal be must Pole South the and point neutral the between distance
The point. neutral the from Pole South the separates which distance the
the and down, noted carefully were took it time the representing hours
easy. became calculation

1 at projectile the by reached be would point this that found Barbicane
December. of 7th the on a.m. 3 then was It December. of 8th the on a.m.
neutral the reach would projectile the intervened, nothing if Therefore,
hours. twenty-two in point

the of fall the slacken to places their in put been had rockets The
to them use to going were fellows bold the now and moon, the upon bullet
were they be, may that However effect. contrary exactly an provoke
fire setting for moment the await but do to nothing was there and ready,
them. to

to proposition a have "I Nicholl, said do," to nothing is there "As
make."

Barbicane. asked that?" is "What

sleep." to go we propose "I

Ardan. Michel exclaimed idea!" nice a is "That

few "A Nicholl. said eyes," our closed have we since hours forty is "It
again." up us set would sleep hours'

Michel. replied "Never!"

sleep." to is humour--mine his to man "every Nicholl; said "Good,"

forty-eight a like snoring soon was Nicholl divan, a on down lying And
bullet. pound

him." imitate shall "I soon. Barbicane said man," sensible a is "Nicholl

baritone. captain's the to bass his joining was he after minutes few A

"these alone, himself found he when Ardan, Michel said "Decidedly,"
ideas." opportune have do sometimes people practical

his under arms long his folding and legs, long his out stretching And
too. sleep to went Michel head,

many Too peaceful. nor durable be neither could slumber this But
hours few a and men, three these of minds the filled preoccupations
once. at awoke three all they a.m., 7 about at after,

its inclining moon, the from away moving still was projectile The
was phenomenon This her. towards more and more summit conical
of designs the aided fortunately it but present, at inexplicable
Barbicane.

come. have would action for time the and hours seventeen Another

felt travellers the be, might they bold However long. seemed day That
decide to was that minute the of approach the at anxiety much
an in imprisonment their or moon the upon fall their either everything,
slowly too went which hours, the counted therefore They orbit. immutable
calculations, in plunged obstinately Nicholl and Barbicane them, for
walls the between space narrow the down and up walking Michel
moon. impassible the eye longing with contemplating

saw They minds. their through passed earth the of thoughts Sometimes
J.T. all, them of dearest the and Club, Gun the of friends their again
occupying been have must secretary honourable the moment that At Maston.
projectile the perceive should he If Mountains. Rocky the on post his
After think? he would what telescope gigantic his of mirror the upon
would they moon, the of pole south the behind disappear it seen having
a of satellite the therefore, was, It north! the at reappear it see
the into announcement unexpected that sent Maston J.T. Had satellite!
enterprise? great the of _dnouement_ the be to this Was world?

came. midnight Terrestrial incident. without passed day the Meanwhile
of point the and hour Another commence. to about was December of 8th The
the animated then velocity What reached. be would attraction equal
vitiate could error no but estimate; no form could They projectile?
would and be to ought velocity that a.m. 1 At calculations. Barbicane's
_nil_. be

the of point stopping the mark would phenomenon another Besides,
attractions, two the spot that In line. neutral the on projectile
weigh not would Objects annihilated. be would lunar, and terrestrial
Barbicane surprised curiously so had which fact, singular This anything.
identical under about come again must before, companions his and
act. must they moment precise that at was It circumstances.

the towards turned sensibly already had bullet the of summit conical The
recoil the all utilising for right just was projectile The disc. lunar
the in therefore was Chance apparatus. the to fire setting by produced
be to were projectile the of velocity the If favour. travellers'
however motion, given a point, neutral the upon annihilated absolutely
fall. its determine would moon the towards slight,

Nicholl. said one," to minutes "Five

match his directing Ardan, Michel answered ready," is "Everything
gas. the of flame the towards

hand. in chronometer Barbicane, said "Wait!"

complete its felt travellers The effect. no had weight moment that At
they if point neutral the near were They themselves. in disappearance
it. reached not had

Barbicane. said o'clock!" "One

into fuses the all put that contrivance a to match his put Ardan Michel
air where outside, heard was detonation No communication. instantaneous
prolonged the saw Barbicane port-lights the through but wanting, was
extinguished. immediately was which flame,

the in felt sensibly very was which shock slight a had projectile The
interior.

breathing. hardly speaking, without listened, looked, friends three The
absolute the in heard been have might hearts their of beating The
silence.

last. at Ardan Michel asked falling?" we "Are

turned not has projectile the of bottom the "for Nicholl; answered "No,"
disc!" lunar the towards

two his towards turned and window his left Barbicane moment that At
lips his wrinkled, forehead his pale, frightfully was He companions.
contracted.

he. said falling!" are "We

moon?" the "upon Ardan, Michel cried "Ah!"

Barbicane. answered earth!" the "Upon

we "when philosophically, added he and Ardan; Michel cried devil!" "The
out get to difficult so be would it think not did we bullet the entered
again." it of

the by kept velocity The begun. had fall frightful the fact, In
the of explosion The point. neutral the beyond it sent had projectile
projectile the carried had which velocity That it. stopped not had fuses
its upon same the do to destined was went it as line neutral the beyond
_to orbit, elliptical its in it, condemned physics of law The return.
passed_. already had it point every by pass

no which and leagues, 78,000 of height a from fall terrible a was It
projectile the ballistics of laws the to According deaden. could springs
it animated which that to equal velocity a with earth the strike would
last the in metres "16,000 of velocity Columbiad--a the left it as
second!"

calculated been has it comparison for figures some give to order in And
of altitude the Dame, Notre of towers the from thrown object an that
120 of velocity a with pavement the reach would feet, 200 only is which
a with earth the strike would projectile the Here hour. an leagues
hour_. an _leagues 57,600 of velocity

coldly. Nicholl said men," lost are "We

religious of sort a with Barbicane, answered die," we if "Well,
enlarged! magnificently be will journey our of result "the enthusiasm,
need will soul the life other the In secret! own His us tell will God
identified be will It know! to order in engines nor machines neither
wisdom!" eternal with

for us console well may world other "the Ardan: Michel replied "True,"
moon!" the called orb trifling that

sublime of movement a with chest his upon arms his crossed Barbicane
resignation.

said. he done!" be will "God's




XX. CHAPTER

SUSQUEHANNA. THE OF SOUNDINGS THE


soundings?" those about what and lieutenant, Well,

expected have would who But sir. over, almost is operation the think "I
American the from only leagues 100 at land, near so depth a such find to
coast?"

Blomsberry. Captain said depression," great a is there Bronsfield, "Yes,
Humboldt's by out hollowed here, valley submarine a exists "There
of Straits the to America of coasts the along runs which current,
Magellan."

the for favourable not "are lieutenant, the said depths," great "Those
one the like best, the is plateau smooth A cables. telegraph of laying
Newfoundland." and Valentia between on lies cable American the

where lieutenant, you, please it may And, Bronsfield. you, with agree "I
now?" we are

line of feet 21,500 moment this at have "we Bronsfield, answered "Sir,"
the touched yet not has line the of end the at bullet the and out,
again." up come have would sounding-lead the for bottom,

"It Blomsberry. Captain said one," ingenious an is apparatus "Brook's
soundings." correct very obtain to us allows

was who forecastle-men the of one moment that at cried "Touched!"
operation. the superintending

forecastle-deck. the to on went lieutenant and captain The

captain. the asked in?" we are depth "What

the answered feet," sixty-two and hundred seven thousand "Twenty-one
pocket-book. his in down it writing lieutenant,

the mark and go will "I captain, the said Bronsfield," well, "Very
a is in--that brought sounding-line the have Now chart. my on result
fires his have shall engineer the Meanwhile hours. several of work
is It done. have you as soon as start to ready be shall we and lighted,
in." turn shall I lieutenant, permission, your with and p.m., 10

amiably. Bronsfield Lieutenant answered certainly!" sir, "Certainly,

the one, was there ever if man worthy a Susquehanna, the of captain The
his took cabin, his to went officers, his of servant humble very
steward, the to satisfaction of expressions many with brandy-and-water
made he way the on servant his complimenting before not bed, into got
slumber. peaceful into sank and beds,

going was December of month the of day eleventh The p.m. 10 then was It
night. magnificent a in end to

States United the of power, horse 500 of corvette a Susquehanna, The
leagues hundred a about at Pacific the in soundings taking was Navy,
of coast the on peninsula long that of abreast coast, American the from
Mexico. New

in movement slightest the not was There fallen. gradually had wind The
and motionless mast the from hung corvette the of colours The air. the
inert.

Blomsberry, Colonel to cousin-german Blomsberry, Jonathan captain, The
the Horschbidden, a married had who members Club Gun the of one
merchant--Captain Kentucky honourable an of daughter and aunt captain's
the execute to weather better for wished have not could Blomsberry
that of nothing felt had corvette His sounding. of operation delicate
Rocky the on up heaped clouds the away swept which tempest great
be to projectile famous the of course the allowed and Mountains,
Heaven thank to forget not did he and well, on going was All observed.
Presbyterian. a of fervour the all with

for intended were Susquehanna the by executed soundings of series The
a of establishment the for bottoms favourable most the out finding
coast. American the and Islands Hawaiian the between cable submarine

director, Its company. powerful a by foot on set project vast a was It
of islands the all cover to even meant Field, Cyrus intelligent the
of worthy enterprise immense network--an electric vast a with Oceania
genius. American

sounding of operations first the that Susquehanna corvette the to was It
of 12th the to 11th the from night the During entrusted. been had
west long., 37' 41 and 7' 27 lat. north in exactly was she December
meridian. Washington the from

the above herself show to began quarter, last her in then moon, The
horizon.

few a and Bronsfield Lieutenant departure, Blomsberry's Captain After
thoughts their appeared moon the As poop. the on together were officers
then were hemisphere whole a of eyes the which orb that towards turned
the discovered have not could glasses marine best The contemplating.
pointed all were they yet and demi-globe, the round wandering projectile
same the in at looking were eyes of millions which disc shining the at
moment.

can "What Bronsfield. Lieutenant said then ago," days ten started "They
them?" of become have

are they "and midshipman, young a exclaimed sir," arrived, have "They
about looking are they country, new a in do travellers all what doing
them."

Lieutenant answered friend," young my so, say you as it of certain am "I
smiling. Bronsfield,

The doubted. be cannot arrival "their officer, another said "Still,"
at full, was she moment the at moon the reached have must projectile
six makes that December; of 11th the at now are We 5th. the on midnight
have they darkness, no with hours, twenty-four times six in Now days.
brave our see I that me to seems It settled. comfortably get to time had
a of borders the on valley, a of bottom the at encamped countrymen
amidst fall, its by buried half projectile, the near stream, Selenite
operations, levelling his beginning Nicholl Captain remains, volcanic
Ardan Michel order, in notes travelling his putting Barbicane President
cigar--" Londrs his with solitudes lunar the performing

midshipman, young the exclaimed so!" is it so; be must it "Oh,
superior. his of description ideal the at enthusiastic

was who Bronsfield, Lieutenant answered it," believe to like should "I
world lunar the from news direct "Unfortunately away. carried seldom
wanting." be always will

Barbicane President cannot "but midshipman, the said sir," me, "Excuse
write?"

answer. this greeted laughter of roar A

has post-office "The quickly. man young the answered letters," "Not
that." with do to nothing

officers the of one said telegraph-office?" the mean you "Perhaps
ironically.

"But in. give not would who midshipman, the answered either," that "Nor
earth." the with communication graphic establish to easy very is it

pray?" how, "And

the brings it that know You Peak. Long's on telescope the of means "By
it that and Mountains, Rocky the of only leagues two within to moon
surface. her on diameter of feet nine having objects see to them allows
They alphabet! gigantic a construct will friends industrious our Well,
then and long, league a sentences and long, feet 600 words write will
news!" up send can they

loudly was imagination some had certainly who midshipman, young The
idea the that convinced was himself Bronsfield Lieutenant applauded.
rays, luminous sending by that added He out. carried been have could
could communications direct mirrors, parabolical of means by grouped
the on visible as be would rays these fact, established--in be also
He earth. the from is Neptune planet the as Mars or Venus of surface
the on observed already points brilliant the that saying by ended
that said, he But earth. the to made signals be might planets nearest
they world, lunar the from news have could they means these by though
have Selenites the unless world terrestrial the from any send not could
distant make to which with instruments disposition their at
observations.

of become has what "but officers, the of one answered evident," is "That
what is That seen? they have What done? they have What travellers? the
not do I which succeeded, has experiment the if Besides, us. interests
the in up walled still is Columbiad The again. done be will it doubt,
and powder of question a only now therefore, is, It Florida. of soil
cargo a it send can we zenith the passes moon the time every and shot,
visitors." of

will Maston J.T. "that Bronsfield, Lieutenant answered evident," is "It
days." these of one friends his join and go

with go to ready am "I midshipman, the exclaimed me," have will he "If
him."

go, to allowed are they if and amateurs, of plenty be will there "Oh,
moon!" the to emigrated have soon will earth the of inhabitants the half

up kept was Susquehanna the of officers the between conversation This
overwhelming the transcribe to impossible be would It a.m. 1 about till
Since minds. audacious these by emitted were which theories and systems
Americans. to impossible was nothing that seemed it attempt Barbicane's
commission another not sending, of project the formed already had They
infantry, of army whole a and colony, whole a but _savants_, of
world. lunar the conquer to cavalry and artillery,

feet thousand Ten in. hauled all not was sounding-line the a.m. 1 At
According in. bring to hours more several take would which out, remained
pressure the and lighted, been had fires the orders commander's the to
once. at started have might Susquehanna The already. up going was

about was Bronsfield a.m.--Lieutenant 1.17 was moment--it very that At
a by attracted was attention his when in turn to watch his leave to
sound. hissing unexpected quite and distant

an from came hissing the that thought first at he and comrades His
high was it that found he head his up lifting upon but steam, of escape
air. the in up

of became hissing the before other each question to time not had They
an appeared eyes dazzled their to suddenly and intensity, frightful
friction its by course, its of rapidity the by inflamed bolis, enormous
strata. atmospheric the against

noise the with fell and nearer, came it as huger grew mass ignited This
close off smashed it which corvette, the of bowsprit the upon thunder of
waves. the in vanished and stem, the to

on all with down gone have would Susquehanna the and nearer feet few A
board.

in rushing and half-clothed, appeared Blomsberry Captain moment that At
him-- preceded had officers his where forecastle, the

asked. he happened?" has what gentlemen, permission, your "With

cried all, them of mouthpiece the himself making midshipman, the And
out--

again." back come 'they' is it "Commander,




XXI. CHAPTER

IN. CALLED MASTON J.T.


forgot sailors and Officers Susquehanna. the board on great was Emotion
crushed being of danger in--the been just had they danger terrible the
the terminated which catastrophe the of thought only They sunk. and
and ancient of enterprise audacious moat the therefore, Thus, journey.
it. attempted had who adventurers bold the of life the lost times modern

had they and said, had midshipman young the back," come 'they' is "It
the of projectile the was bolis the that doubted one No understood. all
travellers. the of fate the about divided were Opinions Club. Gun

one. said dead!" are "They

the and here, deep is water "The other. the answered alive," are "They
deadened." been has shock

suffocated!" die will and air, no have will they "But

incandescent an only was projectile "Their other. the answered "Burnt!"
atmosphere." the crossed it as mass

they dead or "living unanimously, answered was matter?" it does "What
there." from up brought be must

with and together, officers his called had Blomsberry Captain Meanwhile
immediately. done be must Something council. a held he permission their
operation, difficult projectile--a the up haul to was immediate most The
necessary the wanted corvette the But one. impossible an not but
therefore, was, It precise. and powerful be to have would which engines,
Club Gun the to word send to and port, nearest the into put to resolved
bullet. the of fall the about

was port a of choice The unanimously. taken was determination This
of degree 27th the on harbour no had coast neighbouring The discussed.
important the was Monterey, of peninsula the above up, Higher latitude.
a of confines the on seated But, it. to name its given has which town
interior, the with communication telegraphic no had it desert, veritable
enough. quickly news important the spread could alone electricity and

of capital the Through Francisco. San of bay the lay above degrees Some
be would Union the of centre the with communication Country Gold the
days, two than less in Susquehanna, the on, steam all putting By easy.
at start therefore, must, She Francisco. San of port the reach could
once.

Two immediately. sail set could they and up, heaped were fires The
Captain water. the in remained still sounding of fathoms thousand
resolved and in, it hauling in time precious lose not would Blomsberry
line. the cut to

indicate will buoy the "and he, said buoy," a to end the fix will "We
fell." projectile the where point exact the

bearings: exact our have "we Bronsfield, Lieutenant answered "Besides,"
37'." 41 long. west and 7', 27 lat. north

your "with captain; the answered Bronsfield," Mr. well, "Very
cut." line the have permission,

to on out thrown was spars, of couple a by reinforced buoy, strong A
struck solidly was line the of end The ocean. the of surface the
that so surges, the of flow and ebb the to submitted only and beneath,
much. drift not would it

the put had he that captain the warn to came engineer the moment that At
his for him thanked captain The start. could they and on, pressure
corvette The route. the as N.N.E. gave he Then communication. excellent
on. steam all with Francisco San of bay the for made and about, put was
a.m. 3 then was It

the like vessel quick a for much not was over get to leagues hundred Two
the on and hours, thirty-six in distance that over got It Susquehanna.
San of bay the enter would she p.m., 1.27 at December, of 14th
Francisco.

speed all with arriving navy national the of vessel this of sight the At
was curiosity public up, propped mainmast her and gone, bowsprit her on,
quays the on assembled soon was crowd compact A excited. singularly
landing. the awaiting

got Bronsfield Lieutenant and Blomsberry Captain anchor weighing After
land. the to rapidly them carried which boat eight-oared an into down

quay. the on out jumped They

the of one answering without asked, they telegraph-office?" "The
them. upon showered were that questions thousand

amidst telegraph-office, the to himself them guided inspector port The
people. curious of crowd immense an

crushed crowd the whilst office the into went Bronsfield and Blomsberry
door. the against

different four in sent was message one later minutes few A
the to 2nd, Washington; Navy, the of Secretary the to directions:--1st,
J.T. Honourable the to 3rd, Baltimore; Club, Gun the of Vice-President
the of Sub-Director the to 4th, Mountains; Rocky Peak, Long's Maston,
Massachusetts. Observatory, Cambridge

follows:-- as ran It

the of projectile the 37', 41 long. west and 7', 20 lat. north "In
Send am. 1.17 at 12th, December on Pacific, the into fell Columbiad
Susquehanna." Commander instructions.--BLOMSBERRY,

the knew Francisco San of town whole the afterwards minutes Five
had Union the of States different the p.m. 6 Before tidings.
the through midnight, After catastrophe. supreme the of intelligence
American great the of result the knew Europe of whole the cable,
enterprise.

the throughout produced effect the describe to impossible be would It
news. unexpected the by world

the to telegraphed Navy the of Secretary the telegram the of receipt On
Francisco. San of bay the in wait and fire, under keep to Susquehanna
night. or day sail set to ready be to was She

the with and, meeting, extraordinary an had Cambridge of Observatory The
discussed peacefully it bodies, scientific distinguishes which serenity
question. the of part scientific the

were artillerymen the All explosion. an was there Club Gun the At
reading just was Wilcome, Honourable the Vice-President, The assembled.
announced Belfast and Maston Messrs. which by telegram premature the
of reflector gigantic the in perceived been just had projectile the that
bullet, the that also them informed communication This Peak. Long's
of part the playing was moon, the of attraction the by retained
world. solar the in sub-satellite

known. now is subject this on truth The

formally so which message, Blomsberry's of arrival the upon However,
the in formed were parties two telegram, Maston's J.T. contradicted
the admitted who members were side one the On Club. Gun the of bosom
travellers. the of return the consequently and projectile, the of fall
Peak, Long's at observations the by holding who, those were other the On
According mistaken. was Susquehanna the of commander the that concluded
a but nothing bolis, a only was projectile pretended the latter, the to
corvette. the fractured had fall its in which star, shooting a bolis,
velocity the because answered, be well very not could argument Their
The difficult. very observation its made had endowed was it which with
been have certainly might officers his and Susquehanna the of commander
if favour: their in was certainly argument One faith. good in mistaken
the touched have must it earth the on fallen had projectile the
taking and, latitude, north of degree 27th the upon spheroid terrestrial
of movement earth's the and elapsed, had that time the account into
longitude. west of degree 42nd and 41st the between rotation,

that Club Gun the in decided unanimously was it be, might that However
once at start should Elphinstone Major and Bilsby brother Blomsberry's
up dragging of means the about advice their give and Francisco San for
ocean. the of depths the from projectile the

was which railway the and instant, an losing without started men These
where Louis, St. to them took America Central of whole the cross to soon
them. awaited mail-coaches rapid

the Navy, the of Secretary the that moment same the at Almost
Observatory the of Sub-Director the and Club, Gun the of Vice-President
Maston J.T. Honourable the Francisco, San from telegram the received
not emotion existence--an whole his of emotion violent most the felt
was cannon celebrated his when experienced had he that by equalled even
life. his him cost nearly it, like which, and up, blown

started had Club Gun the of Secretary the that remembered be will It
the quickly--for as almost projectile--and the after minutes some
Belfast, J. learned The Mountains. Rocky the in Peak Long's of station
the at Arrived him. accompanied Observatory, Cambridge the of Director
no and themselves, installed summarily had friends two the station
telescope. enormous their of summit the left longer

reflecting the on up set been had instrument gigantic this that know We
gave only arrangement This English. the by view" "front called system,
clearer. much view the made consequently and objects, of reflection one
were observing, whilst Belfast, and Maston J.T. that was result The
lower. the in of instead instrument the of part upper the in stationed
and lightness, of masterpiece a staircase, twisted a by it reached They
280 mirror, metallic the by terminated well metal, the lay them below
deep. feet

the that telescope the round placed platform narrow the upon was it Now
the hid which daylight the cursing existence, their passed _savants_ two
at her veiled obstinately which clouds the and eyes, their from moon
night.

during days, several waiting after when, delight their depict can Who
carrying was that vehicle the perceived they 5th December of night the
deep succeeded delight that To space? through friends their
out sent they observations, incomplete to trusting when, disappointment
that affirmation erroneous the world the to telegram first their with
an in gravitating moon the of satellite a become had projectile the
orbit. immutable

of disc invisible the behind disappeared bullet the instant that After
the disc invisible the on reappeared have to ought it when But moon. the
be may companion impatient less no his and Maston J.T. of impatience
the see should they thought they night the of minute every At imagined.
arose them between Hence it. see not did they and again, projectile
the that affirming Belfast disputes, violent and discussions endless
a but one any that affirming Maston J.T. visible, not was projectile
it. see could man blind

Maston. J.T. repeated bullet!" the is "It

lunar a from falling avalanche an is "it Belfast, answered "No!"
mountain!"

to-morrow." it see shall we then, "Well,

space." into away carried is It more. no seen be will it "No,

you." tell I it, see shall "We

not." shall we "No,

the hail, like showered being were interjections these while And
a constituted Club Gun the of Secretary the of irritability well-known
Belfast. director, the to danger permanent

an but impossible, become have soon would together existence Their
discussions. eternal these short cut event unexpected

two the December of 15th and 14th the between night the During
J.T. disc. lunar the observing in occupied were friends irreconcilable
who Belfast, learned the to things strong saying usual, as was, Maston
the for declared Club Gun the of Secretary The too. angry getting was
even adding projectile, the perceived just had he that time thousandth
was He port-lights. the of one at appeared had face Ardan's Michel that
redoubtable his which gestures of series a by arguments his emphasising
dangerous. rendered hook

10 was platform--it the upon appeared servant Belfast's moment that At
of Commander the from message the was It telegram. a him gave p.m.--and
Susquehanna. the

cry. a uttered and inclosure, the read envelope, the tore Belfast

Maston. J.T. said it?" is "What

bullet!" the "It's

that?" of "What

earth!" the upon fallen has "It

him. answered howl a time this cry; Another

leaning fellow, unfortunate The Maston. J.T. towards turned He
immense the down disappeared had tube, metal the over imprudently
the towards rushed distracted, Belfast, feet! 280 of fall telescope--a
reflector. the of orifice

the of one in caught had hook steel Maston's J.T. again. breathed He
uttering was He telescope. the of platform the maintained which props
cries. formidable

up, hoisted was secretary imprudent the and came, Help called. Belfast
trouble. without not

orifice. upper the at unhurt reappeared He

he. said mirror?" the broken had I "Suppose

severely. Belfast answered it," for paid have would "You

Maston. J.T. asked fallen?" bullet infernal the has where "And

Pacific." the "Into

once." at start us "Let

descending were friends learned two the afterwards hour an of quarter A
reached they afterwards days two and Mountains, Rocky the of slope the
having Club, Gun the of friends their as time same the at Francisco San
road. the on horses five killed

their upon them to up rushed Bilsby and Blomsberry, Elphinstone,
arrival.

exclaimed. they done?" be to is "What

as soon as "and Maston, J.T. answered up," fished be must bullet "The
possible!"




XXII. CHAPTER

UP. PICKED


was waves the under disappeared had projectile the where spot very The
the to it bringing and it seizing for instruments The known. exactly
and invented be to had They wanting. still were ocean the of surface
a such by embarrassed be not could engineers American manufactured. then
they helping, steam and established once grappling-irons The trifle.
weight, its notwithstanding projectile, the raising of assured were
plunged. was it which amidst liquid the of density the diminished which

act to necessary was It bullet. the up fish to enough not was it But
they that doubted one No travellers. the of interest the in promptly
living. still were

inspired confidence whose incessantly, Maston J.T. repeated "Yes,"
fallen have cannot they and fellows, clever are friends "our everybody,
haste make must we but well, and alive alive, are They imbeciles. like
water. and provisions about anxiety no had He so. them find to order in
them. fail soon would air!--air But time! long a for enough had They
haste!" make must they Then

new her for Susquehanna the prepared They haste. make did they And
the for used be to arranged were engines powerful Her destination.
a lbs., 19,250 weighed only projectile aluminium The machines. hauling
picked was which cable, transatlantic the of that than weight less much
smooth the in lay difficulty only The circumstances. similar under up
to difficult it made which bullet, cylindro-conical the of sides
grapple.

Francisco, San to summoned Murchison, engineer the view in end that With
system automatical an upon fitted be to grappling-irons enormous caused
seizing in succeeded they if again go projectile the let not would which
diving-dresses some had also He pincers. powerful their with it
allowed texture, resisting and impermeable their by which, prepared,
board on embarked likewise He sea. the of bottom the survey to divers
ingeniously very air, compressed for apparatuses Susquehanna the
and them, in port-lights with rooms, veritable were They contrived.
sunk be could compartments, certain into water the introducing by which,
where Francisco, San at already were apparatuses These depths. great to
was This dyke. submarine a of construction the in used been had they
them. make to time been have not would there for fortunate,

the notwithstanding apparatus, the of perfection the notwithstanding Yet
the of success the them, use to were who _savants_ the of ingenuity
feet 20,000 from bullet a up Fishing assured. but anything was operation
bullet the if even And operation. uncertain an be must water under
the borne travellers the had how surface, the to brought be again should
sufficiently not would water of feet 20,000 even that shock terrible
deaden?

his on hurried Maston J.T. quickly. done be must everything short, In
diver's the on buckle to either ready was He night. and day workmen
courageous his find to order in air-apparatus the try to or dress
friends.

machines different the which with diligence the notwithstanding Still,
placed were which sums considerable the notwithstanding ready, got were
five Union, the of Government the by Club Gun the of disposition the at
were preparations the before by went centuries) (five days long
highest the to excited was opinion public time that During completed.
through world the over all exchanged incessantly were Telegrams point.
and Nicholl, Barbicane, of saving The cables. and wires electric the
had that nations the All business. international an became Ardan Michel
in interested equally were Club Gun the of enterprise the to subscribed
travellers. the of safety the

automatic and air-chambers, grappling-chains, the last At
the Maston, J.T. Susquehanna. the board on embarked were grappling-irons
their occupied already delegates Club Gun the and Murchison, engineer
start. to but do to nothing was There cabins.

sea calm a on sail set corvette the p.m., 8 at December, of 21st the On
San of population the All blowing. wind north-east cold rather a with
its reserving anxious, and mute quays, the to on crowded Francisco
return. the for hurrahs

the of screw the and tension, of maximum its to on put was steam The
bay. the of out rapidly it carried Susquehanna

the amongst board on conversations the relate to useless be would It
thought. one but had men these All passengers. and sailors, officers,
his and Barbicane were What emotion. same the with beat all hearts Their
had What succour? their to hastening were they whilst doing companions
manoeuvre audacious some attempt to able been they Had them? of become
any that is truth The say. could one No liberty? their recover to
ocean, the under leagues two nearly to Sunk failed. have would attempt
prisoners. its of effort any defy would prison metal their

the passage, rapid a after a.m., 8 at December, of 23rd the On
obliged were They disaster. the of scene the on be to ought Susquehanna
buoy The bearings. exact their take to o'clock twelve till wait to
seen. been yet not had sounding-line the to on fastened

the controlled who officers, his by helped Blomsberry, Captain noon At
Gun the of delegates the of presence in point his made observation,
at be to found was Susquehanna The moment. anxious an was That Club.
disappeared had projectile the where spot very the of west minutes some
waves. the under

reaching of view in given therefore was corvette the of direction The
spot. precise the

not did and order, perfect in was It sighted. was buoy the p.m. 12.47 At
far. drifted have to seem

Maston. J.T. exclaimed last!" "At

Blomsberry. Captain asked begin?" we "Shall

Maston. J.T. answered second," a losing "Without

motionless. perfectly corvette the keep to taken was precaution Every

wished Murchison, engineer, the projectile, the grapple to trying Before
submarine The sea-bottom. the on position exact its out find to
The air. of provision their received search this for destined apparatus
feet 20,000 at for danger, without not is engines these of handling
are they pressure great such under and water the of surface the below
terrible. be would which of consequences the ruptures to exposed

Murchison, engineer the and brother, commander's the Maston, J.T.
the in places their took dangers, these of thought a without
the over presided foot-bridge, his on commander, The air-chambers.
The signal. least the at chains his in haul or stop to ready operation,
the upon machines the of force the all and off, taken been had screw
board. on apparatus the up brought have soon would windlass

its by down dragged chamber, the and p.m., 1.25 at began descent The
the of surface the under disappeared water, with filled reservoirs
ocean.

between divided now was board on sailors and officers the of emotion The
submarine the of prisoners the and projectile the in prisoners the
of panes the to glued and, themselves, forgot latter These apparatus.
were they masses liquid the observed attentively they port-lights, the
through. passing

had companions his and Maston J.T. p.m. 2.17 At rapid. was descent The
arid the except nothing saw they but Pacific; the of bottom the reached
the By animated. longer any fauna nor flora marine neither which desert
could they reflectors, powerful with furnished lamps, their of light
the but radius, large rather a in water of layers dark the observe
eyes. their in invisible remained projectile

Their described. be hardly could divers bold these of impatience The
a made they corvette, the with communication electric in being apparatus
a over chamber their carried Susquehanna the and upon, agreed signal
soil. the from yard one at space of mile

by instant every at deceived plain, submarine the all explored thus They
a there rock, a Here heart. the to them cut which delusions optical
much-sought-for the like them to looked ground, the of swelling
again. despair and error their out find soon would they then projectile;

Maston. J.T. cried be?" they can Where they? are "Where

Ardan, Michel and Barbicane, Nicholl, to aloud called man poor the And
that through him heard have could friends unfortunate his if as
medium! impenetrable

of state vitiated the until conditions those under on went search The
again. up go to divers the forced apparatus the in air the

before terminated not was and p.m., 6 at begun was in hauling The
midnight.

the to on stepped he as Maston J.T. said to-morrow," again try will "We
corvette. the of deck

Blomsberry. Captain answered "Yes,"

place." another in "And

"Yes."

his but success, ultimate his of doubt yet not did Maston J.T.
the of animation the with intoxicated longer no were who companions,
enterprise. the of difficulties the all in took already hours, few first
almost appeared ocean open in Francisco San at easy seemed What
and proportion, large a in diminished success of chances The impossible.
be to had projectile the of finding the that alone chance to was it
left.

the of fatigues the notwithstanding December, of 24th the day, next The
minutes some moved corvette The resumed. were operations day, preceding
the took again, air with provisioned apparatus, the and west, farther
ocean. the of depths the to explorers same

a was sea the of bed The search. fruitless a in passed was day that All
the of that did neither result, no brought 25th the of day The desert.
26th.

for up shut men unfortunate the of thought They disheartening. was It
the feeling all were they Perhaps projectile. the in days twenty-six
of dangers the escaped had they if even suffocation, of symptoms first
air the with doubtless and exhausted, getting was air The fall. their
spirits. and courage their

Maston. J.T. said never," courage their but likely, very air "The

was bullet This lost. was hope all search, days' two after 28th, the On
of hope the up give must They sea! the of immensity the in atom an
it. finding

the abandon not would He leaving. about hear not would Maston J.T. Still
Captain But friends. his of tomb the found least at having without place
the notwithstanding and obstinately, on stay not could Blomsberry
set to orders give to obliged was he secretary, worthy the of opposition
sail.

north-east, heading Susquehanna, the a.m., 9 at December, of 29th the On
Francisco. San of bay the to return to began

the regret with if as and slowly leaving was corvette The a.m. 10 was It
on was who masthead, the at sailor the when catastrophe, the of scene
once-- at all out called look-out, the

bow!" lee the on buoy "A

their through saw They indicated. direction the in looked officers The
buoys those of one like look did which signalled, object the telescopes
a them, unlike but, rivers; or bays of openings the marking for used
six or five emerged which cone a surmounted wind the in floating flag
silver. of plates of made if as sunshine the in shone buoy This feet.

Gun the of delegates the and Maston, J.T. Blomsberry, commander, The
on drifting thus object the examined and foot-bridge the ascended Club
waves. the

dared them of None silence. in but anxiety, feverish with looked All
minds. their all into came that thought the utter

object. the of length cables' two within to approached corvette The

crew. whole the through ran shudder A

one! American an was flag The

J.T. worthy the was It heard. was roar veritable a moment that At
had he that hand one the on forgetting heap; a in fallen had who Maston,
simple a that other the on and arm, one for hook iron an only
a himself given had he cranium-box, his covered cap gutta-percha
blow. formidable

life. to him recalled They up. him picked and him towards rushed They
words? first his were what And

are!" we that boobies quintuple idiots! quadruple brutes! triple "Ah!

exclaimed. him round one every matter?" the is "What

is?" matter the "What

you?" can't "Speak,

bullet the is "it secretary, terrible the shouted imbeciles," is, "It
lbs!" 19,250 weighs only

"Well?"

floats_!" _it consequently lbs., 56,000 or tons, 28 displaces it "And

was it And float!" "to verb the underline did man worthy that how Ah!
fundamental this forgotten had _savants_ these all yes! All, truth! the
after projectile, the lightness specific its of consequence in that law,
had ocean, the of depths greatest the to fall its by dragged been having
tranquilly floating was it now and surface; the to returned naturally
them. carried wind the way whichever

into rushed friends his and Maston J.T. lowered. been had boats The
palpitated hearts All point. highest its at was excitement The them.
contain--the it did What projectile. the towards rowed boats the whilst
down struck had death unless Yes! living. The dead? the or living
flag! the hoisted had they since companions his and Barbicane

Eyes beating. stopped hearts All boats. the in reigned silence Profound
the of port-lights the of One office. their performed longer no
frame the in remaining glass of pieces Some opened. was projectile
actually situated was port-light This broken. been had it that proved
water. above feet five

broken the to rushed He Maston. J.T. of alongside--that drew boat A
window.

heard was Ardan Michel of voice clear and joyful the moment that At
double Barbicane, blank, victory--"Double of accents the in exclaiming
blank!"

dominoes. at playing were Nicholl and Ardan, Michel Barbicane,




XXIII. CHAPTER

END. THE


three the accompanied sympathy immense that remembered be will It
enterprise their of beginning the If departure. their upon travellers
enthusiasm what world, new and old the in excitement such caused had
who spectators of millions those not Would return! their welcome must
sublime the meet to rush peninsula Floridian the invaded had
the of points all from foreigners of legions those Would adventurers?
Barbicane, seeing without Union the leave America, in now globe,
the of passion ardent the and No, more? once Ardan Michel and Nicholl,
Human enterprise. the of grandeur the to respond worthily would public
after returned had who spheroid, terrestrial the left had who beings
be to fail not could space, celestial into journey strange their
see To earth. the to returned he when Elijah prophet the like received
desire. general the was afterwards, them hear to first, them

the all almost by realised promptly very be to was desire This
Union. the of inhabitants

Club Gun the of delegates the and Nicholl, Ardan, Michel Barbicane,
with received there were and Baltimore, to delay without returned
to ready were notes travelling president's The enthusiasm. indescribable
manuscript this bought Herald_ York _New The publicity. for up given be
In enormous. been have must which but known, yet not is which price a at
printed they Moon_ the to _Journey the of publication the during fact,
travellers' the after days Three newspaper. that of copies 5,000,000
known. were expedition their of details least the earth the to return
this of heroes the see to was done be to remaining thing only The
enterprise. superhuman

allowed had moon the around friends his and Barbicane of exploration The
satellite. terrestrial the about theories different the control to them
peculiar quite under and visu_ _de it observed had _savants_ These
which rejected, be to were systems which known now was It circumstances.
its and origin, its orb, this of formation the upon admitted,
their up given had future and present, past, Its inhabitability.
at made observations conscientious to objected be could What secrets.
strangest the Tycho, of mountain curious that from miles forty than less
to made be could answers What orography? lunar of system mountain
of amphitheatre the of depths dark the into looked had who _savants_
of hazards the whom men audacious these contradict could Who Pluto?
which moon, the of disc invisible the over carried had enterprise their
to prerogative their now was It before? seen ever had eye human no
the up built had which science selenographic that of limits the impose
"The say, to and fossil, a of skeleton the did Cuvier like world lunar
earth! the to anterior inhabited and inhabitable world a this, was moon
uninhabited!" and uninhabitable now world a this, is moon The

members its of illustrious most the of return the welcome to order In
banquet; a them giving of thought Club Gun the companions, two his and
under and people, American the of worthy them, of worthy banquet a but
a take could Union the of inhabitants the all that circumstances such
it. in part direct

by together joined were State the in railroads the of termini the All
flags, same the with hung stations the all in Then, rails. movable
dressed. uniformly tables spread were ornaments, same the with decorated
beat which clocks electric upon calculated severely time, certain a At
take to invited were inhabitants the instant, same the at seconds the
banquet. same the at places their

were trains the January, of 9th the to 5th the from days, four During
and Union, the of railways the upon Sundays on are they like suspended
free. were lines the all

had saloon, state a dragging engine, fast very a alone, locomotive One
of railways the upon days, four these during circulating, of right the
States. United the

a by carried, mechanic, a and stoker a by conducted locomotive, This
Club. Gun the of Secretary Maston, J.T. Honourable the favour, great

and Nicholl, Captain Barbicane, President for reserved was saloon The
Ardan. Michel

the of whistle the upon Baltimore of station the left train The
of interjections admiring the all and hurrahs the amidst engine-driver
hour. an leagues eighty of speed the at went It language. American the
heroes three the which with one the to compared speed that was what But
Columbiad? the left had

in population the finding another, to town one from went they Thus
and acclamations, same the with them saluting passage their upon crowds
the over travelled thus They "bravoes." same the them upon showering
Massachusetts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, through Union the of east
York, New through west and north Brunswick; New and Maine, Vermont,
Missouri, Illinois, through south Wisconsin; and Michigan, Ohio,
Florida, and Alabama through south-east Louisiana; and Texas, Arkansas,
Tennessee, through centre the visited they Carolinas; the and Georgia,
Washington of station the after then Indiana; and Virginia, Kentucky,
that imagine could they days four during and Baltimore, re-entered they
saluted banquet, immense one at seated America, of States United the
hurrahs. same the with simultaneously them

placed have would fable whom heroes, these of worthy was apotheosis This
demigods. of ranks the in

travels, of annals the in precedent without attempt, this would now And
be ever communication direct Would result? practical any have
founded be ever navigation of service a Would moon? the with established
to planet from go ever people Will world? solar the for space across
another, to star one from on later and Mercury, to Jupiter from planet,
of allow locomotion of method a would Sirius, to star Polar the from
firmament? the in swarm which suns the visiting

audacious the knowing but questions, these to given be can answer No
the that astonished be will one no race, Anglo-Saxon the of ingenuity
account. to experiment Barbicane's President turn to tried Americans

received public the travellers the of return the after time some Thus
(Limited), Company Joint-Stock a of advertisement the favour marked with
hundred a into divided dollars, million hundred a of capital a with
_National of name the under each, dollars thousand a of shares thousand
Barbicane; Communication_--President, Interstellar for Company
Director, Maston; J.T. Secretary, Nicholl; Captain Vice-President,
in everything foresee to America in customary is it as Ardan--and Michel
Commissary Trollope, Harry Honourable the bankruptcy, even business,
assignees. beforehand appointed were Dayton Francis and Judge,

1 Chapter

descending? we Are contrary. the On No. again? rising we Are
out heave sake Heavens For falling! are we captain! that, than Worse
rise? balloon the Does empty! is sack last the There! ballast! the
the below is sea The waves. of dashing the like noise a hear I No!
every with Overboard us! from feet 500 than more be cannot It car!
everything! ... weight!

air, the through resounded which words startling and loud the were Such
the in oclock four about Pacific, the of desert watery vast the above
1865. March, of 23rd the of evening

northeast, the from storm terrible the forgotten have possibly can Few
without raged tempest The year. that of equinox the of middle the in
were ravages Its March. of 26th the to 18th the from intermission
eighteen of distance a covering Asia, and Europe, America, in terrible
the from equator the to obliquely extending and miles, hundred
were Towns parallel. south fortieth the to parallel north thirty-fifth
of mountains the by devastated coasts uprooted, forests overthrown,
which shore, the on cast vessels them, on precipitated were which water
leveled districts whole hundreds, by numbered accounts published the
several over, passed they everything destroyed which waterspouts by
traces the were such sea; at drowned or land on crushed people thousand
disasters in surpassed It tempest. devastating this by left fury, its of
25th the on one Guadalupe, and Havana ravaged frightfully so which those
1825. July, of 26th the on other the 1810, October, of

a sea, at and land on place taking were catastrophes many so while But
air. agitated the in enacted being was exciting less not drama

a of summit the on carried be might ball a as balloon, a fact, In
of column a of movement circling the into taken been had waterspout,
turning hour, an miles ninety of rate the at space traversed had and air
maelstrom. aerial some by seized if as round and round

five containing car, a swung balloon the of point lower the Beneath
mingled vapor thick the of midst the in visible scarcely passengers,
ocean. the of surface the over hung which spray with

From tempest? the of plaything that come had asked, be may it Whence,
started have not could surely It rise? it did world the of part what
the and already, days five raged had storm the But storm. the during
that doubted be cannot It 18th. the on manifested were symptoms first
traveled have not could it for distance, great a from came balloon the
hours. twenty-four in miles thousand two than less

guidance, their for marks all of destitute passengers, the rate any At
traversed route the reckoning of means the possessed have not could
the in although that, fact remarkable a was It departure. their since
They it. from suffer not did they tempest, furious the of midst very
the feeling without round and round whirled and about thrown were
were they that sensible being or degree, slightest the in rotation
position. horizontal a from removed

gathered had which mist thick the through pierce not could eyes Their
density the was Such them. around all was vapor Dark car. the beneath
or day was it whether certain be not could they that atmosphere the of
roaring no land, inhabited from sound no light, of reflection No night.
while obscurity, the through them, reached have could ocean the of
had alone descent rapid Their zones. elevated those in suspended
However, waves. the from ran they which dangers the of them informed
and arms, ammunition, as such articles, heavy of lightened balloon, the
a to atmosphere, the of layers higher the into risen had provisions,
sea the that discovered having after voyagers, The feet. 4,500 of height
than dreadful less above dangers the thinking and them, beneath extended
useful most their even overboard throw to hesitate not did below, those
life the fluid, that of more no lose to endeavored they while articles,
abyss. the above them sustained which enterprise, their of

to death been have would which alarms of midst the in passed night The
tempest the it with and appeared day the Again souls. energetic less
March, of 24th the day, that of beginning the From moderate. to began
had clouds lighter the of some dawn, At abating. of symptoms showed it
wind the hours few a In air. the of regions lofty more the into risen
rate the say, to is that breeze, fresh a to hurricane a from changed had
It half. by diminished was layers atmospheric the of transit the of
the but breeze, topsail close-reefed a call sailors what still was
diminished. considerably less the none had elements the in commotion

sensibly was air the of region lower the oclock, eleven Towards
felt is which dampness chilly that off threw atmosphere The clearer.
gone have to seem not did storm The meteor. great a of passage the after
have it Could itself. exhausted have to appeared It west. the to farther
to regard with case the sometimes is as sheets, electric in away passed
Ocean? Indian the of typhoons the

again was balloon the that evident also was it time, same the at But
were, it if as appeared It movement. regular a with descending slowly
and lengthening was case its that and collapsing, little, by little
the midday Towards form. oval an to spherical a from passing extending,
It feet. 2,000 only of height a at sea the above hovering was balloon
it capacity, its to thanks and, gas, of feet cubic 50,000 contained
a reach should it although air, the in time long a itself maintain could
position. horizontal a into thrown be might or altitude great

articles last the away cast passengers the danger, their Perceiving
kept, had they provisions few the car, the down weighed still which
hoisted having them, of one and pocket-knives, their to even everything,
to tried net, the of cords the united which circles the to on himself
balloon. the of point lower the firmly more secure

and failing, was gas the that voyagers the to evident however, was, It
regions. higher the in sustained be longer no could balloon the that
perish! infallibly must They

them. beneath visible island, an even nor continent, a not was There
solid a not land, of speck single a present not did expanse watery The
hold. could anchor their which upon surface

tremendous with dashing still were waves whose sea, open the was It
those for even limits, visible any without ocean, the was It violence!
of radius a over extended position, commanding their from gaze, whose
storm, the by mercy without lashed plain, liquid vast The miles. forty
and white whose chargers, furious of herds with covered if as appeared
not sight, in was land No wind. the in streaming were crests disheveled
arrest to cost any at necessary was It seen. be could ship solitary a
in engulfed being from balloon the prevent to and course, downward their
work. urgent this to energies their all directed voyagers The waves. the
the at and fell, still balloon the efforts, their notwithstanding But,
of direction the following rapidity, greatest the with shifted time same
southwest. the to northeast the from say, to is that wind, the

were They men. unfortunate these of situation the was indeed Frightful
were attempts their All machine. the of masters longer no evidently
gas The more. and more collapsed balloon the of case The useless.
was descent Their it. retaining of possibility any without escaped
feet 600 within hung car the midday after soon and accelerated, visibly
ocean. the of

a through rushed which gas, of escape the prevent to impossible was It
which articles the all of car the lightening By silk. the in rent large
suspension their prolong to able been had passengers the contained, it
only could catastrophe inevitable the But hours. few a for air the in
and car, voyagers, night, before appear not did land if and retarded, be
waves. the beneath vanish certainty a to must balloon

truly were They expedient. remaining only the to resorted now They
single a Not face. the in death look to how knew who men, dauntless
the to struggle to determined were They lips. their from escaped murmur
a only was car The fall. their retard to anything do to minute, last
slightest the not was there and float, to unable basket, willow of sort
sea. the of surface the on it maintaining of possibility

the above feet 400 scarcely was balloon the and passed hours more Two
water.

was heart whose man a of voice the voice, loud a moment that At
not others responded voice this To heard. was fear, to inaccessible
2,000 still are here No, out? thrown everything Is determined. less
Does sea. the into plunged immediately bag heavy A gold. in dollars
falls it before long be not will it but little, A rise? balloon the
the Yes! Nothing. out? thrown be to remains still What again.
car. the with sea the into and net, the of hold catch us Let car!

balloon. the lightening of mode only and last the fact, in was, This
fall, its after balloon, the and cut, were car the held which ropes The
the into themselves hoisted had voyagers five The feet. 2,000 mounted
abyss. the at gazing meshes, the to clung and net,

to sufficient is It known. well is balloons of sensibility delicate The
vertical its in difference a produce to article lightest the out throw
mathematical of balance a like is air the in apparatus The position.
of lightened is it when that understood easily thus be can It precision.
So sudden. and impetuous be will movement its weight considerable any
instant an for suspended being after But occasion. this on happened it
rent the by escaping gas the redescend, to began balloon the aloft,
repair. to impossible was it which

them save could efforts human No do. could men that all done had men The
now.

elements. the rules who Him of mercy the to trust must They

the of surface the above feet 500 only was balloon the oclock four At
water.

held was and voyagers, the accompanied dog A heard. was barking loud A
net. the of meshes the in master his to close pressed

loud a immediately Then men. the of one cried something, seen has Top
shouted,-- voice

the towards drove still wind the which balloon, The land! Land!
might which distance, considerable a gone daybreak since had southwest,
in had, land high tolerably a and miles, of hundreds by reckoned be
miles thirty still was land this But direction. that in appeared fact,
there then and it, to get to hour an than less take not would It off.
leeward. to falling of chance the was

fluid the all of emptied be that before balloon the not Might hour! An
retained? yet it

that see distinctly could voyagers The question! terrible the was Such
what of ignorant were They cost. any at reach must they which spot solid
what to know not did they for continent, a or island an whether was, it
reach must they But them. driven had hurricane the world the of part
not. or hospitable whether desolate, or inhabited whether land, this

Several itself! support longer no could balloon the that evident was It
bottom the licked billows enormous the of crests the had already times
rose, half only balloon the and heavier, still it making net, the of
not was land the later hour an Half wing. wounded a with bird a like
in hanging flabby, exhausted, balloon, the but off, mile a than more
to clinging voyagers, The alone. part upper its in gas had folds, great
the into plunged half soon, and it, for heavy too still were net, the
out bulged balloon-case The waves. furious the by beaten were they sea,
it Might vessel. a like along it drove it, taking wind, the and again,
land? the reach thus possibly not

pairs four from resounded cries terrible off, fathoms two only when But,
never would it if as appeared had which balloon, The once. at lungs of
struck been having after bound, unexpected an made suddenly rise, again
new a of relieved instant that at been had it if As sea. tremendous a by
it here and feet, 1,500 of height a to mounted it weight, its of part
coast, the to directly it taking of instead which wind, of current a met
direction. parallel nearly a in it carried

on fell finally and obliquely, reproached it later, minutes two last, At
waves. the of reach the of out beach, sandy a

from themselves disengage to managed other, each aiding voyagers, The
taken was weight, their of relieved balloon, The net. the of meshes the
instant, an for revives which bird wounded a like and wind, the by
space. into disappeared

balloon the and dog, a with passengers, five contained had car the But
shore. the on four left only

had which sea, the by off swept been evidently had person missing The
the that circumstance this to owing was it and net, the struck just
the reached after soon then and time, last the rose balloon lightened
they than ground, firm on foot set castaways four the had Scarcely land.
he Perhaps exclaimed, simultaneously one, absent the of thinking all,
him! save us let him! save us Let land! to swim to try will



2 Chapter

neither were coast this on thrown just had hurricane the whom Those
whose war of prisoners were They amateurs. nor profession by aeronauts
manner. extraordinary this in escape to them induced had boldness

they had times hundred A perished! almost had they times hundred A
But ocean. the of depths the into balloon torn their from fallen almost
the on having, after and destiny, strange a for them reserved had Heaven
General of troops the by besieged Richmond, from escaped March, of 20th
the from miles thousand seven themselves found they Grant, Ulysses
South, the of stronghold principal the was which Virginia, of capital
lasted had voyage aerial Their Secession. of War terrible the during
days. five

were prisoners the of escape the to led which circumstances curious The
follows: as

coups the of one in 1865, February, of month the in year, same That
possess to vain, in though attempted, Grant General which by main de
the of power the into fell officers his of several Richmond, of himself
was distinguished most the of One town. the in detained were and enemy
first-class a Massachusetts, of native a was He Harding. Cyrus Captain
the war, the during confided, had government the whom to engineer,
A time. that at important so were which railways, the of direction
his age; of years forty-five about lean, bony, thin, Northerner, true
mustache, thick a kept only he which of beard, his and hair close-cut
heads finely-developed those one-of had He gray. getting already were
serious a eyes, piercing medal, a on struck be to made appear which
was He school. military the of man clever a of physiognomy the mouth,
pickaxe, and hammer the handling by began who engineers those of one
he power, mental Besides soldiers. common as act first who generals like
remarkable exhibited muscles His dexterity. manual great possessed also
he all thought, of man a as well as action of man A tenacity. of proofs
temperament. sanguine and vigorous his of one to effort without was did
all in fulfilled he practical, and clear-headed, Learned,
human insure to ought united which conditions three those emergencies
will. powerful and wishes, impetuous body, and mind of success--activity
17th the in Orange of William of that motto his for taken have might He
success. of hope without even persevere and undertake can I century:
of battles the all in been had He personified. courage was Harding Cyrus
Ulysses under Illinois, at volunteer a as begun having After war. that
of siege the at Landing, Pittsburg Belmont, Paducah, at fought he Grant,
the on Wilderness, the Chattanooga, River, Black Gibson, Port Corinth,
who general the of worthy soldier a valiantly, and everywhere Potomac,
had Harding Captain times of hundreds And dead! my count never I said,
but Grant; terrible the by counted not were who those among been almost
till him favored fortune himself, spared never he where combats these in
battle of field the on prisoner taken and wounded was he when moment the
important another day same the on and time same the At Richmond. near
than other no was This Southerners. the of hands the into fell personage
ordered been had who Herald, York New the for reporter a Spilett, Gideon
armies. Northern the of midst the in war the of changes the follow to

American or English indomitable of race that of one was Spilett Gideon
obtain to nothing at stop who others, and Stanley like chroniclers,
shortest the in journal their to it transmit and information, exact
Herald, York New the as such Union, the of newspapers The time. possible
with. reckoned be to men are reporters their and powers, genuine are
great of man a reporters: those of first the among ranked Spilett Gideon
having ideas, of full anything, for ready and prompt energetic, merit,
in enthusiastic artist, and soldier world, whole the over traveled
nor fatigue, trouble, for neither caring action, in resolute council,
for then and first, himself for information, of pursuit in when danger,
curious of sorts all on knowledge of treasury perfect a journal, his
He impossible. the of and unknown, the of unpublished, the of subjects,
reporting fire, under write who observers intrepid those of one was
welcome. is danger every whom to and bullets, among

one in revolver rank, first the in battles, the all in been had also He
tremble. pencil his made never grape-shot other; the in note-book hand,
who those like telegrams, incessant with wires the fatigue not did He
short, notes, his of each but say, to nothing have they when speak
he Besides, point. important some on light threw clear, and decisive,
Black the of affair the after who, he was It humor. in wanting not was
the of wicket the at place his keep to cost any at determined River,
result the journal his to announced having after and office, telegraph
the of chapters first the hours two for telegraphed battle, the of
New the but dollars, thousand two Herald York New the cost It Bible.
intelligence. first the published Herald York

age. of years forty than more rather was He tall. was Spilett Gideon
steady, was eye His face. his surrounded red on bordering whiskers Light
take to accustomed man a of eye the was It changes. its in rapid lively,
to inured was he built, Well scene. a of details the all glance a at in
water. cold in hardened steel of bar a like climates, all

York New the of reporter the been had Spilett Gideon years ten For
as was he for drawings, and letters his by enriched he which Herald,
captured, was he When pen. the of as pencil the of use the in skilful
The battle. the of sketch and description a making of act the in was he
just has rifleman Southern A these: were note-book his in words last
Gideon missed notwithstanding Southerner The but-- me, at aim taken
a without affair this of out came fortune, usual his with who, Spilett,
scratch.

except other each know not did who Spilett, Gideon and Harding Cyrus
engineers The Richmond. to carried been both had reputation, by
made he that convalescence his during was it and healed, rapidly wounds
appreciate to learned then men two The reporter. the with acquaintance
escaping, of that object, one but had aim common their Soon other. each
the of ranks the in together fighting and army, Grants rejoining
Federals.

chance; every seize to determined first the from had Americans two The
town, the in liberty at wander to allowed were they although but
In impossible. appeared escape that guarded, strictly so was Richmond
devoted was who servant a by rejoined was Harding Captain meanwhile the
on born Negro a was fellow intrepid This death. in and life in him to
Cyrus, whom to but mother, and father slave a of estate, engineers the
given since long had heart, and conviction from Abolitionist an was who
He master. his leave not would free, though slave, once The freedom. his
active, vigorous, thirty, about of man a was He him. for died have would
merry, always naive, sometimes calm, and gentle, intelligent, clever,
answered only he but Nebuchadnezzar, was name His honest. and obliging,
Neb. of abbreviation familiar the to

left he prisoner, made been had master his that heard Neb When
Richmond, before arrived instant, an hesitating without Massachusetts
life his risked having after shrewdness, and stratagem of dint by and
The town. besieged the into penetrate to managed over, times twenty
finding at Neb of joy the and servant, his seeing on Harding of pleasure
described. be scarcely can master, his

quite was it Richmond, into way his make to able been had Neb though But
very were prisoners Northern the for again, out get to thing another
the make to needed was opportunity extraordinary Some watched. strictly
did only not opportunity this and success, of chance any with attempt
find. to difficult very was but itself, present not

of victory The operations. energetic his continued Grant Meanwhile
of those to united forces, His bought. dearly very been had Petersburg
gave nothing and Richmond, before unsuccessful been yet as had Butler,
deliverance. speedy a of hope any prisoners the

single a offer not did captivity tedious his whom to reporter, The
active usually His longer. no it stand could note, of worthy incident
of out get might he thought--how sole one with occupied was mind
attempt, the made even he had times Several cost. any at Richmond
siege the However, obstacle. insurmountable some by stopped was but
Grants join and escape to anxious were prisoners the if and continued;
Southern the join to anxious less no were besieged the of certain army,
Southerner. determined a Forster, Jonathan one was them Among forces.
not could Secessionists the of prisoners the if that was, truth The
the while themselves Secessionists the could neither town, the leave
had time long a for Richmond of Governor The it. invested army Northern
to wished much very he and Lee, General with communicate to unable been
march the hasten to as so town, the of situation the him to known make
conceived accordingly Forster Jonathan Thus relief. their to army the of
lines, besieging the over pass to as so balloon, a in rising of idea the
camp. Secessionist the reach way that in and

and manufactured was balloon A attempt. the authorized Governor The
five by accompanied be to was who Forster, of disposal the at placed
have might they case in arms with furnished were They persons. other
of event the in provisions and alighted, they when themselves defend to
prolonged. being voyage aerial their

should It March. of 18th the for fixed was balloon the of departure The
force, moderate of wind northwest a with night, the during effected be
in camp Lees General reach would they that calculated aeronauts the and
hours. few a

was it 18th the From breeze. simple a not was wind northwest this But
became soon tempest The hurricane. a to changing was it that evident
to impossible was it for deferred, was departure Forsters that such
furious the of midst the in carried it whom those and balloon the risk
elements.

to ready was Richmond, of square great the on inflated balloon, The
the supposed, be may as and, wind, the of abatement first the on depart
great. very was moderate storm the see to besieged the among impatience

the in alteration any without passed March of 19th the 18th, The
fastened balloon the keeping in difficulty great even was There weather.
about. furiously it dashed squalls the as ground, the to

with blew storm the morning next the but passed, 19th the of night The
impossible. was balloon the of departure The force. redoubled

the of one in accosted was Harding, Cyrus engineer, the day that On
This know. least the in not did he whom person a by Richmond of streets
years forty or thirty-five about of man a Pencroft, named sailor a was
of pair a of possessed and sunburnt, very built, strongly age, of
an was Pencroft physiognomy. good remarkably a and eyes sparkling bright
had who and over, ocean the all sailed had who North, the from American
being a that adventure impossible almost and possible every through gone
that say to needless is It encounter. would wings no and feet two with
astonished was and anything dare to ready fellow, dashing bold, a was he
Richmond to gone had year the of beginning the at Pencroft nothing. at
a of son Jersey, New from fifteen of boy young a with business, on
his been had he if as loved he whom orphan, an captain, former
first the before town the leave to able been having Not child. own
disgust; great his to up, shut himself found he siege, the of operations
by escape to resolved he difficulties, to succumb to accustomed not but,
knew he reputation; by engineer-officer the knew He other. or means some
On restraint. his under chafed man determined that impatience what with
without saying, him, accost to hesitate therefore, not, did he day this
captain? Richmond, of enough had you Have circumlocution,

a in added, who and spoke, who man the at fixedly looked engineer The
voice,-- low

escape? to try you will Harding, Captain

this that evident was it and quickly, engineer the asked When?
examined yet not had he for consideration, without uttered was question
penetrating a with having after But him. addressed who stranger the
had he that convinced was he sailor, the of face open the observed eye
man. honest an him before

briefly. asked he you? are Who

known. himself made Pencroft

escape? to propose you do way what in and Harding, replied Well,

looks which and nothing, doing there left is which balloon lazy that By
us-- for purpose on waiting was it if as me to

The sentence. his finish to sailor the for necessity no was There
and arm, the by Pencroft seized He once. at him understood engineer
which project, his developed sailor the There house. his to him dragged
its in lives their but nothing risked They simple. extremely indeed was
so but true, is it violence, its all in was hurricane The execution.
how well perfectly knew Harding Cyrus as engineer an daring and clever
art the with acquainted well as been himself he Had balloon. a manage to
Pencroft ship, a of navigation the with was he as air the in sailing of
friend young his taking course of out, set to hesitated have not would
the of tempests fiercest the brave to accustomed for, him; with Herbert
hurricane. the of account on hindered be to not was he ocean,

word, a saying without sailor the to listened had Harding Captain
long-sought-for the was Here satisfaction. with shone eyes his but
feasible, was plan The pass. it let to man a not was opportunity--he
night, the In extreme. the in dangerous confessed, be must it though,
the into slip balloon, the approach might they guards, their of spite in
they that doubt no was There it. held which cords the cut then and car,
without and succeed, might they hand other the on but killed, be might
already started have would balloon the storm this storm!--Without this
itself. presented then have not would opportunity looked-for the and

last. at Harding said alone! not am I

sailor. the asked you? with bring to wish you do people many How

Neb. servant my and Spilett, friend my Two;

five. me and Herbert with and Pencroft; replied three, be will That
six-- hold will balloon the But

voice. firm a in Harding answered go, will we enough, be will That

knew, well friend his as reporter, the for Spilett, included we This
him to communicated was project the when and back, draw to man a not was
simple so that was, him astonished What unreservedly. it of approved he
his followed he Neb, to As before. him to occurred not had idea an
go. to wished master his wherever master

there. out meet all will we Pencroft, said then, evening, This

Heaven and Harding; Captain replied oclock, ten at evening, This
departure. our before abate not does storm the that grant

lodging, his to returned and friends, two the of leave took Pencroft
the of knew boy courageous The remained. had Brown Herbert young where
result the awaited he that anxiety without not was it and plan, sailors
determined five Thus engineer. the to made being proposal the of
tempestuous the of mercy the to themselves abandon to about were persons
elements!

his nor Forster Jonathan neither and abate, not did storm the No!
car. frail that in it confronting of dreamed companions

it thing; one feared only engineer The journey. terrible a be would It
the by about dashed and ground the to held balloon, the that was
the round roamed he hours several For shreds. into torn be would wind,
same the did Pencroft apparatus. the surveying square, nearly-deserted
man a like then and now yawning pockets, his in hands his side, his on
like dreading, really but time, the kill to how know not did who
Evening balloon. the of destruction or escape the either friend, his
like passed mists Thick extreme. the in dark was night The arrived.
very was it snow, with mingled fell Rain ground. the to close clouds
had storm violent the if as seemed It Richmond. over hung mist A cold.
the that and besieged, the and besiegers the between truce a produced
streets The storm. the of detonations louder the by silenced were cannon
that in necessary appeared even not had It deserted. were town the of
which of midst the in square, the in guard a place to weather horrible
prisoners, the of departure the favored Everything balloon. the plunged
they voyage hazardous the of termination the be possibly might what but
elements?-- furious the of midst the in contemplated

head his on firmly hat his fixing Pencroft, exclaimed weather! Dirty
same! the all succeed shall we pshaw, but fist; his of blow a with

different from glided companions his and Harding nine, half-past At
the by extinguished gas-lamps, the which square, the into directions
almost balloon, enormous the Even obscurity. total in left had wind,
of sacks the of Independently seen. be not could ground, the to beaten
was car the fastened, were net the of cords the which to ballast,
five The pavement. the in ring a through passed cable strong a by held
the was such and perceived, been not had They car. the by met prisoners
other. each see even not could they that darkness

their took Herbert and Neb, Spilett, Harding, word, a speaking Without
detached order engineers the by Pencroft while car, the in places
only, minutes few a of work the was It ballast. of bags the successively
companions. his rejoined sailor the and

had engineer the and cable, the by held only then was balloon The
word. the give to but do to nothing

Top, was It car. the into bound a with sprang dog a moment that At
his broken having creature, faithful The engineer. the of favorite a
additional its that fearing however, He, master. his followed had chain,
animal. the away send to wished ascent, their impede might weight

exclaimed beast! poor difference, little but make will more One
the go letting spoke he as and sand, of bags two out heaving Pencroft,
after disappeared, direction, oblique an in ascending balloon the cable;
it as down threw it which chimneys, two against car the dashed having
them. by swept

the to exhibited was hurricane the of rage full the indeed, Then,
descending, of dream not could engineer the night the During voyagers.
by intercepted was below earth the of glimpse a even broke, day when and
fog.

the see to them allowed clearing partial a when passed had days Five
maddest the into lashed now feet, their beneath ocean extending wide
gale. the by fury

individuals daring five these befell what recollect will readers Our
of 20th the on balloon the in expedition hazardous their on out set who
coast, desert a on thrown were them of four afterwards days Five March.
was number their of one But country! their from miles thousand seven
the spirit, leading their guide, their be to was who man the missing,
feet, their recovered had they instant The Harding! Captain engineer,
assistance. him rendering of hopes the in beach the to hurried all they



3 Chapter

carried been had way, given having net the of meshes the engineer, The
animal faithful The disappeared. had also dog His wave. a by off
the cried Forward, master. his help to out leaped voluntarily had
forgetting Neb, and Pencroft, Herbert, Spilett, four, all and reporter;
giving tears, bitter shed Neb Poor search. their began fatigue, their
on loved he being only the lost having of thought the at despair to way
earth.

disappeared Harding Cyrus when time the from passed had minutes two Only
hopes had They ground. the on foot set companions his when moment the to
us let him! for look us Let him. save to time in arriving of therefore
Neb. cried him! for look

too! him find will we and Spilett, Gideon replied Neb, Yes,

trust! I Living,

living! Still

Pencroft. asked swim? he Can

there. is Top besides, and Neb, replied Yes,

head. his shook shore, the on surf heavy the observing sailor, The

half nearly and shore, the of north the to disappeared had engineer The
point nearest The landed. had castaways the where place the from mile a
off. distance that fully thus was reach could he beach the of

dark. very night the made fog thick A oclock. six nearly then was It
had chance which on land the of north the toward proceeded castaways The
they which of situation geographical the region, unknown an them, thrown
with mingled soil, sandy a upon walking were They guess. even not could
ground, The vegetation. of sort any of destitute appeared which stones,
holes, with riddled perfectly places some in was rough, and unequal very
minute every escaped holes these From painful. extremely walking making
more Others, directions. all in flew which flight, clumsy of birds great
sailor The heads. their over clouds in passed and flocks in rose active,
rose cries shrill whose cormorants, and gulls recognized he thought
sea. the of roaring the above

for listened then shouted, and stopped castaways the time to time From
had engineer the if that thought they for ocean, the from response some
the heard have would they place, the to near been had they and landed,
to unable been have himself Harding should even Top, dog the of barking
arose sound no but listen, to stopped They existence. of sign any give
little The surf. the of dashing the and waves the of roaring the above
of hollow every into searching forward, march their continued then band
shore. the

suddenly were castaways four the minutes, twenty for walking After
to close billows foaming of sight the by standstill a to brought
the at themselves found They here. ended ground solid The feet. their
furiously. broke sea the which on point sharp a of extremity

steps, our retrace must we sailor; the said promontory, a is It
mainland. the gain thus shall we and right, the towards holding

shone waves whose ocean, the to pointing Neb, said there, is he if But
all and again, call us let Well, darkness. the in white snowy a of
no came there but shout, vigorous a gave they voices, their uniting
reply. no still again; began then lull, a for waited They reply.

the of side opposite the following returned, accordingly castaways The
Pencroft However, rugged. and sandy equally soil a over promontory,
he and rose, ground the that equal, more was shore the that observed
massive whose hill, a to slope long a by joined was it that declared
the through indistinctly looming see could he that thought he front
sea the shore; the of part this on numerous less were birds The mist.
the of agitation the that observed they and tumultuous, less also was
This heard. scarcely was surf the of noise The diminished. was waves
the which bay, semicircular a formed evidently promontory the of side
follow to But sea. open the of breakers the from sheltered point sharp
the of part that to opposite exactly south, go to was direction this
a and mile a of walk a After landed. have might Harding where coast
to return to them permit would which curve no presented shore the half,
must point, the turned had they which of promontory, This north. the
strength their although castaways, The mainland. the to attached be
every hoping forward, courageously marched still exhausted, nearly was
first the in them set would which angle sudden a with meet to moment
nearly trudging after when, disappointment, their was What direction.
rocks, slippery of composed point elevated an reached having miles, two
sea. the by stopped again themselves found they

one from it surveyed have we and Pencroft, said islet, an on are We
other. the to extremity

not continent, a on not thrown, been had they right; was sailor The
in miles two than more not was which islet an on but island, an on even
breadth. less a even with length,

with strewn sea-birds, of refuge desolate the spot barren this Was
important more a to attached vegetation, of destitute and stones
car their from voyagers the When say. to impossible was It archipelago?
reconnoiter to able been not had they mist, the through land the saw
eyes sailor his with accustomed Pencroft, However, sufficiently. it
clearly could he that certain almost was gloom, the through piece to
elevated an indicated which masses confused west the in distinguish
single a was it whether determine dark the in not could they But coast.
the as either, it leave not could They others. with connected or island,
their day next the till off put therefore must they them; surrounded sea
reached had cry single a not alas! whom, from engineer, the for search
existence. in still was he that show to them

Perhaps reporter. the said nothing, proves friend our of silence The
will we so directly, reply to unable and wounded, is or fainted has he
despair. not

islet, the of point a on fire a light to proposed then reporter The
vain in searched they But engineer. the to signal a as serve would which
found. be to were stones and sand but nothing brambles; dry or wood for
to attached strongly all were who companions, his and Neb of grief The
too was It described. than pictured better be can Harding, intrepid the
what with wait must They him. help to powerless were they that evident
to able been had engineer the Either daylight. for could they patience
coast, the of point some on refuge a found already had and himself, save
cold The by. passed hours painful and long The ever! for lost was he or
perceived scarcely they but cruelly, suffered castaways The intense. was
Forgetting rest. minutes a taking of think even not did They it.
continued they on, hope to wishing or hoping chief, their but everything
its to returning always spot, sterile this on down and up walk to
the of scene the to nearest approach could they where point, northern
voices, their uniting then and called, they listened, They catastrophe.
would which before, than shout louder a even raise to endeavored they
to almost fallen now had wind The distance. great a to transmitted be
Nebs of One subside. to also began sea the of noise the and calm, a
Pencrofts directed Herbert echo. an produce to appeared even shouts
west, the to coast a is there that proves That adding, it, to attention
not could eyes his besides, nodded; sailor The distance. great no at
might it indistinct however land, discovered had he If him. deceive
only the was echo distant that But there. be to sure was land appear,
the all over hung gloom heavy a while shouts, Nebs by produced response
island. the of east part

the midnight Towards little. by little clearing was sky the Meanwhile,
companions his with there been had engineer the if and out, shone stars
Northern the to belong not did stars these that remarked have would he
not were constellations the visible, not was Star Polar The Hemisphere.
the States; United the in see to accustomed been had they which those
sky. the in brightly glittered Cross Southern

25th the of morning the in oclock five Towards away. passed night The
dark, remained still horizon the lighten; to began sky the March, of
could eye the that so sea, the from rose mist thick a daybreak with but
At stood. they where from so or feet twenty beyond penetrate scarcely
waves. moving heavily great in itself unrolled gradually fog the length

distinguish could castaways the that however, unfortunate, was It
cast were Neb and reporter the of gaze the While them. around nothing
coast the for eagerly looked Herbert and sailor the ocean, the upon
said mind, Never visible. was land of speck a not But west. the in
there... is it it... feel I land, the see not do I though Pencroft,
the But Richmond. at longer no are we that fact the as sure as there...
hot A mist. fine-weather a only was It rising. in long not was fog
half-past About island. the of surface the to penetrated soon sun
more became mist the sunrise, after hour an of three-quarters six,
the Soon below. away cleared but above, thicker grew It transparent.
showed sea the then cloud, a from descended had it if as appeared isle
on bounded but east, the towards away far spreading them, around itself
coast. precipitous and abrupt an by west the

provisionally least at was safety Their there. was land the Yes!
half about channel a by separated were coast the and islet The insured.
current. rapid extremely an rushed which through breadth, in mile a

heart, his of impulse the following castaways, the of one However,
his consulting without current, the into himself threw immediately
haste in was He Neb. was It word. single a saying without companions,
been had It north. the towards climb to and side, other the on be to
reporter The vain. in him called Pencroft back. him hold to impossible
cross to want you Do him. stopped Pencroft but him, follow to prepared
the said right! All Spilett. replied Yes, asked. he channel? the
we If master. his to help carry to able well is Neb bit; a wait seaman;
by sea open the into carried being risk we channel, the into venture
is it wrong, not Im if but, strong; very running is which current, the
patience, have us Let sand. the over down going is tide the See, ebbing.
You passage. fordable a find may we possible is it water low at and
can we than more separate not will we reporter, the replied right, are
help.

He current. the against vigorously struggling was Neb time this During
seen be could shoulders black His direction. oblique an in crossing was
also he but quickly, very down carried was He stroke. each at emerging
from cross to hour an half than more took It shore. the towards way made
feet hundred several shore the reached he and land, the to islet the
had he which from point the to opposite was which place the from
started.

himself shook he granite, of wall high a of foot the at Landing
behind disappeared soon running, off setting then, and vigorously;
northern the of height the nearly to projected which point, rocky a
islet. the of extremity

anxiety, painful with attempt daring his watched had companions Nebs
land the on attention their fixed they sight, of out was he when and
which with shell-fish some eating while lay, safety of hope their where
better was it still but repast, wretched a was It strewn. was sand the
the on terminating bay, vast one formed coast opposite The nothing. than
vegetation, all of destitute was which point, sharp very a by south
a in shore the on abutted point This aspect. wild very a of was and
the on north, the Towards rocks. granite high of outline grotesque
trending appeared, coast rounded more a and widened, bay the contrary,
cape. slender a in terminating and northeast, the to southwest the from
the of bow the made which extremities, two these between distance The
islet, the rose shore the from mile a Half miles. eight about was bay,
extreme Its whale. gigantic a of carcass the resembled somewhat which
mile. a of quarter a than more not was breadth

with covered sand, of first consisted beach the islet, the Opposite
the above little by little appearing now were which stones, black
perpendicular a by separated was level second The tide. retreating
of height a at edge unequal an by top the at terminated cliff, granite
ending miles, three of length a for thus continued It feet. 300 least at
the by cut if as looked which precipice a with right the on suddenly
and irregular this promontory, the above left, the On man. of hand
it till rocks conglomerated of slope long a by descended cliff jagged
of plateau upper the On point. southern the of ground the with mingled
above that like tableland flat a was It appeared. tree a not coast the
least at proportions; reduced of but Hope, Good of Cape the at Town Cape
to wanting not was verdure However, islet. the from seen appeared it so
confused a distinguish easily could They precipice. the beyond right the
view. their of limits the beyond extended which trees, great of mass
ranges continued the by wearied long so eye, the relieved verdure This
northwesterly a in plateau, the above and beyond Lastly, granite. of
white a glittered miles, seven least at of distance a at and direction
mountain, lofty a of that was It rays. suns the reflected which summit
snow. with capped

formed land this whether decided be present at not could question The
beholding on But continent. a to belonged it whether or island, an
have would geologist no left, the on up heaped masses convulsed the
unquestionably were they for origin, volcanic a them give to hesitated
convulsions. subterranean of work the

on land, this examined attentively Herbert and Pencroft, Spilett, Gideon
indeed which on years; long many live to have perhaps might they which
as vessels, of track usual the of out be it should die, even might they
case. the be to likely was

Pencroft? say, you do what Herbert, asked Well,

sailor. the replied everything, in as bad, some and good some is There
we hours three In making. evidently is ebb the now But see. shall We
get to try will we side, other the on once and passage, the attempt will
not was Pencroft captain. the find may hope I and scrape, this of out
greater the tide, low at later hours Three anticipations. his in wrong
Between uncovered. was channel the of bed the forming sand the of part
would which channel narrow a remained only there coast the and islet the
cross. to easy be doubt no

themselves stripped companions his and Spilett Gideon oclock, ten About
and heads, their on bundles in placed they which clothes, their of
deep. feet five than more not was which water, the into ventured then
through got and fish, a like swam deep, too was it whom for Herbert,
shore. opposite the on difficulty without arrived three All capitally.
which clothes, their on put they sun, the in themselves drying Quickly
take to down sat and water, the with contact from preserved had they
next. do to what together counsel



4 Chapter

would he that sailor the telling and up, sprang reporter the once at All
direction the in cliff the climbed he place, same that at them rejoin
hastened Anxiety before. hours few a taken had Neb Negro the which
soon he and friend, his of news obtain to longed he for steps, his
accompany to wished Herbert cliff. the of angle an round disappeared
him.

encampment, an prepare to have we sailor; the said boy, my here, Stop
Our shell-fish. these than grub better rather find and try to and
for work is There back. come they when something want will friends
everybody.

Herbert. replied ready, am I

it about set must We do. will that sailor; the said right, All
have must we therefore hungry; and cold, tired, are We regularly.
nests; in eggs and forest, the in wood is There food. and fire, shelter,
house. a find to only have we

rocks, the among cave a for look will I Herbert, returned well, Very
creep. can we which into hole some discover to sure be shall I and

boy. my on, go Pencroft; said right, All

far beach, the over wall enormous the of foot the to walked both They
the towards going of instead but retreated; now had tide the which from
feet hundred several remarked, had Pencroft southward. went they north,
which of out cutting, narrow a landed, they which at place the from
was it hand one the on Now, issue. might stream or river a thought he
stream good a of neighborhood the in themselves settle to important
thrown had current the that possible was it other the on and water, of
there. shore the on Harding Cyrus

but feet, hundred three of height a to rose said, been has as cliff, The
washed scarcely base, its at even and throughout, unbroken was mass the
as serve would which fissure smallest the offer not did it sea, the by
even which granite, hard very of wall perpendicular a was It dwelling. a
of myriads fluttered summit the Towards away. worn not had waves the
long, with species web-footed the of those especially and sea-fowl,
man, of presence the in bold tribe, clamorous beaks--a pointed flat,
Pencroft domains. their invaded thus time first the for probably who
little voracious the them, among gulls other and skua the recognized
granite. the of crevices the in nestled numbers great in which sea-mew,
to but number, great a killed have would swarm this among fired shot A
one; had Herbert nor Pencroft neither and needed, was gun a shot a fire
their even and eatable, scarcely are sea-mews and gulls this, besides
forward gone had who Herbert, However, taste. detestable a have eggs
sea-weed, with covered rocks upon came soon left, the to more little a
these On tide. high the by hidden be would later, hours some which,
not shell-fish, bivalve abounded wrack, slippery of midst the in rocks,
up ran who Pencroft, called Herbert people. starving by despised be to
hastily.

eggs! of instead do will these sailor; the cried mussels! are Here

examining attentively was who Herbert, replied mussels, not are They
lithodomes. are they rocks; the to attached molluscs the

Pencroft. asked eat? to good they Are

so. Perfectly

lithodomes. some eat us let Then

natural in up well was boy young the Herbert; upon rely could sailor The
father His science. the for passion a quite had had always and history,
best the of lectures the attend him letting by it, in him encouraged had
industrious intelligent, the of fond very were who Boston, in professors
course the in once than more was, history natural for turn his And lad.
These instance. this in mistaken not was he and use, great of time, of
adhering and clusters in suspended shells, oblong were lithodomes
molluscous of species that to belong They rocks. the to tightly very
is shell their stone; hardest the in holes excavate which perforators
common the in remarked not is which feature a ends, both at rounded
mussel.

were which lithodomes, the of meal good a made Herbert and Pencroft
had they as and oysters, as them ate They sun. the to opened half then
any of condiments without palatable were they taste, peppery strong a
sort.

which thirst, their not but time, the for appeased thus was hunger Their
to then had They molluscs. naturally-spiced these eating after increased
such in wanting be would it that likely not was it and water, fresh find
taken having after Herbert, and Pencroft region. uneven capriciously a
which with lithodomes, of supply ample an collecting of precaution the
the of foot the regained handkerchiefs, and pockets their filled they
cliff.

as which, through cutting, the at arrived they farther paces hundred Two
to was not or fresh whether water, of stream a ran guessed, had Pencroft
separated been have to appeared wall the place this At ascertained. be
a out hollowed was base its At force. subterranean violent some by
angle. sharp tolerably a formed which of part farthest the creek, little
and breadth, in feet hundred one measured part that at watercourse The
river The high. feet twenty scarcely were side each on banks two its
which granite, of walls two the between directly almost strong became
disappeared and turned suddenly then it mouth; the above sink to began
off. mile a half trees stunted of wood a beneath

Pencroft. said require! we wood the is yonder and water, the is Here
house. the want only we now Herbert, Well,

this at that ascertained sailor The limpid. was river the of water The
reach not did floods rising the when tide, low at say, to is time--that
for looked Herbert established, point important This sweet. was it--it
everywhere vain; in but retreat, a as them serve would which cavity some
perpendicular. and plain, smooth, appeared wall the

high the of reach the above and watercourse the of mouth the at However,
pile a but grotto, a not formed, had nature of convulsions the tide,
and countries granite in with met often are as such rocks, enormous of
Chimneys. of name the bear which

sandy by rocks, the among in far quite penetrated Herbert and Pencroft
the through entered it for wanting, not was light which in passages
only were some which of blocks, the between left were which openings
also came light the with but equilibrium; of miracle a by sustained
the from cold sharp the wind the with corridor-gale--and regular air--a
of some stopping-up by that thought sailor the However, exterior.
be could Chimneys the sand, and stones of mixture a with openings the
typographical the represented plan geometrical Their habitable. rendered
the isolating by but abridged, cetera et signifies which &, sign
so blew winds west and south the which through sign, the of mouth upper
use. of part lower the making in succeed could they strongly,

Harding Captain see ever we if and Pencroft, said work, our Heres
labyrinth. this of something make to how know will he again,

returns he when and Herbert, cried Pencroft, again, him see shall We
a make can we if so, be will It here. dwelling tolerable a find must he
smoke. the for opening an keep and passage left the in fireplace

serve will Chimneys these and sailor, the replied boy, my can, we So
I fuel. of store a get and come first but work, to set us Let turn. our
openings, these up stopping in useful very be will branches some think
fiends. many so like shrieks wind the which through

they angle, the turning and, Chimneys, the left Pencroft and Herbert
quite was here current The river. the of bank left the climb to began
could it tide--and rising The wood. dead some down drifted and rapid,
considerable a to force with back it drive perceived--must be already
and ebb this utilize could they that thought then sailor The distance.
objects. heavy of transport the for flow

boy the and sailor the hour, an of quarter a for walked having After
left. the towards turning in made river the which angle the at arrived
magnificent of forest a through pursued was course its point this From
the notwithstanding verdure, their retained still trees These trees.
which coniferae, of family the to belonged they for season, advanced
to climates northern from globe, the of regions the all over spread is
deedara, the especially recognized naturalist young The tropics. the
around spread which and zone, Himalayan the in numerous very are which
up sprang trees beautiful these Between odor. agreeable most a them
around. wide spread boughs parasol open opaque whose firs, of clusters
dry crushing were feet his that felt Pencroft grass, long the Among
fireworks. like crackled which branches

these of name the know dont I if Herbert, to he said boy, my Well,
and wood, burning them call may we that reckon I rate any at trees,
want. we thing chief the thats now just

work. to set immediately who Herbert, replied supply, a get us Let

the lop to necessary even not was It made. easily was collection The
feet; their at lying were wood dead of quantities enormous for trees,
yet not was it transporting of means the wanting, not was fuel if but
therefore was it rapidly; burn would dry, very being wood, The found.
the and quantity, considerable a Chimneys the to carry to necessary
this. remarked Herbert sufficient. be not would men two of loads

carrying of way some be must there sailor, the replied boy, my Well,
cart a had we If everything. doing of way a always is there wood; this
enough. easy be would it boat, a or

Herbert. said river, the have we But

which road a like us to be will river the Pencroft; replied Right,
nothing. for invented been not have rafts and itself, of carries

wrong the going is road our moment this at Herbert, observed Only,
rising! is tide the for way,

sailor, the replied ebbs, it till wait we if right all be shall We
get us Let Chimneys. the to fuel our carry to it trust will we then and
ready. raft the

river. the towards steps his directed Herbert, by followed sailor, The
wood of load a strength, his to proportion in each carried, both They
dead of quantity great a also bank the on found They fagots. in bound
probably had man of foot the which among grass, of midst the in branches
kind a In raft. his make to directly began Pencroft trod. before never
current, the broke which shore the of point a by created bay, little of
which wood, of pieces good-sized some placed lad the and sailor the
on formed, thus was raft A creepers. dry with together fastened had they
have to indeed, sufficient, collected, had they all stacked they which
the and finished, was work the hour an In men. twenty least at loaded
tide. the of turning the awaited bank, the to moored raft

consent one with and occupied, be to hours several still were There
a have to as so plateau, upper the gain to resolved Herbert and Pencroft
country. surrounding the of view extended more

wall, the river, the by formed angle the behind feet hundred two Exactly
edge the to slope gentle a in away died rocks, of fall a by terminated
began sailor the and Herbert staircase. natural a was It forest. the of
the reached they muscles their of vigor the to thanks ascent; their
of mouth the above point the to proceeded and minutes; few a in summit
river. the

long not which ocean the upon cast was look first their it, attaining On
observed, They condition. terrible a such in traversed had they before
the which on coast the of north the to part that all emotion, with
had Harding Cyrus that there was It place. taken had catastrophe
to balloon, their of portion some if see to looked They disappeared.
but was sea The Nothing! existed. yet cling, possibly might man a which
Neither also. solitary was it coast, the to As desert. watery vast one
at that possible was it But seen. anywhere be could Neb nor reporter the
perceived. be to away far too both were they time this

Captain as energetic as man a that Herbert, cried me, tells Something
have must He people. other like drowned be himself let not would Harding
Pencroft? so, think you dont shore; the of point some reached

Cyrus see to ever expected little He sadly. head his shook sailor The
Doubtless, Herbert: to hope some leave to wishing but again; Harding
a of out get would who man a is engineer our he; said doubtless,
yield. would else one any which to scrape

Stretched attention. great with coast the examined he meantime the In
rivers the of right the on bounded shore, sandy the was them below out
like appeared visible were which rocks The breakers. of lines by mouth
sea the reef, the Beyond surf. the in reposing monsters amphibious
the closed point sharp a south the To rays. suns the beneath sparkled
that in prolonged was land the if seen be not could it and horizon,
made have would which southwest, and southeast ran it if or direction,
bay the of extremity northern the At peninsula. long very a coast this
wider a in distance great a to continued was shore the of outline the
great with and cliffs, without flat, low, was shore the There curve.
then Herbert and Pencroft uncovered. left tide the which sand, of banks
the by arrested first was attention Their west. the towards returned
miles. seven or six of distance a at rose which mountain snow-topped
spread were coast the of miles two within to declivities first its From
the by caused patches, green large by relieved wood, of masses vast
the to forest this of edge the from Then, trees. evergreen of presence
Here trees. of groups with irregularly scattered plain, a extended shore
little the of waters the glades through sparkled left the on there and
the of spurs the towards back course winding its trace could they river;
sailor the where point the At spring. to seemed it which among mountain,
granite high two the between run to began it wood, of raft his left had
on abrupt, and clear remained wall the bank left the on if but walls;
sides massive the gradually, sank it contrary, the on bank, right the
shingle to stones the stones, to rocks the rocks, isolated to changed
point. the of extremity the to running

sailor. the murmured island? an on we Are

lad. the replied enough, big be to seems it rate, any At

Pencroft. said same! the all island an is big, so ever island, An

perfect more A answered. be yet not could question important this But
island itself, land the to As point. the settle to made be to had survey
varied and aspect, its in agreeable fertile, appeared it continent, or
productions. its in

we misfortune, our in and Pencroft; observed satisfactory, is This
it. for Providence thank must

of full was heart pious whose Herbert, responded praised! be God
things. all of Author the to gratitude

which on country the time some for examined Herbert and Pencroft
an hasty so after guess to difficult was it but cast; been had they
them. for store in had future the what inspection

granite the of crest southern the following returned, then They
most the of rocks, jagged of fringe long a by bordered platform,
the in nestled there lived birds of hundreds Some shapes. whimsical
whole a startled rocks, the over jumping Herbert, stone; the of holes
creatures. winged these of flock

sea-mews! nor gulls not are those he, cried Oh!

Pencroft. asked then? they are What

pigeons! were they say would one word, my Upon

by them recognize I pigeons. rock or wild are these but so, Just
their by and tail, white the by wing, the on black of band double the
eggs its eat, to good is rock-pigeon the if But plumage. slate-colored
in left have may they many how see soon will we and excellent, be must
nests! their

an of shape the in is it unless hatch, to time them give not will We
merrily. Pencroft replied omelet!

hat? your in Herbert; asked in? omelet your make you will what But

that; for enough conjuror quite not am I sailor, the replied Well!
to undertake will I and boy, my shell, the in eggs to down come must we
hardest! the despatch

granite, the in cavities the examined attentively Herbert and Pencroft
being dozen few A hollows. the of some in eggs found really they and
time the as and handkerchief, sailors the in packed were collected,
began Herbert and Pencroft approaching, was full be would tide the when
was it there, arrived they When watercourse. the towards redescend to
avail now must They turned. already had tide The midday. after hour an
not did Pencroft mouth. the to wood the take to ebb the of themselves
neither guidance, without current the in away go raft the let to intend
never is sailor a But it. steer to himself it on embark to mean he did
Pencroft and ropes, or cables of question a is there when loss a at
This creepers. dry of made long, fathoms few a cord, a twisted rapidly
the and raft, the of after-part the to fastened was cable vegetable
with raft the off pushing Herbert, while hand his in it held sailor
The capitally. succeeded This current. the in it kept pole, long a
very was bank The current. the down drifted wood of load enormous
before and aground, run would raft the that fear no was there equal;
the from paces few a mouth, rivers the at arrived they oclock two
Chimneys.



5 Chapter

cave the render to was raft, the unloading after care, first Pencrofts
Sand, draughty. it made which holes the all up stopping by habitable
the to open galleries the up closed clay, wet branches, twisted stones,
to kept, was side the at opening winding and narrow One winds. south
divided thus was cave The draw. fire the make to and smoke the out lead
would donkey a which with dens dark such if rooms, four or three into
and dry, were they But name. the deserved contented been have scarcely
which room, principal the in least at upright, stand to space was there
taking and sand, fine with covered was floor The center. the occupied
better. a of want for it with pleased well were they all in all

our working, were Pencroft and he while Herbert, said Perhaps,
ours. to place superior a found have companions

work must we know, dont we as but, seaman; the replied likely, Very
at string no than bow ones to strings two have to Better same. the all
all!

find to were they if be will it jolly how Herbert, exclaimed Oh!
them! with back him bring to were and Harding Captain

sort. right the of man a was that Pencroft, said indeed! Yes,

again? him seeing ever of despair you do Herbert, exclaimed Was!

Pencroft and done, soon was work Their sailor. the replied forbid! God
satisfied. well very himself declared

will They like. they when back come can friends our he, said Now,
shelter. enough good a find

easy supper--an the prepare to and fireplace a make to only had now They
the of opening the at ground the on placed were stones flat Large task.
take not did smoke the if This, kept. been had which passage narrow
temperature equal an maintain to enough be would it, with out heat the
sailor the and rooms, the of one in away stowed was wood Their inside.
with busy was seaman The brushwood. and logs some fireplace the in laid
matches. any had he if him asked Herbert when this,

without for happily, say may I and Pencroft, replied Certainly,
fix. a in be should we tinder or matches

by Herbert, replied do, savages the as fire get might we Still
other. the against one stick dry of bits two rubbing

besides anything do can you if see lets and boy, my try, right; All
arms. your exercising

of islands the in used much and proceeding, simple very a its Well,
Pacific. the

to how know must savages the but Pencroft, replied it, deny dont I
to tried have I once than more for wood, peculiar a employ or it do
prefer I say must I it. manage never could I but way, that in fire get
matches? my are where bye, the By matches.

there, always was which box, the for waistcoat his in searched Pencroft
the rummaged he it; find not could He smoker. confirmed a was he for
discover nowhere could he horror, his to but, trousers, his of pockets
box. the

have must box The Herbert. at looking he, said go! a Heres
have must you Herbert, Surely, lost! got and pocket my of out fallen
fire! make possibly can that tinder-box--anything something--a

Pencroft. havent, I No,

the among sand, the On boy. the by followed out, rushed sailor The
vain. in but carefully, searched both they bank, rivers the near rocks,
seen. easily been have would therefore and copper, of was box The

car? the of out it throw you didnt Herbert, asked Pencroft,

article small a such but sailor; the replied that, than better knew I
I through. gone have we about tumbling the in disappear easily could
be? it can Where box! the Confound pipe! my lost have even rather would

the to run lets Herbert; said down, going is tide the here, Look
landed. we where place

waves the which box, the find would they that probable scarcely was It
well as was it but tide, high at pebbles, the among about rolled had
had they where point the to rapidly walked Pencroft and Herbert try. to
hunted They cave. the from feet hundred two about before, day the landed
nothing. found but rocks, the of clefts the in shingle, the among there,
the by away swept been have must it place this at fallen had box the If
with crevice little every searched they down, went sea the As waves.
the for and circumstances, their in loss grave a was It result. no
very looked he vexation; his hide not could Pencroft irreparable. time
observing, by him console to tried Herbert word. a not said but anxious,
been have likely, very would, they matches, the found had they if that
useless. and sea the by wetted

shut which box copper a in were they sailor; the replied boy, my No,
do? to we are what now and tightly; very

Herbert. said fire, a making of way some find certainly shall We
them. without be not will Spilett Mr. or Harding Captain

and fire, without are we meantime the in but Pencroft; replied Yes,
return. their on repast sorry a but find will companions our

no have they that possible it think you do quickly, Herbert said But,
matches? or tinder

nor Neb neither for head, his shaking sailor, the replied it, doubt I
keep rather would Spilett Mr. that believe I and smoke, Harding Captain
match-box. his than note-book his

be to certainly was box the of loss The reply. not did Herbert
or way some in fire procuring of sure still was boy the but regretted,
not was he although so, think not did experienced, more Pencroft, other.
rate, any At grievance. great or small a about himself trouble to man a
the and Neb of return the await done--to be to thing one only was there
had they which eggs hard of feast the up give must they but reporter;
prospect agreeable an not was flesh raw of meal a and prepare, to meant
others. the for or themselves for either

of event the in Herbert, and sailor the cave, the to returning Before
and shell-fish, more some collected unattainable, positively being fire
dwelling. their to steps their retraced silently then

He box. his for looked still ground, the on fixed eyes his Pencroft,
angle the to mouth its from river the of bank left the up climbed even
it over went plateau, the to returned He moored. been had raft the where
the of border the on grass high the among searched direction, every in
vain. in all forest,

cave. the re-entered Herbert and he when evening the in five was It
were passages the of corners darkest the that say to useless is It
Towards despair. in up it give to obliged were they before ransacked
the of lands high the behind disappearing was sun the when oclock, six
the signalized strand, the on down and up walking was who Herbert, west,
Spilett. and Neb of return

not had sailor the sank; heart boys The alone!... returning were They
not had Harding, Cyrus engineer, the forebodings; his in deceived been
found! been

saying without rock, a on down sat arrival, his on reporter, The
strength not had he hunger, of dying fatigue, with Exhausted anything.
word. a utter to

he which tears the and cried, had he how showed eyes red his Neb, to As
hope. all lost had he that clearly too told restrain not could

to attempt their in done had they that all recounted reporter The
distance a for coast the surveyed had Neb and He Harding. Cyrus recover
balloon the where place the beyond much consequently and miles eight of
the by followed was which fall a one, but time last the fallen had
solitary; was shore The Top. dog the and engineer the of disappearance
a not displaced; recently pebble a even Not mark. a of vestige a not
beach. the of part that all on footstep human a not sand; the on trace
by visited been never had shore the of portion that that clear was It
there, was it and land, the as deserted as was sea The being. human a
a found have must engineer the that coast, the from feet hundred few a
tomb.

which voice a in exclaiming up, jumped Neb account, his ended Spilett As
be cant he dead! not is he No! him, within struggled hope how showed
get could He him! to never but else, one any to happen might It dead!
no do can I Oh! him, forsaking strength his Then anything! of out
murmured. he more!

give will God him! find will we him, to running Herbert, said Neb,
eat must you and hungry, are you meantime the in But us! to back him
something.

which shell-fish, of handfuls few a Negro poor the offered he saying, So
anything eaten not had Neb food. insufficient and wretched indeed was
live not would not, could He them. refused he but hours, several for
master. his without

himself laid he then shell-fish, the devoured he Spilett, Gideon to As
calm. but weak, very was He rock. a of foot the at sand, the on down
we he, said Sir, hand, his taking and him, to up went Herbert
is Night here. lying than better be will which shelter a found have
farther. search will we To-morrow rest! and Come advancing.

On cave. the towards went boy the by guided and up, got reporter The
he chance by if tone, natural most the in him asked Pencroft way, the
two. or match a have to happened

I said, nothing finding but pockets, his in felt stopped, reporter The
away. them thrown have must I but some, had

same the received and Neb to question same the put then seaman The
answer.

sailor. the exclaimed it! Confound

he matches? no you Have arm, his seizing and him heard reporter The
asked.

consequence. in fire no and one, Not

do! to what know would he here, was master my if Neb, cried Ah!

other. each at uneasily looking motionless, remained castaways four The
Spilett, Mr. saying, by silence the break to first the was Herbert
havent you perhaps you; about matches have always and smoker a are you
enough! be will match single a again, try well, looked

and waistcoat, trousers, his of pockets the in again hunted reporter The
extreme his to less no joy, great Pencrofts to last at and great-coat,
his of lining the in entangled wood of piece tiny a felt he surprise,
could he but stuff, the through fingers his with it seized He waistcoat.
great of was it one, single a and match a was this If out. it get not
phosphorus. the off rub to not importance

breaking without cleverly, very and boy, the said try? me let you Will
wood of bit little precious yet wretched the out draw to managed he it,
unused. was It men. poor these to importance great such of was which

He cargo! whole a having as good as is it Pencroft; cried Hurrah!
cave. the entered companions, his by followed and, match, the took

are country inhabited an in many so which of wood, of piece small This
the with used be here must value, no of are and indifference with wasted
caution. greatest

must We done, that dry; quite was it that sure made first sailor The
he. said paper, some have

his of out leaf a tearing hesitation some after Spilett, replied Here,
note-book.

and him, to out held reporter the which paper of piece the took Pencroft
dry and leaves, grass, of handfuls Some fireplace. the before down knelt
the that way a such in disposed and fagots the under placed were moss
fire. catch rapidly would wood dry the and circulate, easily could air

as cone, a of shape the into paper of piece the twisted then Pencroft
a Taking moss. the among in it poked and wind, high a in do smokers
heart, beating a with and carefully, it wiped he stone, rough small,
did attempt first The match. the rubbed gently he breath, his holding
to fearing enough, hard struck not had Pencroft effect. any produce not
phosphorus. the off rub

missed has match the trembles, hand my he, said it, do cant I No,
his take to Herbert told he rising, and not! will I cannot, I fire;
place.

Prometheus nervous. so been life his all in never had boy the Certainly
He anxious. more been have not could heaven from fire the steal to going
directly. match the struck but however, hesitate, not did

making up, sprang flame blue tiny a and heard was spluttering little A
the augment to as so match the turned quickly Herbert smoke. choking a
seconds few a in which cone, paper the into it slipped then and flame,
moss. the then and fire, caught too

assisted flame, cheerful a and crackled wood dry the later minute A
the of midst the in up sprang sailor, the of blowing vigorous the by
darkness.

in before nervous so never was I up; getting Pencroft, cried last! At
life! my all

easily quite went smoke The fireplace. capital a made stones flat The
was warmth agreeable an and drew, chimney the passage, narrow the at out
felt. being in long not

to always and out, go fire the let to not care great take now must They
had they as attention, and care needed only It alight. embers some keep
time. any at store their renew could and wood of plenty

more a preparing by fire the use to was thought first Pencrofts
were eggs dozen Two shell-fish. of dish a than supper nourishing
these watched corner, a in up leaning reporter The Herbert. by brought
his on weighed thought threefold A anything. saying without preparations
had he If he? was where alive, was he If alive? still Cyrus Was mind.
of means some found not had he that it was how fall, his from survived
shore. the about roaming was he Neb, to As existence? his known making
soul. a without body a like was He

no had he time this but eggs, cooking of ways fifty knew Pencroft
under them roasting with himself content to obliged was and choice,
seaman the and done, was cooking the minutes few a In cinders. hot the
the was Such supper. the of share his take to reporter the invited
eggs hard The coast. unknown this on castaways the of repast first
mans to indispensable everything contain eggs as and excellent, were
were and off, well themselves thought people poor these nourishment,
missing been not had them of one only if Oh! them. by strengthened much
been had Richmond from escaped who prisoners five the If meal! this at
fire crackling clear, this before rocks, piled-up the under there, all
Heaven! to rendered have they must thanksgiving what sand, dry the on
unquestioned their was who he learned, most the ingenious, most the But
even not had body his and missing, alas! was, Harding, Cyrus chief,
burial-place. a obtained

heard be could Outside on. come had Night March. of 25th the passed Thus
breaking surf the of sound monotonous the and wind the of howling the
a with forwards and backwards shingle the rolled waves The shore. the on
noise. deafening

down noted shortly having after corner dark a into retired reporter The
the land, new this of appearance first the day; the of occurrences the
the of incident the coast, the of exploration the leader, their of loss
his forget to managed he fatigue, by overcome then and etc.; matches,
he sailor, the to As directly. sleep to went Herbert sleep. in sorrows
not did he which on fire, the on eye one with night the passed
The cave. the in sleep not did castaways the of one But fuel. spare
companions his that all notwithstanding Neb, despairing inconsolable,
on long night all wandered rest, some take to him induce to say could
master. his on calling shore the



6 Chapter

the from castaways these by possessed articles the of inventory The
soon was uninhabited, be to appeared which coast a upon thrown clouds,
at wearing were they which clothes the save nothing, had They out. made
and note-book a however, mention, must We catastrophe. the of time the
a not inadvertence, by doubtless kept, had Spilett Gideon which watch a
they car the in while for pocket-knife; a even not tool, a not weapon,
heroes imaginary The balloon. the lighten to everything out thrown had
shipwrecked Raynal and Selkirk as well as Wyss, of or Defoe Daniel of
in never were Aucklands, the of archipelago the on and Fernandez Juan on
their from resources abundant had they Either destitution. absolute such
some else or ammunition, tools, cattle, grain, in vessels, stranded
the all with them supplied which coast the on up thrown were things
a not whatever, instrument any not here, But life. of necessities first
everything. with themselves supply must they nothing From utensil.

could engineer the if them, with been had Harding Cyrus if yet, And
their on bear to mind inventive his science, practical his brought have
must they Alas! lost. been have not would hope all perhaps situation,
expect could castaways The Harding. Cyrus see to again longer no hope
never which Providence that from and themselves from but nothing
sincere. is faith whose those abandons

coast, the of part this on themselves establish to they ought But
was it if belonged, it continent what to know to trying without
island? desert a of shore the on were they if or inhabited,

shortest the with solved be should and question, important an was It
take. to measures what know would they answer its From delay. possible
few a wait to best appeared it advice, Pencrofts to according However,
some prepare fact, in must, They exploration. an commencing before days
molluscs. and eggs than food strengthening more procure and provisions
all of first must fatigues, new undertaking before explorers, The
strength. their recruit

was fire The present. the for sufficient retreat a offered Chimneys The
of plenty were There embers. some preserve to easy was it and lighted,
easy be would It beach. the on and rocks the among eggs and shell-fish
the about hundreds by flying were which pigeons the of few a kill to
trees the Perhaps stones. or sticks with either plateau, the of summit
Lastly, fruit. eatable with them supply would forest neighboring the of
there. was water sweet the

the at remain would they days few a for that settled accordingly was It
along either expedition, an for themselves prepare to as so Chimneys
Neb suited plan This country. the of interior the into or shore the
he presentiments, his in as ideas his in obstinate As particularly.
the of scene the coast, the of part this abandon to haste no in was
Cyrus of loss the in believe not would he not, did He catastrophe.
ended had man a such that possible him to seem not did it No, Harding.
a floods, the in drowned wave, a by away carried fashion, vulgar this in
the up cast not had waves the as long As shore. a from feet hundred few
eyes, his with seen not had Neb, he, as long as engineer, the of body
believe not would he master, his of corpse the hands his with touched
his in ever than deeper itself rooted idea this And death! his in
be to illusion an still but perhaps, illusion An heart. determined
him, for As destroy. to wish not did sailor the which one and respected,
was He Neb. with arguing in use no was there but longer, no hoped he
buried, is master his where place the leave not will who dog the like
him. survive not would he probably most that such was grief his and

on out set had Neb daybreak, at March, of 26th the morning, same This
spot the to returned had he and direction, northerly a in shore the
Harding. unfortunate the over closed had doubt, no sea, the where

and eggs pigeons of solely composed was breakfast days That
the in evaporation by deposited salt some found had Herbert lithodomes.
welcome. very was mineral this and rocks, the of hollows

accompany to wished he if reporter the asked Pencroft ended, repast The
to try to going were they where forest, the to himself and Herbert
should someone that necessary thought was it consideration, on But hunt.
improbable highly the in hand at be to and fire, the in keep to remain
behind. remained accordingly reporter The aid. requiring Neb of event

ammunition find shall We sailor. the said Herbert, chase, the To
of moment the at But forest. the in weapons our cut and way, our on
would it tinder, no had they since that observed, Herbert starting,
substance. another by it replace to prudent be perhaps

Pencroft. asked What?

for serve need of case in could That boy. the replied linen, Burnt
tinder.

the had it Only advice. sensible very it thought sailor The
handkerchief. of piece a of sacrifice the necessitating of inconvenience
of part a and trying, while worth well was thing the Notwithstanding,
of state the to reduced soon was handkerchief checked large Pencrofts
central the in placed was material inflammable This rag. half-burnt a
all from sheltered rock, the in cavity little a of bottom the at chamber
damp. and wind

the and threatening was weather The morning. the in oclock nine was It
of angle the turned Pencroft and Herbert southeast. the from blew breeze
at just which, smoke the at look a cast having without not Chimneys, the
of bank left the ascended they rock: of point a round curled place, that
river. the

stout two tree first the from broke Pencroft forest, the at Arrived
Herbert which of ends the clubs, into transformed he which branches
knife! a for given have not they would what Oh! rock. a on smooth rubbed

bank. the following grass, long the among advanced now hunters two The
river the southwest, the to course its directed which turning the From
over banks, high between lay channel the and gradually narrowed
lose should they lest Pencroft, arch. double a formed trees the which
would which stream, the of course the follow to resolved themselves,
bank the But started. they which from point the to back them lead always
trees the of branches flexible the here, obstacles: some without not was
had they which thorns and creepers there, current; the with level bent
the among glided often Herbert sticks. their with down break to
the in disappeared and cat, young a of agility the with stumps broken
to not him begging directly, back him called Pencroft But underwood.
disposition the observed attentively sailor the Meanwhile, away. wander
ground, the bank, left the On country. surrounding the of nature and
It interior. the towards imperceptibly rose marshy, and flat was which
reached doubtless which threads liquid of network a like there looked
the through ran stream a Sometimes drain. underground some by river the
shore opposite The difficulty. without crossed they which underwood,
occupied river the which of valley the and uneven, more be to appeared
trees with covered hill, The visible. clearly more was bottom the
walking bank right the On view. the intercepted terraces, in disposed
the and suddenly, fell declivities the for difficult, been have would
of strength the by sustained only were water the over bending trees
roots. their

already coast the as well as forest, this that add to needless is It
saw only Pencroft life. human of sign any of destitute was surveyed,
not could he which of animals, of footprints fresh quadrupeds, of traces
Herberts also was such and probability, all In species. the recognize
doubtless which beasts wild formidable by left been had some opinion,
of mark the observe they did nowhere but trouble; some them give would
a of impression the nor fire, a of ashes the nor trees, the on axe an
on for themselves, congratulate probably might they this On foot. human
perhaps was man of presence the Pacific the of middle the in land any
little, speaking Pencroft and Herbert desired. than feared be to more
and slowly, very advanced great, were way the of difficulties the for
mile. a than more gone scarcely had they hour an for walking after
sang birds some However, successful. been not had hunt the yet As
had man if as timid, very appeared and foliage, the in fluttered and
described, Herbert others, Among fear. instinctive an with them inspired
closely beak, pointed long a with bird a forest, the of part marshy a in
a of though fine, not was plumage its but king-fisher, the resembling
brilliancy. metallic

nearer. get to trying Herbert, said jacamar, a be must That

sailor, the replied jacamar, taste to opportunity good a be will This
roasted! be to humor a in is fellow that if

on creature the struck boy, the by thrown cleverly stone a then, Just
and off ran jacamar the and it, disable not did blow the but wing, the
instant. an in disappeared

Herbert. cried am! I clumsy How

a many aimed; well was blow The sailor. the replied boy! my no, No,
yourself. with vexed be dont Come, altogether! it missed have would one
day! another it catch shall We

many scattered, more be to found were trees the advanced, hunters the As
in searched Pencroft fruit. eatable bore none but magnificent, being
many so in employed are which palm-trees precious those of some for vain
fortieth the as far as found been have which and life, domestic in ways
in only thirty-fifth the to and Hemisphere, Northern the in parallel
coniferae, of composed only was forest this But Hemisphere. Southern the
pine, Douglas and Herbert, by recognized already deodaras, as such
and America, of coast northwest the on grow which those to similar
height. in feet fifty and hundred a measuring firs, splendid

plumage, pretty and size small a of birds, of flock a moment this At
branches the among themselves dispersed tails, glancing long with
down. fine with as ground the covered which feathers, their strewing
examined having after and feathers, these of few a up picked Herbert
them,--

he. said couroucous, are These

still, Pencroft, replied guinea-fowl, or moor-cock a prefer should I
eat-- to good are they if

replied delicate, very is flesh their also and eat, to good are They
kill and approach to easy is it mistake, dont I if Besides, Herbert.
stick. a with them

foot the at arrived grass, the among creeping lad, the and sailor The
The birds. little with covered were branches lower whose tree, a of
their for served which insects of passage the waiting were couroucous
slender the clasping seen be could feet feathery Their nourishment.
them. supported which twigs

mowed they scythes, like sticks their using and rose, then hunters The
away, flying of thought never who couroucous, these of rows whole down
were hundred A off. knocked be to themselves allowed stupidly and
to minds their up made others the before ground, the on heaped already
fly.

of reach the within quite is which game, is here Pencroft, said Well,
it! take and hands our out put to only have We us. like hunters

twigs, flexible on larks like couroucous the strung having sailor The
bend a made here stream The exploration. their continued then they
the for prolonged not probably was detour this but south, the towards
the by supplied be and mountain, the in source its have must river
cone. central the of sides the covered which snow the of melting

to said, been has as was, expedition their of object particular The
of inhabitants the for game of quantity possible greatest the procure
not had object this yet as that acknowledged be must It Chimneys. the
he though researches, his pursued actively sailor the So attained. been
recognize to time even not had he which animal some when exclaimed,
had Top But Top! dog the had had we only If grass, long the into fled
perished probably had and master, his as time same the at disappeared
him. with

certain through seen were birds of flocks new oclock three Towards
the of those pecking, were they berries aromatic whose at trees,
resounded call trumpet loud a Suddenly others. among juniper-tree
game a by produced was cry sonorous and strange This forest. the through
couples, several saw soon They States. United the in grouse called bird
tail and brown, dark with mottled chestnut-brown rich was plumage whose
wing-like two the by males the recognized Herbert color. same the of
at of hold get to determined Pencroft neck. the on raised appendages
whose and fowl, a as large as were which gallinaceae, these of one least
they for difficult, was it But pullet. a of that than better is flesh
fruitless several After approached. be to themselves allow not would
sailor the grouse, the scaring but nothing in resulted which attempts,
lad,-- the to said

take to try must we wing, the on them kill cant we since Decidedly,
line. a with them

proposal. the at surprised much Herbert, cried fish? a Like

found had Pencroft seriously. quite sailor the replied fish, a Like
four or three having each nests, grouse dozen a half grass the among
their which to nests, these touch to not care great took He eggs.
he that these around was It return. to fail not would proprietors
took He fishing-lines. real but snares, not lines, his stretch to meant
singular his prepared there and nests, the from distance some to Herbert
would Walton Izaak of disciple a which care the all with apparatus
rather though interest, great with work the watched Herbert used. have
fastened creepers, fine of made were lines The success. its doubting
strong Thick, feet. twenty or fifteen of length the of other, the to one
acacia dwarf a from supplied were (which back bent points the thorns,
Large hooks. of way by creepers, the of ends the to fastened were bush)
bait. furnished ground, the on crawling were which worms, red

himself concealing and grass the among passing Pencroft, done, This
grouse the near hooks with armed lines his of end the placed skillfully,
behind Herbert with hid and ends other the took returned, he then nests;
be must it though, patiently; waited both they There tree. large a
inventive the of success the on much reckon not did Herbert that said,
Pencroft.

several surmised, had sailor the as then, but passed, half-hour whole A
the pecking along, walked They nests. their to returned grouse of couple
hunters, the of presence the way any in suspecting not and ground,
the of leeward to themselves place to care taken had besides, who,
gallinaceae.

and breath, his held He interested. highly moment this at felt lad The
if as advanced, lips his open, mouth his staring, eyes his Pencroft,
breathed. scarcely grouse, of piece a taste to about

notice any taking without hooks, the about walked birds the Meanwhile,
the if as bait the moved which tugs little gave then Pencroft them. of
alive. still been had worms

the does than anxiety greater much felt undoubtedly sailor The
The water. the through coming prey his see not does he for fisherman,
the attacked they and gallinaceae, the of attention the attracted jerks
same the at swallowed grouse voracious Three beaks. their with hooks
his struck Pencroft jerk, smart a with Suddenly hook. and bait moment
taken. were birds the that showed wings of flapping a and line,

himself made he which of game, the towards rushing cried, he Hurrah!
instant. an in master

seen ever had he that time first the was It hands. his clapped Herbert
was it that confessed modestly sailor the but line, a with taken birds
of merit the claim not could he besides that and attempt, first his not
invention.

hit to hope must we are, we as situated he, added rate, any at And
contrivances. other many upon

not at delighted Pencroft, and claws, their by fastened were grouse The
observing and hands, empty with companions their before appear to having
their to return to best it judged decline, to begun had day the that
dwelling.

only had they course whose river, the by indicated was direction The
excursion, their with enough tired oclock, six towards and, follow, to
Chimneys. the at arrived Pencroft and Herbert



7 Chapter

crossed, arms his shore, the on motionless standing was Spilett Gideon
in east the towards lost was which of horizon the sea, the over gazing
zenith. the towards rapidly spreading was which cloud black thick a
day. of decline the with increased and strong, already was wind The
a of symptoms first the and aspect, threatening a of was sky whole The
visible. clearly were storm violent

reporter. the towards went Pencroft and Chimneys, the entered Herbert
approach. him see not did absorbed, deeply latter, The

sailor: the said Spilett! Mr. night, dirty a have to going are We
rain. and wind in delight Petrels

words first his and Pencroft, saw moment, the at turning reporter, The
were,--

the when was, car the say you would coast the from distance what At
companion? our off carried waves

and instant an reflected He question. this expected not had sailor The
replied,--

most. the at lengths cables Two

Spilett. Gideon asked length? cables a is what But

feet. hundred six or fathoms, twenty and hundred a About

twelve disappeared have must Harding Cyrus reporter, the said Then,
shore? the from most the at feet hundred

Pencroft. replied that, About

also? dog his And

Also.

our that admitting while reporter, the rejoined me, astonishes What
that and death, his met also has Top that is perished, has companion
the on cast been has master his of nor dog the of body the neither
shore!

sailor. the replied sea, heavy a such with astonishing, not is It
down farther them carried have currents that possible is it Besides,
coast. the

waves? the in perished has friend our that opinion your is it Then,
reporter. the asked again

opinion. my is That

your to deference due with Spilett, Gideon said opinion, own My
absolute the of fact double the in that is Pencroft, experience,
something is there dead, or living Top, and Cyrus of disappearance
unlikely. and unaccountable

Pencroft; replied Spilett, Mr. you, like think could I wish I
the this, said Having point. this on up made is mind my unhappily,
hearth. the on crackled fire good A Chimneys. the to returned sailor
a cast flame the and wood, dry of armful an on thrown just had Herbert
passage. the of parts darkest the into light bright

to best appeared It dinner. the prepare to began immediately Pencroft
get to needed all for fare, of bill the into solid something introduce
day, next the for kept were couroucous of strings The strength. their up
stick, a on spitted soon were which grouse, of couple a plucked they but
fire. blazing a before roasting and

of absence prolonged The returned. not had Neb evening the in seven At
met had he that feared be to was It uneasy. very Pencroft made Negro the
had fellow unhappy the that or land, unknown this on accident an with
different very drew Herbert But despair. of act some to driven been
caused was delay Nebs him, to According absence. this from conclusions
search. his prolong to him induced had which circumstances new some by
had Why Harding. Cyrus of advantage the to be must new everything Also,
found had he Perhaps him? detained still hope unless returned not Neb
path. right the in him put had which trace a footstep, a mark, some
was he even Perhaps track. certain a on moment this at was he Perhaps
master. his near

The talk. him let companions His spoke. he Thus reasoned. lad the Thus
most thought Pencroft what But gesture. a with approved alone reporter
farther shore the on researches his pushed had Neb that was, probable
return. to time had yet as not had he that and before, day the than

times several presentiments, vague by agitated however, Herbert,
him assured Pencroft But Neb. meet to go to intention an manifested
deplorable and darkness the in that course, useless a be would that that
much be would it that and Neb, of traces any find not could he weather
day, next the by appearance his made not had Neb If wait. to better
search. his in him join to hesitate not would Pencroft

to not best was it that opinion sailors the of approved Spilett Gideon
large two but project; his up give to obliged was Herbert and divide,
eyes. his from fell tears

boy. generous the embracing from refrain not could reporter The

over passed southeast the from gale furious A in. set now weather Bad
was rain Heavy reef. the over beat it as roared sea The coast. the
vapor of masses Ragged dust. like particles into storm the by dashed
if as sounded shingles tormented the which on beach, the along drove
as added wind the by raised sand the while cart-loads, in out poured
united the rendered and liquid, was which that to dust mineral were it
the of end the and mouth rivers the Between insupportable. attack
the lashed maelstrom this from gusts and whirled wind of eddies cliff,
fireplace the from smoke The valley. narrow the through ran which water
and passages the filling opening, the through back driven also was
uninhabitable. them rendering

away, die fire the let Pencroft cooked, were grouse the as Therefore,
ashes. the under buried embers few a preserved only and

the that doubt no was there but appeared, not had Neb oclock eight At
have must he that and return, his hindered alone weather frightful
the least at or storm the of end the await to cave, some in refuge taken
it him, find to attempting or him, meet to going to As day. of return
impossible. was

excellent, was meat the supper; at dish only the constituted game The
very them rendered had excursion long whose Herbert, and Pencroft and
satisfaction. infinite with it devoured hungry,

rested had he which in corner the to retired each concluded, meal Their
the near sleep to going in long not was Herbert and night, preceding the
fireplace. the beside himself stretched had who sailor,

strength, in increased also tempest the advanced, night the as Outside,
Richmond from prisoners the carried had which that to equal was it until
the during frequent are which tempests The Pacific. the in land this to
are catastrophes, in prolific so are which and equinox, the of seasons
to obstacle no opposes which ocean, immense this over terrible all above
of violence terrific the of idea an give can description No fury. their
coast. unprotected the upon beat it as gale the

was It solid. was Chimneys the formed which rocks of pile the Happily
insecurely which, of few a granite, of blocks enormous of composed
could Pencroft and foundations, their on tremble to seemed balanced,
he But rock. the on rested it as head his under quiverings rapid feel
and fear, to nothing was there that rightly, and himself, to repeated
of noise the heard he However way. give not would retreat their that
on down falling wind, the by plateau the of summit the from torn stones
Chimneys, the of part upper the to on rolled even few A beach. the to
Twice perpendicularly. projected were they when fragments in off flew or
so passage, the of opening the at himself intrenched and rose sailor the
be to nothing was there But outside. the at safety in look a take to as
returned he and considerable, not were which showers, these from feared
the beneath glowed embers the where fireplace, the before couch his to
ashes.

tempest, the of uproar the hurricane, the of fury the Notwithstanding
last at Sleep profoundly. slept Herbert tumult, the and thunder, the
to habituated had life seafaring a whom Pencroft, of possession took
reproached He anxiety. by awake kept was alone Spilett Gideon anything.
not had he that evident was It Neb. accompanied having not with himself
not did Herbert troubled had which presentiments The hope. all abandoned
Why Neb. on concentrated were thoughts His also. him agitate to cease
scarcely couch, sandy his on about tossed He returned? not Neb had
his then, and Now elements. the of struggle the to thought a giving
thought sudden some but instant, an for closed fatigue, with heavy eyes,
immediately. almost them reopened

morning, from hours two perhaps was it and advanced, night the Meanwhile
shaken. vigorously was asleep, sound then Pencroft, when

ideas his collecting and himself, rousing cried, he matter? the Whats
seamen. to usual promptitude the with

saying,-- and him, over leaning was reporter The

listen! Pencroft, Listen,

those beyond noise no hear could but ears, his strained sailor The
storm. the by caused

he. said wind, the is It

heard-- I thought I again, listening Spilett, Gideon replied No,

What?

dog! a of barking The

up. springing Pencroft, cried dog! A

Yes--barking--

the in how, besides, And sailor. the replied possible! not Its
storm-- the of roaring

reporter. the said Stop--listen--

during heard, he thought really and attentively, more listened Pencroft
barking. distant lull, a

hand. sailors the pressing reporter, the said Well!

Pencroft. replied Yes--yes!

three all and awoke; just had who Herbert, cried Top! is It Top! is It
in difficulty great had They Chimneys. the of opening the towards rushed
and succeeded, they last at But back. them drove wind The out. getting
looked They rocks. the against leaning by standing remain only could
sky, the sea, The intense. was darkness The speak. not could but about,
was light of speck a Not mass. black one in mingled all were land the
visible.

minutes, few a for thus remained companions his and reporter The
sand. the by blinded rain, the by drenched wind, the by overwhelmed

they which barking, the heard again they tumult, the of pause a in Then,
distance. some at be must found

most was He accompanied? or alone he was But Top! be only could It
made have would he him, with been had Neb if for, alone, probably
the squeezed sailor The Chimneys. the towards directly more way his
which way a in heard, himself make not could he for hand, reporters
passage. the reentered he then Wait! signified

the into threw he which fagot, lighted a with issued he after instant An
shrilly. whistling darkness,

barking the for; waited been had signal this if as appeared It
passage. the into bounded dog a soon and nearer, came immediately
him. after entered Spilett and Herbert, Pencroft,

lighted was passage The embers. the on thrown was wood dry of armful An
flame. bright a with up

Herbert. cried Top! is It

these from derived who Anglo-Norman, magnificent a Top, indeed was It
which smell of acuteness the and foot of swiftness the crossed races two
the of dog the was It dogs. coursing of qualities preeminent the are
master his nor Neb Neither alone! was he But Harding. Cyrus engineer,
him! accompanied

Chimneys, the to straight him guided had instinct his that it was How
the in all, above inexplicable, appeared It know? not did he which
more still was what But tempest! a such in and night black this of midst
even nor exhausted, nor tired, neither was Top that was, inexplicable
was and him, towards him drawn had sand!--Herbert or mud with soiled
hands. lads the against neck his rubbing dog the head, his patting

reporter. the said also! found be will master the found, is dog the If

us! guide will Top off! set us Let Herbert. responded it! grant God

arrival Tops that felt He objection. any make not did Pencroft
he. said then! along Come conjectures. his contradicted

few a placed He hearth. the on embers the covered carefully Pencroft
return. their until fire the in keep to as so them, among wood of pieces
to barks short by them invite to seemed who dog, the by preceded Then,
out, dashed he boy, the and reporter the by followed and him, with come
supper. the of remains the handkerchief his in up put having after

a Not height. its at perhaps and violence, its all in then was storm The
follow To clouds. the through pierced moon the from light of ray single
instinct. Tops on rely to best was It difficult. was course straight a
the and dog, the behind walked Herbert and reporter The so. did They
The word. a exchange to impossible was It rear. the up brought sailor
terrific. was wind the but heavy, very not was rain

The companions. two his and seaman the favored circumstance one However,
of clouds The backs. their on blew consequently southeast, being wind
received being from insupportable, been have would otherwise which sand,
they short, In progress. their impede consequence in not did behind,
in difficulty some had and liked, they than faster went sometimes
at not was it for strength, them gave hope but feet; their keeping
that doubt no had They shore. the along way their made they that random
dog. faithful the them sent had he that and master, his found had Neb
companions his for sent only Neb had or living, engineer the was But
unfortunate the of corpse the to duties last the render might they that
Harding?

Pencroft and reporter, the Herbert, precipice, the passed having After
rocks the of turn The breath. take and stop to aside stepped prudently
or walk this after breathe could they and wind, the from them sheltered
hour. an of quarter a of run rather

having lad the and other, each to reply and hear now could They
as barks, short few a gave Top Harding, Cyrus of name the pronounced
saved. was master his that say to as much

Top? saved, Herbert; repeated he? isnt Saved,

reply. in barked dog the And

it wind the by urged and rise, to began tide The out. set more once They
billows Great tide. spring a was it as high, unusually be to threatened
passed probably they that violence such with reef the against thundered
longer no mole The invisible. quite then islet, the over entirely
the of attacks the to exposed directly was which coast, the protected
sea. open

wind the precipice, the left companions his and sailor the as soon As
they gale the under bent Though fury. renewed with again them struck
what to as hesitate not did who Top, following quickly, very walked
take. to direction

interminable an left their on having north, the towards ascended They
their on and noise, deafening a with broke which billows, of extent
guess. to impossible was it which of aspect the country, dark a right
passed wind the for flat, comparatively was it that felt they But
came it when was it as back driven being without them, over completely
cliff. the with contact in

cleared had they that reckoned they morning, the in oclock four At
though wind, the and raised, slightly were clouds The miles. five about
their by protected Insufficiently cold. and sharp very was damp, less
not but cruelly, suffered Spilett and Herbert Pencroft, clothing,
Top, follow to determined were They lips. their escaped complaint a
them. lead to wished animal intelligent the wherever

fog the where zenith, the At break. to began day oclock five Towards
a belt, opaque an under clouds; the bordered shades gray thick, less was
were billows the of crests The horizon. the traced clearly line luminous
the At whiteness. its regained foam the and light, wild a with tipped
though seen, be could coast the of parts hilly the left the on time same
indistinctly. very

and seaman The lifted. rapidly clouds The broken. had day oclock six At
were They Chimneys. the from miles six about then were companions his
heads whose rocks, of reef a by bounded shore flat very a following
left, the On water. deep in were they for sea, the from emerged scarcely
bristling downs, sandy of extent vast one be to appeared country the
resistance no offered shore the and cliff, no was There thistles. with
two grew there and Here hillocks. irregular of chain a but ocean the to
in projecting branches their west, the towards inclined trees, three or
of border the extended southwest, the in behind, Quite direction. that
forest. the

returned, then forward, ran He excited. very became Top moment, this At
the left then dog The steps. their hasten to them entreat to seemed and
least the showing without instinct, wonderful his by guided and beach,
The him. followed They downs. the among in straight went hesitation,
be to was creature living a Not desert. absolute an appeared country
seen.

hillocks of composed were large, was which of extent the downs, The
a resembled They distributed. irregularly very hills, of even and
have could instinct amazing an only and sand, in modeled Switzerland
way. the recognized possibly

two his and reporter the beach, the left having after minutes Five
of back the at out hollowed excavation, of sort a at arrived companions
Spilett, bark. clear loud, a gave and stopped, Top There mound. high a
cave. the into dashed Pencroft and Herbert,

grass. of bed a on extended body a beside kneeling there, was Neb

Harding. Cyrus engineer, the of that was body The



8 Chapter


word. one uttered only Pencroft move. not did Neb

cried. he Living?

clasped Herbert pale. turned sailor the and Spilett reply. not did Neb
his in absorbed Negro, poor The motionless. remained and hands, his
sailor the heard nor companions his seen neither had evidently grief,
speak.

ear his placed and body, motionless the beside down knelt reporter The
clothes. his open torn first having chest, engineers the to

the catch to endeavored he which during age!--passed, minute--an A
heart. the of throb faintest

had Despair seeing. without gazed and little a himself raised had Neb
recognized, be scarcely could He countenance. his changed completely
was master his believed He grief. with broken fatigue, with exhausted
dead.

examination. attentive and long a after rose, last at Spilett Gideon

he. said lives! He

a heard also he engineer, the beside turn his in knelt Pencroft
cheek. his on breath slight a felt even and throbbing,

found, He water. for look to out ran reporter the from word a at Herbert
greatly been have to seemed which stream, limpid a off, feet hundred a
nothing but sand; the through filtered which and rains, the by increased
was lad The downs. the among shell a even not water, the put to which in
stream, the in handkerchief his dipping with himself content to obliged
grotto. the to back hastened it with and

only who Spilett, Gideon for enough was handkerchief wet the Happily
almost an produced water cold The lips. engineers the wet to wished
speak. to try to seemed he and heaved chest His effect. immediate

reporter. the exclaimed him! save will We

master his undressed He heart. Nebs in revived hope words these At
found, be to was bruise a as much so not but wounded, was he if see to
must he as surprising, was which limbs, or body, head, the on either
and uninjured, were hands the even rocks; the against dashed been have
the of traces no showed engineer the how explain to difficult was it
breakers. the of reach of out get to made have must he which efforts

he speak to able was Cyrus When later. come would explanation the But
to how was, question the present the For happened. had what say would
this bring would rubbing that likely appeared it and life, to him recall
jersey. sailors the with work to set they so about;

slightly arm his moved shampooing, rude this by revived engineer, The
exhaustion, from sinking was He regularly. more breathe to began and
would it arrived, companions his and reporter the not had certainly, and
Harding. Cyrus with over all been have

Neb. to seaman the said you? didnt dead, was master your thought You

and you, found not had Top if and Neb, replied dead! quite Yes!
lain have then and master, my buried have should I here, you brought
die! to grave his on down

Harding! Cyrus for escape narrow a been indeed had It

having after before, day The happened. had what recounted then Neb
northerly a in coast the ascended had he daybreak, at Chimneys the left
already had he which shore the of part that reached had and direction,
visited.

beach, the searched had Neb acknowledged, he hope any without There,
He him. guide to trace smallest the for sand, the on rocks, the among
by covered not was which beach the of part that particularly examined
all obliterated have would water the sea the near for tide, high the
corpse a for was It living. master his find to expect not did Neb marks.
hands! own his with bury to wished he which corpse a searched, he that

been have to never appeared coast desert This vain. in long sought He
not had sea the which those shells, The creature. human a by visited
mark, high-water above millions by with met be might which and reached,
broken. was shell a Not untouched. were

was It miles. some for beach the along walk to resolved then Neb
point. distant a quite to body the carried had waves the that possible
rarely it shore, low a from distance little a floats corpse a When
Neb This later. or sooner up, it throw not does tide the that happens
time. last the for again master his see to wished he and knew,

examining carefully miles, two another for coast the along went I
finding of despaired had I and water, low and high at both beach, the
on footprints saw I evening, the in five above yesterday, when anything,
sand. the

Pencroft. exclaimed Footprints?

Neb. replied Yes!

reporter. the asked edge? waters the at begin footprints these Did

have must others the for mark, high-water above only Neb, replied No,
tide. the by out washed been

Spilett. said Neb, on, Go

clear very were They footprints. these saw I when crazy half went I
mile, a of quarter a for them followed I downs. the towards went and
as after, minutes Five them. destroy to not care taking but running,
Top and Top, was It dog. a of barking the heard I dark, getting was it
master! my to here, me brought

the finding at grief his been had what saying by account his ended Neb
life. of sign least the for sought vainly he which in body, inanimate
his All alive. be to him for longed he dead him found had he that Now
last the render to but done be to remained Nothing useless! were efforts
his of thought then Neb much! so loved had he whom one the to duties
again. man unfortunate the see to wish would doubt, no They, companions.
animal? faithful the of sagacity the on rely not he Could there. was Top
his among one the reporter, the of name the pronounced times several Neb
best. knew Top whom companions

direction the in off bounded dog the and south, the to pointed he Then
him. to indicated

upon looked be might which instinct an by guided how, heard have We
them. found had Top supernatural, as almost

account. this to attention great with listened had companions Nebs

which efforts the after Harding, Cyrus how them to unaccountable was It
had rocks, the crossing by waves the from escape to made have must he
was either explained be not could what And scratch. a even received not
than more downs, the in cave this to get to managed had engineer the how
shore. the from mile a

to master your brought who you not was it reporter, the said Neb, So,
place. this

Negro. the replied I, not was it No,

Pencroft. said himself, by here came captain the that clear very Its

credible! not is it but Spilett, observed reality, in clear is It

engineers the from produced be only could fact this of explanation The
had Rubbing returned. speech till that for wait must they and lips, own
arm his moved Harding Cyrus blood. the of circulation the re-established
him. escaped words incomprehensible few a and head, his then again,

appear not did engineer the but spoke, him, over bending was who Neb,
by him in exhibited only was Life closed. remained eyes his and hear, to
restored. been yet as not had senses his movement,

of means the or fire, either having not regretted much Pencroft
burnt the bring to forgotten unfortunately, had, he for it, procuring
by produced sparks the from ignited have easily would which linen,
were they pockets, engineers the to As flints. two together striking
watch. his contained which waistcoat, his of that except empty, entirely
as soon as that and Chimneys, the to Harding carry to necessary was It
all. of opinion the was This possible.

back him brought engineer the on lavished was which care the Meanwhile,
with water The expected. have could they than sooner consciousness to
thought also Pencroft gradually. him revived lips his wetted they which
which flesh titras the from moisture some water the with mixing of
large two with returned and beach the to ran Herbert brought. had he
introduced he which something concocted sailor The shells. bivalve
his opened it drinking eagerly who engineer, the of lips the between
eyes.

him. over leaning were reporter the and Neb

Neb. cried master! my master! My

other his then Spilett, and Neb recognized He him. heard engineer The
theirs. pressed slightly hand his and companions, two

even were, thoughts what showed which him, escaped again words few A
they Undoubtedly understood. was he time This brain. his troubling then,
utter. to attempted before had he words same the were

murmured. he continent? or Island

enough time is there hastily; Pencroft cried continent, the Bother
are you provided anything, for care dont we captain! that, about see to
living.

sleep. to appeared then and faintly, nodded engineer The

make to immediately began reporter the and sleep, this respected They
Neb, place. comfortable more a to Harding transporting for arrangements
towards steps their directed and cave the left Pencroft and Herbert,
sailor the way the On trees. distorted few a with crowned mound high a
repeating,-- help not could

a What gasp! last ones at when that, of think To continent! or Island
man!

companions two his and Pencroft mound, the of summit the at Arrived
its of despoil to hands, their than tools other no with work, to set
with fir; marine of sort a tree, sickly rather a branches principal
and grass with covered which, on litter, a made they branches these
engineer. the carry could they leaves,

when oclock ten was it and minutes, forty nearly them occupied This
left. not had Spilett whom Harding Cyrus to returned they

the from rather or sleep, the from awaking just was engineer The
his to returning was color The him. found had they which in drowsiness,
a himself raised He death. as pale as been had now till which cheeks,
was. he where ask to appeared and him, around looked little,

reporter. the asked Cyrus? fatigue, without me to listen you Can

engineer. the replied Yes,

be will Harding Captain that sailor, the said opinion, my Its
grouse more some have will he if better, still you to listen to able
a with him presenting he, added captain, grouse, have we jelly,--for
flesh. the of some added time this he which to jelly, this of little

divided was rest the and grouse, the of little a ate Harding Cyrus
were they for breakfast, meager a but it found who companions, his among
hunger. from extremely suffering

for Chimneys, the at food of plenty is there sailor, the said Well!
house, a have we south, the in there, down that captain, know, must you
of dozen several pantry, the in and fireplace, and beds, rooms, with
as and ready, is litter Your couroucous. calls Herbert our which birds,
home. you carry will we enough strong feel you as soon

two, or hour another wait engineer; the replied friend, my Thanks,
Spilett. speak, now And out. set will we then and

the all recounted He occurred. had that all him told then reporter The
balloon, the of fall last the unacquainted, was Cyrus which with events
it (whatever desert a appeared which land, unknown this on landing the
Chimneys, the of discovery the continent), or island whether was,
the devotion, Nebs course of forgetting not him, for search the
other many as well as Top, faithful the by exhibited intelligence
matters.

pick then, not, did you voice, feeble still a in Harding, asked But,
beach? the on up me

reporter. the replied No,

cave? this to me bring not you did And

No.

sea? the from cave this is distance what At

captain, astonished, are you if and Pencroft; replied mile, a About
place! this in you seeing at ourselves surprised less not are we

took who and gradually, recovering was who engineer, the said Indeed,
singular! very is it indeed details, these in interest great

were you after happened what us tell you can sailor, the resumed But,
sea? the by off carried

him torn had wave The little. very knew He considered. Harding Cyrus
returning On fathoms. several first at sank He net. balloon the from
struggling creature living a felt he light, half the in surface, the to
the of nothing saw He help. his to sprung had who Top, was It him. near
had dog, the of that and weight his of both lightened which, balloon,
arrow. an like away darted

could which distance a at sea, angry the of midst the in was, he There
struggle to attempted He shore. the from mile a half than less be not
his by up him held Top vigorously. swimming by billows the against
the towards him drove and him seized current strong a but clothes;
Top dragging sank, he exertion, of hour an half after and north,
he which in moment the to moment that From depths. the into him with
remembered he friends his of arms the in himself find to recovered
nothing.

the to on thrown been have must you Pencroft, remarked However,
your found Neb since here, walk to strength had have must you and beach,
footmarks!

found you and thoughtfully; engineer, the replied course, of Yes...
coast? this on beings human of traces no

met had you chance by if besides, reporter; the replied trace, a Not
have he should why time, of nick the in just there, deliverer some with
waves? the from you saved having after you abandoned

engineer, the added Neb, me, Tell Spilett. dear my right, are You
a had have cant you who... you not was it servant, his to turning
any Do absurd.... thats no, which during unconsciousness... of moment
Harding. asked remain? still footsteps the of

of back the at entrance, the at here, Neb; replied master, Yes,
has storm The wind. and rain the from sheltered place a in mound, the
others. the destroyed

it if see and shoe my take you will Harding, Cyrus said Pencroft,
footprints? the to exactly fits

guided Herbert, and he While requested. engineer the as did sailor The
Cyrus found, be to were footprints the where place the to went Neb, by
reporter,-- the to remarked

thing! extraordinary most a is It

Spilett. Gideon replied inexplicable! Perfectly

about talk will we Spilett, dear my now, just it upon dwell not do But
by-and-by. it

entered. others the after moment A

the to exactly fitted shoe engineers The it. about doubt no was There
sand. the on them left had who Harding Cyrus therefore was It footmarks.

I which unconsciousness this experienced have must I he, said Come,
any without somnambulist, a like walked have must I Neb. to attributed
having after here, me guided have must Top and steps, my of knowledge
dog! old Come, Top! Come, waves... the from me dragged

were caresses and master, his to barking bounded animal magnificent The
accounting of way other no was there that agreed was It him. on lavished
of honor the all deserved Top that and Harding, Cyrus of rescue the for
affair. the

could they if engineer the asked having Pencroft oclock, twelve Towards
which effort an by and replying, of instead Harding, him, remove now
on lean to obliged was he But up. got will, energetic most the exhibited
fallen. have would he or sailor, the

litter. captains the bring Pencroft; cried done! Well

with covered been had branches transverse the brought; was litter The
having Pencroft, and it, on laid was Harding grass. long and leaves
towards started they other, the at Neb and end one at place his taken
but, accomplished; be to miles eight of distance a was There coast. the
stop to necessary be perhaps would it and fast, go not could they as
reach to hours six least at take would it that reckoned they frequently,
not did it fortunately but strong, still was wind The Chimneys. the
observed elbow, his on leaning engineer, the down, lying Although rain.
no and, gazed; he but speak, not did He inland. particularly coast, the
ground, of inequalities its with country, the of appearance the doubt,
mind. his on impressed were productions, various its forests, its
he and him, overcame fatigue hours, two for traveling after However,
slept.

short a and precipice, the at arrived band little the five half-past At
Chimneys. the at after time

was Harding Cyrus sand; the on placed was litter the and stopped, They
awake. not did and profoundly, sleeping

had storm terrible the that found surprise, extreme his to Pencroft,
occurred; had changes Important place. the of aspect the altered quite
a with covered also was which beach, the on lay stone of blocks great
passing sea, the Evidently wrack. and algae, sea-weed, of carpet thick
enormous the of foot the to up right carried been had islet, the over
away torn been had cave the of front in soil The granite. of curtain
across flashed presentiment horrid A waves. the of violence the by
almost returned but passage, the into rushed He mind. Pencrofts
The companions.... his at staring motionless, stood and immediately,
burnt the mud; but nothing were cinders drowned the out; was fire
had sea The disappeared! had tinder, as served have to was which linen,
and overthrown was everything and passages, the of end the to penetrated
Chimneys! the of interior the in destroyed



9 Chapter

acquainted made were Neb and Herbert, Spilett, Gideon words, few a In
serious very so appeared which accident, This happened. had what with
honest the of companions the on effects different produced Pencroft, to
sailor.

or listen, not did master, his found having at delight his in Neb,
saying. was Pencroft what with himself trouble to care not did rather,

feelings. sailors the degree some in shared Herbert

replied,-- simply he reporter, the to As

me! to indifferent perfectly its Pencroft, word, my Upon

fire! any havent we that repeat, I But,

Pooh!

it! relighting of means any Nor

Nonsense!

Spilett-- Mr. say, I But

reporter. the replied here? Cyrus Isnt

fire making of way some find soon will He alive? engineer our not Is
us! for

what? With

nothing. With

of bottom the in for, nothing, say could He say? to Pencroft had What
Cyrus in had companions his which confidence the shared he heart his
every of compound a microcosm, a them to was engineer The Harding.
with be to better was It knowledge. human all of possessor a science,
town flourishing most the in him without than island, desert a in Cyrus
they him with nothing; want could they him With States. United the in
volcanic a that told been had men brave these If despair. never would
the in engulfed be would land this that land, the destroy would eruption
replied,-- imperturbably have would they Pacific, the of depths

here! is Cyrus

into relapsed again had engineer the however, palanquin, the in While
during subjected been had he which to jolting the which unconsciousness,
his to appeal now not could they that so on, brought had journey his
the all fact, In meager. very be necessarily must supper The ingenuity.
of means any existed longer no there and consumed, been had flesh grouse
had reserved been had which couroucous the Besides, game. more cooking
done. be to was what consider must They disappeared.

There passage. central the into carried was Harding Cyrus all, of First
remained still which sea-weed of couch a him for arrange to managed they
be doubt no would him overpowered had which sleep deep The dry. almost
nourishment. any than him to beneficial more

the when modified had which temperature, the and in, closed had Night
the Also, cold. extremely became again northwest, the to shifted wind
certain in up put had Pencroft which partitions the destroyed having sea
had draughts, the of account on Chimneys, the passages, the in places
therefore, would, condition engineers The habitable. scarcely become
him covered carefully not had companions his if enough, bad been have
waistcoats. and coats their with

inevitable the of composed course of was evening, this Supper,
the on supply plentiful a up picked Neb and Herbert which of lithodomes,
sea-weed, edible some added lad the molluscs, these to However, beach.
sea the by washed only were sides whose rocks, high on gathered he which
order the to belongs which sea-weed, This tides. high of time the at
gelatinous a dry, when produces, Sargassum, genus the of Fucacae, of
after companions, his and reporter The nutritious. and rich matter,
which of sargassum, the sucked lithodomes, of quantity a eaten having
very East the of parts in used is It tolerable. very was taste the
captain the sailor, the said mind! Never natives. the by considerably
unhappily and severe, very became cold the Meanwhile soon. us help will
it. from themselves defending of means no had they

fire. procure to ways of sorts all in tried vexed, extremely sailor, The
striking by and moss, dry some found He work. this in him helped Neb
being not moss, the but sparks, some obtained he pebbles two together
only really were sparks the for fire, take not did enough, inflammable
which those as consistency same the of all at not and incandescent,
experiment, The manner. same the in struck when flint from emitted are
succeed. not did therefore,

tried then proceeding, the in confidence no had he although Pencroft,
the Certainly, do. savages as together, wood dry of pieces two rubbing
into transformed been had it if exhibited, Neb and he which movement
the heat to enough been have would theory, new the to according heat,
to hot, became wood of bits The nothing. to came It steamer! a of boiler
themselves. operators the than so less much but sure, be

of state complete a in was who Pencroft, hour, an working After
disgust. in wood of pieces the down threw perspiration,

this in fires their light savages that believe to made be never can I
light sooner could I exclaimed. he will, they what say them let way,
other! each against them rubbing by arms my

kindle often Savages proceeding. the despise to wrong was sailor The
answer not does wood of sort every But rubbing. rapid of means by wood
usual the following knack, the is there besides, and purpose, the for
knack. the not had Pencroft that probable is it and expression,

of bits the taken had Herbert long. last not did humor ill Pencrofts
them. rub to himself exerting was and down, turned had he which wood
the seeing on laughter of burst a restrain not could sailor hardy The
failed. had he where succeed to lad the of efforts

he. said rub! boy, my Rub,

do to pretend dont I but laughing, Herbert, replied rubbing, am I
be shall I soon and shivering, of instead myself warm but else anything
Pencroft! good my are, you as hot as

this for up, give to obliged were they However, happened. soon This
repeated, Spilett Gideon fire. procure to attempt the least, at night
troubled been have not would Harding Cyrus that time, twentieth the for
in himself stretched he meantime, the in And, difficulty. a small so for
did Pencroft and Neb, Herbert, sand. of bed his on passages the of one
feet. masters his at slept Top while same, the

the in eight about awoke, engineer the when March, of 28th the day, Next
on as and, sleep, his watching him around companions his saw he morning,
were:-- words first his before, day the

thought. uppermost his was This continent? or Island

captain! it, about anything know dont we Pencroft, replied Well!

yet? know dont You

into us guided have you when Pencroft, rejoined know, shall we But
country. the

much without who, engineer, the replied it, try to able am I think I
upright. stood and rose effort,

sailor. the cried capital! Thats

my eat, to something me Give Harding. replied weak, dreadfully feel I
you? havent fire, have You off. go soon will it and friends,

seconds-- few a in But, to. replied immediately not was question This

it have we captain, rather, or Pencroft, said fire, no have we Alas!
longer! no

amused He before. day the passed had that all recounted sailor the And
abortive his then match, single the of history the by engineer the
way. savages the in fire procure to attempt

some find not do we if and engineer, the replied consider, shall We
tinder-- to similar substance

sailor. the asked Well?

matches. make will we Well,

Chemicals?

Chemicals!

the striking reporter, the cried that, than difficult more not is It
shoulder. the on sailor

went All protest. not did he but simple, so it think not did latter The
seas the from rising was sun The fine. very become had weather The out.
of rugosities prismatic the spangles golden with touched and horizon,
precipice. huge the

on himself seated engineer the him, around glance rapid a thrown Having
and shell-fish of handfuls few a him offered Herbert stone. of block a
saying,-- sargassum,

Harding. Captain have, we that all is It

at morning this do--for will it Harding; replied boy, my Thanks,
least.

little a with down it washed and appetite, with food wretched the ate He
shell. immense an in river the from drawn water, fresh

somewhat feeling Then, speaking. without him at looked companions His
said,-- and arms, his crossed Harding Cyrus refreshed,

an on us thrown has fate whether yet know not do you friends, my So,
continent? a on or island,

boy. the replied captain, No,

is there then, till engineer; the said to-morrow, know shall We
done. be to nothing

Pencroft. replied Yes,

What?

idea. fixed a had also, who, sailor, the said Fire,

Harding. replied Pencroft, it, make will We

a west the in see not I did yesterday, me carrying were you While
country? the commands which mountain

high-- rather be must which mountain a Spilett, replied Yes,

to-morrow, summit the to climb will we engineer, the replied Well,
Till continent. a or island an is land this if see shall we then and
done. be to nothing is there repeat, I then,

again. sailor obstinate the said fire! Yes,

a have only Spilett, Gideon replied fire! a us make will he But
Pencroft! patience, little

it If say, to seemed which way a in Spilett at looked seaman The
but soon; very meat roast taste wouldnt we it, do to you upon depended
silent. was he

very be to appeared He reply. no made had Harding Captain Meanwhile
remained he minutes few a For fire. of question the by troubled little
speaking,-- again then thought; in absorbed

at but, deplorable; perhaps, is, situation our he, said friends, My
at then, and continent, a on are we Either plain. very is it rate, any
inhabited some reach shall we fatigue, less or greater of expense the
is island the if case, latter the In island. an on are we or place,
its of help the with scrape the of out get to try will we inhabited,
by scrape the of out get to try will we desert, is it if inhabitants;
ourselves.

Pencroft. replied plainer, be could nothing Certainly,

Spilett, Gideon asked continent, a or island an is it whether But,
us? thrown has storm this Cyrus, think, you do whereabouts

is it presume I but engineer, the replied exactly, say cannot I
was wind the Richmond, left we when fact, In Pacific. the in land some
that proves greatly violence very its and northeast, the from blowing
from maintained been has direction the If varied. have not could it
North of States the traversed have we southwest, the to northeast the
Mexico, Mexico, of Gulf the Georgia, of Carolina, South of Carolina,
cannot I Ocean. Pacific the of part a then part, narrow its in itself,
seven to six than less at balloon the by traversed distance the estimate
a half varied had wind the that supposing even and, miles, thousand
Mendava, of archipelago the to either us brought have must it quarter,
I than strength greater a had it if even, or Pomotous, the on either
correct, is hypothesis last the If Zealand. New of land the to suppose,
shall we Maoris, or English again. home get to enough easy be will it
is this contrary, the on If, speak. can we whom to one some find always
shall we perhaps archipelago, tiny some in island desert a of coast the
overlooks which peak that of summit the from it reconnoiter to able be
here ourselves establish to best how see shall we then and country, the
away. go to never are we if as

Cyrus? dear my Never, say You reporter. the cried Never?

and engineer, the replied first, at worst the at things put to Better
surprise. a for best the reserve

this that too, hoped, be to is It Pencroft. remarked said, Well
ships; of course the of out just situated not is one, be it if island,
unlucky! really be would that

the made first have we until on rely to have we what know not shall We
engineer. the replied mountain, the of ascent

to state a in be you shall Herbert, asked captain, to-morrow, But
ascent? the of fatigue the bear

boy, my Pencroft, and you provided engineer, the replied so, hope I
hunters. clever and quick yourselves show

my on if game, of speaking are you since sailor, the said Captain,
back-- it bringing of am I as it roasting of certain as was I return,

Harding. replied Pencroft, same, the all back it Bring

the pass to were reporter the and engineer the that agreed then was It
plateau. upper the and shore the examine to as so Chimneys, the at day
their renew forest, the to return to were sailor the and Herbert, Neb,
or feathered creature, every on hands violent lay and wood, of store
reach. their within come might which hairy,

Herbert morning, the in oclock ten about accordingly out set They
aside,-- murmuring Pencroft joyous, Neb confident,

that believe shall I house, the at fire a find I return, my on If,
and bank; the climbed three All it. light to came itself thunder the
to said stopping, sailor, the river, the by made angle the at arrived
companions,-- two his

wood-men? or hunters being by begin we Shall

quest. in already Top is There Herbert. replied Hunters,

back come can we afterwards and sailor, the said then, hunt, will We
wood. our collect and

three torn having after Pencroft, and Neb, Herbert, to, agreed This
bounding was who Top, followed fir, young a of trunk the from sticks
grass. long the among about

river, the of course the following of instead hunters, the time, This
the still were There forest. the of heart the into straight plunged
In family. pine the to part, most the for belonging, trees, same
exhibited pines these clumps, in growing crowded, less places, certain
development, their by indicate, to appeared and dimensions, considerable
had engineer the than latitude higher a in situated was country the that
covered were time, by away worn stumps with bristling Glades, supposed.
Then, fuel. of store inexhaustible an formed which wood, dry with
almost became and again, thickened underwood the passed, glade the
impenetrable.

trees, of groups the among way the find to enough difficult was It
off broke time to time from sailor the So track. beaten any without
wrong was he perhaps, But, recognized. easily be might which branches
first their on done had Herbert and he as watercourse, the follow to not
itself. shown had creature a not hour an walking after for excursion,
be not could which birds roused only branches, the under running Top,
that probable was it and invisible, were couroucous the Even approached.
forest, the of part marshy the to return to obliged be would sailor the
fishing. grouse his performed happily so had he which in

is this if tone, sarcastic slightly a in Neb, said Pencroft, Well,
wont it master, my to back bring to promised you which game the all
it! roast to fire large a need

be will which game the isnt it sailor, the replied patience, Have
return. our on wanting

Harding? Captain in confidence not you Have

Yes.

fire? make will he that believe dont you But

fireplace. the in blazing is wood the when it believe shall I

so. said has master my since blaze, will It

see! shall We

above course its in point highest the reached not had sun the Meanwhile,
usefully was and continued, therefore, exploration, The horizon. the
was fruit whose tree a of made Herbert which discovery a by marked
almond, excellent an produces which stone-pine, the was This edible.
These Europe. and America of regions temperate the in esteemed much very
them described Herbert and maturity, of state perfect a in were almonds
them. on feasted who companions, his to

meat, for mussels raw bread, of way by sea-weed Pencroft, said Come,
who those for dinner good a certainly thats dessert, for almonds and
pocket! their in match single a not have

Herbert. said complain, mustnt We

that repeat, I only Pencroft, replied boy, my complaining, not am I
meal. of sort this in economized much too little a is meat

the in thicket, a towards ran who Neb, cried something! found has Top
were barking Tops With barking. disappeared, had dog the which of midst
gruntings. curious mingled

this there game was there If Neb. followed had Herbert and sailor The
how rather, but cooked, be to was it how discuss to time the not was
it. of hold get to were they

engaged Top saw they when bushes the entered scarcely had hunters The
This ear. the by holding was he which animal an with struggle a in
a of long, half a and feet two nearly pig of sort a was quadruped
toes, its hair; scanty hard having below, lighter color, brown blackish
membrane. a by united be to seemed ground, the in fixed strongly then
of one say, to is that capybara, the animal this in recognized Herbert
order. rodent the of members largest the

stupidly It dog. the against struggle not did capybara the Meanwhile,
men saw it Perhaps fat. of bed thick a in buried deeply eyes, its rolled
time. first the for

to going just was stick, his on grasp his tightened having Neb However,
which by teeth, Tops from itself tearing latter, the when pig, the fell
rushed grunt, vigorous a uttered ear, its of tip the by held only was it
wood. the in disappeared and him, overthrew almost Herbert, upon

Pencroft. cried rascal! The

joined they when moment the at but Top, after darted directly three All
shaded pond large a of waters the under disappeared had animal the him
pines. venerable by

the into plunged Top motionless. stopped, Pencroft and Herbert, Neb,
not did pond, the of bottom the at hidden capybara, the but water,
appear.

to surface the to come soon will he for boy, the said wait, us Let
breathe.

Neb. asked drown? he Wont

an almost is and feet, webbed has he since Herbert, replied No,
him. watch But animal. amphibious

to went companions two his and Pencroft water. the in remained Top
the of retreat the off cut to as so bank, the of parts different
water. the beneath for looking was dog the which capybara,

the on appeared animal the minutes few a In mistaken. not was Herbert
from it kept and bound, a in it upon was Top water. the of surface
was bank, the to dragged capybara, the later instant An again. plunging
stick. Nebs from blow a by killed

triumph. of cry this with ready always was who Pencroft, cried Hurrah!

bones! the to gnawed be shall pig this and fire, good a but me Give

the by judging and shoulders, his on capybara the hoisted Pencroft
to signal the gave he oclock, two about was it that sun the of height
return.

intelligent the to thanks who, hunters, the to useful was instinct Tops
Half come. had they which by road the discover to enabled were animal,
river. the at arrived they later hour an

if though before, done had he as wood, of raft a made soon Pencroft
the following raft the and task, useless a be would it fire no was there
Chimneys. the towards returned they current,

again and stopped, he when paces fifty gone not had sailor the But
cliff,-- the of angle the towards pointed hurrah, tremendous a uttering

shouted. he Look! Neb! Herbert!

rocks. the among up curling and escaping was Smoke



10 Chapter

The fire. crackling a before were hunters three the minutes few a In
the to one from looked Pencroft there. were reporter the and captain
word. a saying without hand, his in capybara his other,

reporter. the cried fellow, brave my yes, Well,

we and perfectly, pig splendid this roast will which fire, real Fire,
presently! feast a have will

Pencroft. asked it? lighted who But

sun! The

which sun the was It reply. his in right quite was Spilett Gideon
could sailor The Pencroft. astonished so which heat the furnished had
of think not did he that amazed so was he and eyes, his believe scarcely
engineer. the questioning

Harding. of Herbert asked sir? burning-glass, a you Had

one. made I but he, replied boy, my No,

was It burning-glass. a for served which apparatus the showed he And
reporters the and own his from taken had he which glasses two simply
adhesive edges their rendered and water with them filled Having watches.
burning-glass, regular a fabricated thus he clay, little a of means by
caused soon moss, dry very some on rays solar the concentrating which,
blaze. to it

engineer the at gazed he then apparatus; the considered sailor The
if that opinion his expressed plainly look a only word, a saying without
At man. ordinary no certainly was he magician, a not was Harding Cyrus
cried,-- he and him, to returned speech last

paper! your on down that note Spilett, Mr. that, Note

reporter. the replied noted, is It

capybara, the and spit, the arranged seaman the him, helping Neb Then,
clear, a before suckling-pig a like roasting soon was cleaned, properly
fire. crackling

the because only not habitable, more become again had Chimneys The
and wood of partitions the because but fire, the by warmed were passages
re-established. been had mud

their employed had companions his and engineer the that evident was It
and strength, his recovered entirely almost had Harding Cyrus well. day
eye, his point this From plateau. upper the to climbing by it proved had
time long a for fixed was distances, and heights estimate to accustomed
The day. next the reach to wished he which of summit the cone, the on
to him to appeared northwest, the to miles six about situated mountain,
of gaze the Consequently sea. the of level the above feet 3,500 measure
least at of radius a over extend would summit its on posted observer an
solve easily could Harding that probable was it Therefore miles. fifty
much so attached he which to continent, or island of question the
importance.

excellent. declared was capybara the of flesh The capitally. supped They
repast, the completed stone-pine the of almonds the and sargassum The
projects with preoccupied was He little. spoke engineer the which during
day. next the for

best be would it what upon ideas some forth gave Pencroft twice or Once
only mind, methodical a of evidently was who Harding, Cyrus but do; to
word. a uttering without head his shook

upon, depend to have we what know shall we repeated, he To-morrow,
accordingly. act will we and

and fire, the on thrown were wood of armfuls fresh ended, meal The
soon were Top, faithful the including Chimneys, the of inhabitants the
sleep. deep a in buried

29th the day, next the and night, peaceful this disturbed incident No
excursion the undertake to ready awoke, they active and fresh March, of
fate. their determine must which

enough be would capybara the of remains The start. the for ready was All
hours. twenty-four least at for companions his and Harding sustain to

had glasses the As way. the on food more find to hoped they Besides,
Pencroft reporter, and engineer the of watches the to returned been
be not would that flint, to As tinder. as serve to linen little a burned
in seven half-past was It origin. Plutonic of regions these in wanting
Chimneys. the left sticks, with armed explorers, the when morning the
already road the take to best appeared it advice, Pencrofts Following
was It route. another by return to and forest, the through traversed
south the turned They mountain. the reach to way direct most the also
at abandoned was which river, the of bank left the followed and angle
path, The southwest. the towards elbow an formed it where point the
nine at and found, was trees, evergreen the under trodden already
border western the reached had companions his and Harding Cyrus oclock
at boggy undulated, little very then, till ground, The forest. the of
from ascended which slope, gentle a had afterwards, sandy and dry first,
animals timid very few A country. the of interior the towards shore the
his but them, started quickly Top forest-trees. the under seen were
commence to come not had time the for back, him called soon master
who man a not was engineer The later. to attended be would that hunting;
even might It idea. fixed his from diverted be to himself allow would
in either all, at country the observe not did he that said been have
being aim great his productions, natural its in or configuration its
he it towards straight therefore and him, before mountain the climb to
leaving On made. was minutes few a of halt a oclock ten At went.
the before appeared country the of system mountain the forest, the
truncated first, the cones; two of composed was mountain The explorers.
by sustained was feet, hundred five thousand two about of height a at
immense an of talons the like out branch to appeared which buttresses,
bristling valleys, narrow were these Between ground. the on set claw
cone. lowest the of top the to rose which of clumps last the trees, with
which mountain the of side that on vegetation less be to appeared There
no which, seen be could fissures deep and northeast, the to exposed was
watercourses. were doubt,

little a placed and rounded, slightly second, a rested cone first the On
Scotchman A ear. the over cocked hat round great a like side, one on
of formed appeared It ajee. thocht a was bonnet His said, have would
rocks. reddish by pierced there and here earth, bare

of ridge the along proceeding and cone, second the reach to wished They
it. gain to which by way best the be to seemed spurs the

companions his and said, had Harding Cyrus ground, volcanic on are We
which, spur, a of back the on degrees by ascend to began him following
first the joined path, accessible more consequently and winding a by
plateau.

and Here force. subterranean by convulsed been evidently had ground The
met were pumice-stone, and basalt of debris numerous blocks, stray there
feet hundred some which, fir-trees, rose groups isolated In with.
almost shades massive formed gorges, narrow the of bottom the at lower,
rays. suns the to impenetrable

footprints the on remarked Herbert ascent, the of part first the During
animals. large of passage recent the indicated which

Pencroft. said willingly, by pass us let not will beasts these Perhaps

in tiger the hunted already had who reporter, the replied Well,
to successfully how learn soon shall we Africa, in lion the and India,
guard! our upon be must we meantime the in But them. encounter

slowly. but ascended They

be not could which obstacles and detours by increased distance, The
fell, suddenly ground the too, Sometimes, long. was directly, surmounted
to had they which chasm deep a of edge the on themselves found they and
practicable some find to as so steps their retracing in Thus, round. go
At nothing. for undergone fatigue and employed was time much path,
breakfast for halted adventurers of band small the when oclock, twelve
in fell which stream little a near firs, of group large a of foot the at
plateau, first the from way half still themselves found they cascades,
this From nightfall. till reach not would they probably most which
high the right the on but extended, much was sea the of view the point
On it. beyond land was there whether seeing their prevented promontory
the on but, north; the to miles several extended sight the left, the
short cut was it explorers, the by occupied point the at northwest,
powerful a formed which spur, fantastically-shaped a of ridge the by
cone. central the of support

the towards more slanted They continued. was ascent the oclock one At
shade the under There bushes. thick among entered again and southwest
the to belonging gallinaceae of couples several fluttered trees the of
skin pendant a by ornamented tragopans, were They species. pheasant
planted horns, round small, two by and throats, their over hangs which
fowl, a of size the about were which birds, these Among eyes. the behind
his in gorgeous was male the while brown, uniformly was female the
stone a with Spilett, Gideon spots. white with decorated plumage, red
which on tragopans, these of one killed thrown, vigorously and cleverly
eyes. greedy cast had air, fresh the by hungry made Pencroft,

on resting by assisted party, the bushes, of region the leaving After
steep a up feet hundred a about for climbed shoulders, others each
soil the where trees, few very with place, level a reached and acclivity
make to zigzags by ascend to necessary was It volcanic. appeared
being footing the and steep, very was it for easy, more slope the
Herbert and Neb caution. greatest the required precarious exceedingly
between reporter the and captain the rear, the Pencroft lead, the took
were there heights--and these frequented which animals The them.
sure of races those to belong necessarily them--must of traces numerous
this but seen, were Several goat. or chamois spine, supple and foot
he sudden--Sheep! a of all for them, gave Pencroft name the not was
shouted.

size, large a of animals half-a-dozen from feet fifty about stopped All
a with point, the towards flattened and back bent horns strong with
color. tawny a of hair silky long under hidden fleece, woolly

the in found usually species a but sheep, ordinary not were They
the gave Herbert which to zone, temperate the of regions mountainous
musmon. the of name

sailor. the asked chops? and legs they Have

Herbert. replied Yes,

Pencroft. said sheep! are they then, Well,

an with gazed basalt, of blocks the among motionless animals, The
Then time. first the for bipeds human saw they if as eye, astonished
rocks. the over bounding disappeared, they aroused, suddenly fears their

in them, watched he as Pencroft, cried again, meet we till Good-bye,
Neb and Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus that tone comical a such
laughing. help not could

Sulphur lava. of traces were there and Here continued. was ascent The
In them. round go to had they and way, their stopped sometimes springs
such substances, other among crystals formed had sulphur the places some
crystals. feldspar little of infinity an of made cinders whitish as

lower the of truncating the by formed plateau first the approaching In
four Towards great. very were ascent the of difficulties the cone,
only There passed. been had trees the of zone extreme the oclock
have must which pines, stunted twisted, few a there and here remained
the from winds high the altitude this at resisting in life hard a had
was weather the companions his and engineer the for Happily sea. open
of elevation an at breeze high a for tranquil; atmosphere the beautiful,
purity The proceedings. their hindered have would feet thousand three
perfect A air. transparent the through felt was zenith the at sky the of
the by hid then sun, the see not could They them. around reigned calm
the of half-horizon the masked which cone, upper the of screen vast
as increased shore the to stretching shadow enormous whose and west,
than rather Vapor--mist course. diurnal its in sank luminary radiant the
colors prismatic the all assume and east, the in appear to clouds--began
rays. solar the of influence the under

which plateau, the from explorers the separated only feet hundred Five
the for encampment an there establish to as so reach to wished they
miles two than more to increased were feet hundred five these but night,
slid were, it as soil, The describe. to had they which zigzags the by
feet. their under

the when slipped they that angle an such presented often slope The
Evening support. sufficient a give not did air the by worn stones
his and Harding Cyrus when night almost was it and degrees, by on came
at arrived hours, seven of ascent an by fatigued much companions,
an prepare to necessary then was It cone. first the of plateau the
sleeping and first eating by strength their restore to and encampment,
rocks, of base a on rose mountain the of stage second This afterwards.
abundant. not was Fuel retreat. a find to easy be would it which among
brushwood, dry and moss the of means by made be could fire a However,
was sailor the While plateau. the of parts certain covered which
and Neb use, this to put he which stones with hearth his preparing
soon They fuel. of supply a getting with themselves occupied Herbert
linen burnt the struck, was steel The brushwood. of load a with returned
fire crackling a breath, Nebs under and, flint, of sparks the caught
Their rocks. the of shelter the under minutes few a in itself showed
cold the withstand to them enable to only was fire a lighting in object
bird, the cooking in employed not was it as night, the of temperature
and capybara the of remains The day. next the for kept Neb which
not was It supper. their formed almonds stone-pine the of dozens some
finished. was all when six half-past

large the half-light the in exploring of thought then Harding Cyrus
Before mountain. the of cone upper the supported which layer circular
the round get to possible was it if know to wished he rest, any taking
summit its and steep too being sides its of case the in cone the of base
possible was it for him, preoccupied question This inaccessible. being
north, the towards say, to is that inclined, hat the way the from that
mountain the of summit the if Also, practicable. not was plateau the
not could they other, the on if, and side, one on reached be not could
the survey to impossible be would it cone, the of base the round get
would ascent the making in object their and country, the of part western
unattained. altogether be part in

and Pencroft leaving fatigue, of regardless accordingly, engineer, The
the of incidents the note to Spilett Gideon and beds, the arrange to Neb
north. the towards going plateau, the of edge the follow to began day,
him. accompanied Herbert

Cyrus deep. yet not was darkness the still, and beautiful was night The
In speaking. without other, each near walked boy the and Harding
without passed they and them, before opened plateau the places some
path, narrow a only was there rocks, by obstructed others, In hindrance.
twenty of walk a After abreast. walk not could persons two which in
point this From stop. to obliged were Herbert and Harding Cyrus minutes,
the separated here shoulder No one. became cones two the of slope the
seventy almost inclined being slope, The mountain. the of parts two
impracticable. became path the degrees,

of thoughts up give to obliged were boy the and engineer the if But
for given was opportunity an return in direction, circular a following
cone. the ascending

mouth rugged the was It hollow. deep a opened them before fact, In
at escaped had matter liquid eruptive the which by crater, the of
and lava Hardened activity. in still was volcano the when periods the
which steps, large of staircase natural of sort a formed scoria crusted
mountain. the of summit the to ascent the facilitate greatly would

followed hesitating, without and glance, a at in this all took Harding
increasing an of midst the in chasm enormous the entered he lad, the by
obscurity.

the Would overcome. to feet thousand a of height a still was There
be soon would It practicable? be crater the of acclivities interior
until ascent his continue to resolved engineer persevering The seen.
the of interior the up wound acclivities these Happily stopped. was he
ascent. their favored and volcano

completely was it that doubted be not could it itself, volcano the to As
in seen be could flame a not sides; its from escaped smoke No extinct.
issued even trembling no mutter, a not roar, a not hollows; dark the
the of bowels the into far reached perhaps which well, black this from
sulphurous no with filled was crater the inside atmosphere The earth.
complete its was it volcano; a of sleep the than more was It vapor.
succeed. would attempt Hardings Cyrus extinction.

interior, the of sides the up climbing he and Herbert little, by Little
circular this of radius The heads. their above widen crater the saw
obviously. increased cone, the of edge the by framed sky, the of portion
entered stars fresh made, explorers the that were, it as step, each At
the of constellations magnificent The vision. their of field the
splendid the glittered zenith the At resplendently. shone sky southern
is which Centauri, Alpha was far not and Scorpion, the in Antares
the as Then, globe. terrestrial the to star nearest the be to believed
Triangle, Southern the Fish, the of Fomalhaut appeared widened, crater
Cross, Southern glittering the Pole, Antarctic the at nearly lastly, and
Hemisphere. Northern the of Star Polar the replaces which

on foot set Herbert and Harding Cyrus when oclock eight nearly was It
cone. the of summit the at mountain the of ridge highest the

a over extend not could gaze their and dark, perfectly then was It
it was or land, unknown this surround sea the Did miles. two of radius
not could It Pacific? the of continent some with west the in connected
the at visible clearly belt, cloudy a west, the Towards out. made be yet
sky the if discover not could eye the and gloom, the increased horizon,
line. circular same the in together blended were water and

which appeared, suddenly light vague a horizon the of point one at But
zenith. the to mounted cloud the as proportion in slowly descended

its but disappearing; almost already moon, crescent slender the was It
detached then line, horizontal the clearly show to sufficient was light
for trembling reflection its see could engineer the and cloud, the from
and hand, lads the seized Harding Cyrus surface. liquid a on instant an
voice,-- grave a in

disappeared crescent lunar the when moment the at he, said island! An
waves. the beneath



11 Chapter

the to returned had Herbert and Harding Cyrus later hour an Half
upon land the that companions his told merely engineer The encampment.
they day next the that and island, an was them thrown had fate which
sleep, to could he as well as himself settled each Then consult. would
feet hundred five thousand two of height a at hole, rocky that in and
islanders the night, peaceful a through sea, the of level the above
repose. profound enjoyed

which breakfast, hasty a after March, of 30th the day, next The
climb to wished engineer the tragopan, roasted the of solely consisted
survey to attentively more as so volcano, the of summit the to again
life for imprisoned were companions his and he which upon island the
any from distance great a at situated be island the should perhaps,
the visited which vessels of course the of out was it if or land,
followed companions his time This Ocean. Pacific the of archipelagoes
the on island, the see to wished also They exploration. new the in him
wants. their all of supply the for depend must they which of productions

Herbert, Harding, Cyrus when morning the in oclock seven about was It
one No encampment. the quitted Neb and Spilett, Gideon Pencroft,
in faith had They situation. their about anxious be to appeared
this of basis the that observed be must it but doubtless, themselves,
engineer The companions. his with as Harding with same the not was faith
wild this from extorting of capable felt he because confidence, had
companions; his and himself of life the for necessary everything country
them. with was Harding Cyrus because just nothing, feared latter the
would fire, relighted the of incident the since especially, Pencroft
the if rock, bare a on was he if even instant, an for despaired have not
rock. the on him with was engineer

the from permission without Richmond left we he, said Pshaw,
or day some away get to manage dont we if hard be will It authorities!
us! detain will one no certainly where place a from other

went They before. evening the as road same the followed Harding Cyrus
of mouth the to shoulder, the formed which plateau the by cone the round
pure a in rose sun The magnificent. was weather The chasm. enormous the
mountain. the of side eastern the all rays his with flooded and sky

to out it made had engineer the what just was It reached. was crater The
widening, extended, which funnel vast a say, to is that dark; the in be
large chasm, the Below plateau. the above feet thousand a of height a to
thus and mountain, the of sides the over wound lava of streaks thick
which valleys lower the to matter eruptive the of course the marked
island. the of part northern the furrowed

five thirty exceed not did inclination whose crater, the of interior The
ascent. the to obstacles nor difficulties no presented degrees, forty to
overflowed had probably which noticed, were lava ancient very of Traces
way new a opened had chasm lateral this before cone, the of summit the
it. to

the between communication a established which chimney volcanic the to As
calculated be not could depth its crater, the and layers subterranean
to as doubt no was there But obscurity. in lost was it for eye, the with
volcano. the of extinction complete the

the at assembled were companions his and Harding oclock eight Before
northern the swelled which mound conical a on crater, the of summit
edge.

not could lips their if as cried, they everywhere! sea the sea, The
them. of islanders made which words the restrain

around all water of sheet circular immense an formed indeed, sea, The
Cyrus cone, the of summit the to again climbing on Perhaps, them!
shore, island some coast, some discovering of hope a had had Harding
before. evening the dark the in perceive to able been not had he which
to is that horizon, the of verge farthest the on appeared nothing But
a Not sight. in land No miles. fifty than more of radius a over say
visible--the was alone ocean the space immense this all Over sail.
be to appeared which circumference a of center the occupied island
infinite.

for surveyed motionless, and mute companions, his and engineer The
extreme most its to it examining ocean, the of point every minutes some
saw sight, of power marvelous a possessed who Pencroft, Even limits.
it if horizon, the at land been had there if certainly and nothing;
undoubtedly would sailor the vapor, indistinct an as only appeared
his under telescopes regular placed had nature for out, it found have
eyebrows.

commanded they which island the to returned gaze their ocean the From
these in Spilett Gideon by put was question first the and entirely,
terms:

island? this is size what About

ocean. immense the of midst the in large appear not did it Truly,

the observed attentively he minutes; few a reflected Harding Cyrus
which at height the consideration into taking island, the of perimeter
then,-- placed; was he

the to giving in mistaken am I think not do I he, said friends, My
miles. hundred a than more of circumference a island the of shore

area? an consequently And

so is it for engineer, the replied estimate, to difficult is That
uneven.

had island the calculation, his in mistaken not was Harding Cyrus If
at was it but Mediterranean, the in Zante, or Malta of extent the almost
promontories, capes, in rich less and irregular more much time same the
when and eye, the caught form strange Its creeks. or bays, points,
they outline, the drawn had advice, engineers the on Spilett, Gideon
leviathan, monstrous a animal, fantastic some resembled it that found
Pacific. the of surface the on sleeping lay which

of is it which island, the of shape exact the fact in was This
immediately was it of map correct tolerably a and know, to consequence
reporter. the by drawn

a formed landed, had castaways the where shore, the of part east The
high a by concealed been had which cape, sharp a by terminated bay, wide
other two northeast the At exploration. first his on Pencroft from point
looked which gulf, narrow a ran them between and bay, the closed capes
dog-fish. formidable a of jaws half-open the like

like rounded, was coast the southwest the to northeast the From
of sort a forming again, rising animal, an of cranium flattened the
the of part this to shape particular any give not did which protuberance
volcano. the by occupied was center the which of island,

broken south, and north regularly pretty ran shore the point this From
in ended it which from creek, narrow a by perimeter its of two-thirds at
alligator. gigantic a of appendage caudal the to similar tail, long a

thirty than more stretched which peninsula, regular a formed tail This
island, the of southeast cape the from reckoning sea, the into miles
which roadstead, open an making round, curled it mentioned; already
land. strangely-formed this of shore lower the out marked

creek the and Chimneys the between say to is that part, narrowest the At
island the latitude, in it to corresponded which shore, western the on
the at jaws the from length, greatest its but miles; ten measured only
less not was southwest, the of tail the of extremity the to northeast
miles. thirty than

very this, was aspect general its island, the of interior the to As
and shore, the to mountain the from part southern the throughout woody
east the and volcano the Between part. northern the in sandy and arid
a see to surprised were companions his and Harding Cyrus coast
not had they which of existence the trees, green with bordered lake,
same the on be to appeared lake the height, this from Seen suspected.
his to explained engineer the reflection, on but, ocean, the as level
about be must water of sheet little this of altitude the that companions
a but was basin, its was which plateau, the because feet, hundred three
coast. the of prolongation

Pencroft. asked lake? freshwater a it Is

water the by fed be must it for engineer, the replied Certainly,
mountain. the from flows which

a out pointing Herbert, said it, into runs which river little a see I
west. the in somewhere source its took evidently which stream, narrow

most lake, the feeds stream this since and Harding; said Yes,
the which by outlet an is there sea the near side the on probably
return. our on that see shall We escapes. water surplus

mentioned already river the and watercourse winding little This
the to displayed was it as such least at water-system, the constituted
of masses the under that possible was it However, explorers. the of eyes
forest, immense an forming island, the of two-thirds covered which trees
such that inferred be even might It sea. the towards ran rivers other
magnificent most the in appear region this did rich so case, the was
indication no was There zones. temperate the of flora the of specimens
stagnant be might there perhaps though north, the in water running of
addition in all, was that but northeast; the in marshes the among water
the with strongly so contrasted which aridity and sand, downs, the to
island. the of rest the of vegetation luxuriant

contrary, the on rose, it part; central the occupy not did volcano The
two the of boundary the mark to seemed and region, northwestern the in
part first the southeast, the and south, the at southwest, the At zones.
the on north, the At verdure. of masses under hidden were spurs the of
the on away died which ramifications, their follow could one contrary,
mountain the when time the at that, side this on was It plains. sandy
and passage, a away worn had discharge the eruption, of state a in was
the formed which jaw narrow the to spread had lava of heap large a
gulf. northeastern

the of top the at hour an remained companions his and Harding Cyrus
in plan a like eyes, their under displayed was island The mountain.
the for yellow forests, the for green tints, different with relief
nothing tout-ensemble, its in it viewed They water. the for blue sand,
the of hollows the verdure, by hidden ground the but concealed remained
chasms. volcanic the of interior the and valleys,

have would answer the and solved, be to remained question important One
castaways. the of future the upon effect great a

inhabited? island the Was

close the after which to question, this put who reporter the was It
negative. the in be to seemed answer the made, just had they examination

of group a Not perceived. be hand human a of work the could Nowhere
curling smoke No shore. the on fishery a not cabin, solitary a not huts,
of distance a true, is It man. of presence the betrayed air the in
points, extreme the from observers the separated miles thirty nearly
have would it and southwest, the to extended which tail the of is, that
there. habitation a discover to eyes, Pencrofts to even difficult, been
three-quarters covered which verdure, of curtain the could Neither
straggling some shelter not did it if see to raised be island, the of
narrow the of shores the on live islanders the general in But village.
shore this and Pacific, the of waters the above emerge which spaces
desert. absolute an be to appeared

island the that admitted be might it exploration, complete more a Until
by occasionally, least at frequented, it was But uninhabited. was
this to reply to difficult was It islands? neighboring of natives the
fifty But miles. fifty of radius a within appeared land No question.
large the by or proas Malay by either crossed, easily be could miles
island, the of position the on depended Everything canoes. Polynesian
archipelagoes. to proximity its of or Pacific, the in isolation its of
longitude and latitude their out find to able be Harding Cyrus Would
it doubt, in was he Since difficult. be would It instruments? without
neighboring of descent possible a against precautions take to best was
natives.

its determined, shape its finished, was island the of exploration The
systems mountain and water the calculated, extent its out, made features
marked been had plains and forests the of disposition The ascertained.
descend to only now had They plan. reporters the on way general a in
of point triple the in soil, the explore and again, slopes mountain the
resources. animal and vegetable, mineral, its of view,

Harding Cyrus departure, for signal the companions his giving before But
voice,-- grave calm, a in them to said

of hand the which upon land of corner small the is friends, my Here,
time, long a here; live to going are We us. thrown has Almighty the
passes ship some if arrive, will help unexpected too, Perhaps, perhaps.
there island; unimportant an is this because chance, by say I chance. by
feared be to is it and anchor, could ships which in port a even not is
say, to is that followed, usually route the of out situated is it that
of archipelagoes the frequent which ships the for south the to much too
Australia to go which those for north the to much too and Pacific, the
from position our of nothing hide to wish I Horn. Cape doubling by
you--

with reporter, the replied Cyrus, dear my right, are you And
and you, in confidence have They men. with deal to have You animation.
friends? my so, not it Is them. upon depend can you

the seizing Herbert, said captain, everything, in you obey will I
hand. engineers

Neb. cried everywhere! and always, master My

not names my work, at grumble ever I if sailor, the said me, for As
America little a make will we captain, like, you if and Pencroft, Jack
start railways, establish will we towns, build will We island! this of
in put quite changed, quite is it when day, fine one and telegraphs,
of government the to it offer and go will we civilized, quite and order
thing. one ask I Only, Union. the

reporter. the said that? is What

colonists, but castaways, ourselves consider not do we that is, It
the and smiling, help not could Harding settle. to here come have who
added, and companions, his thanked then He adopted. was idea sailors
Heaven. of aid the on and energy their on rely would he that

Pencroft. cried Chimneys! the to off set us let now Well,

would it me to seems It engineer. the said friends, my minute, One
capes, the to, as well as island, this to name a give to thing good a be
see. can we which watercourses, and promontories,

the simplify will that future, the In reporter. the said good, Very
follow. and give to have shall we which instructions

say to able be to something is it already sailor, the said Indeed,
like looks it least, At from. come has one where and going, is one where
somewhere.

Herbert. said example, for Chimneys, The

it and convenient, most the was name That Pencroft. replied Exactly!
for Chimneys the of name the keep we Shall myself. of quite me to came
captain? encampment, first our

it. christened so have you since Pencroft, Yes,

who sailor, the returned easy, be will that others, the for as Good!
did, Robinsons the as names, them give us Let spirits. high in was
Point, Whale Bay, Providence me; to read often has Herbert story whose
Disappointment! Cape

Mr. of Herbert, said Harding, Captain of names the rather, Or,
Neb!-- of Spilett,

teeth. white sparkling his showing Neb, cried name! My

And well! very do would that Neb, Port Pencroft. replied not? Why
Gideon-- Cape

reporter, the said country, our from names borrowing prefer should I
America. of us remind would which

of those for Harding; Cyrus said then ones, principal the for Yes,
bay vast that to give might We willingly. it admit I seas, and bays the
on hollow large that to example; for Bay, Union of name the east the on
standing, are we which upon mountain the to Bay; Washington south, the
eyes, our under extended is which lake that to Franklin; Mount of that
names These friends. my better, be could nothing Grant; Lake of that
have who citizens great the of those and country, our recall will
we which promontories, and capes, gulfs, rivers, the for but it; honored
which names choose us let rather mountain, this of top the from perceive
better themselves impress will They shape. particular their recall will
of shape The practical. more be will time same the at and memory, our on
imagine to troubled be not shall we that strange so is island the
in yet, as know not do we which streams the to As resembles. it what
creeks the later, explore shall we which forest the of parts different
find we as them christen can we discovered, be will afterwards which
friends? my think, you do What them.

The companions. his by to agreed unanimously was proposal engineers The
to only had they and map, a like eyes their under out spread was island
write would Spilett Gideon points. and angles its all to names give
be would island the of nomenclature geographical the and down, them
mountain, the and bays two the named they First, adopted. definitely
had engineer the as Franklin, Mount and Bay, Washington Bay, Union
suggested.

the of southwest the at peninsula this to reporter, the said Now,
of that and Peninsula, Serpentine of name the give to propose I island,
a like just is it for it, terminates which tail bent the to Reptile-end
tail. reptiles

engineer. the said Adopted,

let island, the of extremity other the to pointing Herbert, said Now,
Shark jaws, open of pair a like singularly so is which gulf this call us
Gulf.

by resemblance the complete can we and Pencroft, cried Capital!
Cape. Mandible jaws the of parts two the naming

reporter. the observed capes, two are there But

South and Cape Mandible North have can we Pencroft, replied Well,
Cape. Mandible

Spilett. said inscribed, are They

to island the of extremity southeastern the at point the only is There
Pencroft. said named, be

Herbert. asked Bay? Union of extremity the is, That

some to godfather be to wished also who directly, Neb cried Cape, Claw
domain. his of part

like very was cape this for name, excellent an found had Neb truth, In
singularly-shaped this which animal fantastic the of claw powerful the
represented. island

their and taken, had things turn the at delighted was Pencroft
with settlers the furnished which river the to gave soon imaginations
of name the them, thrown had balloon the which near and water drinking
the which upon islet the To Providence. to gratitude true in Mercy, the
plateau the to Island; Safety of name the landed, first had castaways
from and Chimneys, the above precipice granite high the crowned which
of name the bay, vast the of whole the embrace could gaze the whence
Heights. Prospect

Serpentine the covered which wood impenetrable of masses the all Lastly,
West. Far the of forests the named were Peninsula

was island the of parts known and visible the of nomenclature The
fresh made they as it complete would they later, and finished, thus
discoveries.

by them fixed roughly had engineer the compass, the of points the to As
Prospect and Bay Union placed which sun, the of position and height the
the of hour exact the taking by day, next the But east. the to Heights
this between position its marking by and sun, the of setting and rising
exactly, island the of north the fix to reckoned he setting, and rising
the Hemisphere, Southern the in situation its of consequence in for,
and north the in passed culmination, its of moment precise the at sun,
those to do, to seems it movement, apparent its in as, south, the in not
Hemisphere. Northern the in situated places

Mount descend to only had settlers the and finished, was Everything
out,-- cried Pencroft when Chimneys, the to return to Franklin

stupid! preciously are we Well!

to risen and notebook his closed had who Spilett, Gideon asked Why?
depart.

it! christen to forgotten have we island! our Why!

his all and name engineers the it give to propose to going was Herbert
simply,-- said Harding Cyrus when him, applauded have would companions

now who him of friend; my citizen, great a of name the it give us Let
it call us Let Republic! American the of unity the defend to struggles
Island! Lincoln

hurrahs. three by to replied was proposal engineers The

their of talked colonists new the sleeping, before evening, that And
with it stained which war terrible the of spoke they country; absent
and subdued, be soon would South the that doubt not could they blood;
thanks triumph, would justice, of cause the North, the of cause the that
Lincoln! to thanks Grant, to

sixteen that knew little They 1865. March, of 30th the happened this Now
and Washington, in committed be would crime frightful a afterwards days
fanatic. a of hand the by fall would Lincoln Abraham Friday Good on that



12 Chapter

crater, the down Climbing mountain. the of descent the began now They
previous the of encampment their reached and cone the round went they
of watches the and breakfast-time, be must it thought Pencroft night.
hour. the out find to consulted therefore were engineer and reporter the

had he as sea-water, the from preserved been had Spilett Gideon of That
an was It waves. the of reach of out sand the on once at thrown been
the which chronometer, pocket perfect a quality, excellent of instrument
day. every carefully up wind to forgotten not had reporter

time the during stopped had course, of it, watch, engineers the to As
downs. the on passed had he which

sun the of height the by ascertaining and up, it wound now engineer The
at watch his put he morning, the in oclock nine about be must it that
hour. that

you have time, Richmond the kept have You wait. Spilett, dear my No,
not?

Cyrus. Yes,

is which town, that of meridian the by set is watch your Consequently,
Washington? of that almost

Undoubtedly.

very, up it winding with yourself Content thus. it keep well, Very
us. to use of be may This hands. the touch not do but exactly,

sailor. the thought that? of good the be will What

was almonds and game of store the that heartily, so and ate, They
supply would they uneasy, all at not was Pencroft But exhausted. totally
taste, his to much very been had share whose Top, way. the on themselves
Moreover, brushwood. the among game fresh some find to how know would
some manufacture to engineer the asking simply of thought sailor the
no be would there supposed he fowling-pieces; two or one and powder
that. in difficulty

return to companions his to proposed captain the plateau, the leaving On
so Grant, Lake reconnoiter to wished He way. new a by Chimneys the to
one of crest the followed therefore They trees. in framed magnificently
probably lake the supplied that creek the which between spurs, the of
names the employed already settlers the talking, In source. its had
exchange the facilitated singularly which chosen, just had they which
very other the and young one Pencroft--the and Herbert ideas. their of
said, sailor the walking, while and enchanted, boyish--were

lose to impossible be will It sounds! it capital how Herbert! Hey,
or Grant, Lake to way the follow we whether since, boy, my ourselves,
be shall we West, Far the of woods the through Mercy the join we whether
Bay! Union at consequently, and, Heights, Prospect at arrive to certain

settlers the band, compact a forming without that agreed, been had It
the that certain very was It other. each from away stray not should
it and animals, dangerous by inhabited were island the of forests thick
Neb and Herbert, Pencroft, general, In guard. their on be to prudent was
The bush. every into nose his poked who Top, by preceded first, walked
note to ready Spilett Gideon together, went engineer the and reporter
stepping only and part, most the for silent engineer the incident, every
substance, vegetable or mineral a another, or thing one up pick to aside
remark. any making without pocket, his into put he which

vain in looked have I Pencroft. muttered up? picking be he can What
for. stooping of trouble the worth thats anything for

of declivities last the descended band little the oclock ten Towards
and bushes with strewn scantily was ground the yet As Franklin. Mount
a forming earth, calcinated yellowish over walking were They trees.
wood. the of edge the to extended which long, mile a nearly of plain
three takes Bischof, to according which, basalt, that of blocks Great
very plain, the strewed cool, to years of millions fifty and hundred
lava, of traces no here were there However, places. some in confused
slopes. northern the over particularly more spread was which

the of course the incident, without reach, to expected Harding Cyrus
the of border the at trees the under flowed supposed he which creek,
the and Neb while back, hastily running Herbert saw he when plain,
rocks. the behind hiding were sailor

Spilett. asked boy? my matter, the Whats

hundred a rocks, the among smoke seen have We Herbert. replied Smoke,
us. from paces

reporter. the cried place? this in Men

to have we whom with knowing before ourselves showing avoid must We
this on natives no are there that trust I Harding. Cyrus replied deal,
Top? is Where else. anything than more them dread I island;

before. on is Top

bark? doesnt he And

No.

back. him call to try must we However, strange. is That

rejoined had Herbert and Spilett, Gideon engineer, the moments, few a In
the behind sight of out kept they them, like and companions, two their
basalt. of heaps

the in rising color yellowish a of smoke saw clearly they thence From
air.

latter, the and master, his from whistle slight a by recalled was Top
the among away glided him, for wait to companions his to signing
this of result the awaited anxiously motionless, colonists, The rocks.
forward. hasten them made engineer the from shout a when exploration,
odor disagreeable a with struck once at were and him, joined soon They
atmosphere. the impregnated which

what guess to engineer the for enough was recognized, easily odor, The
him. startled had cause, without not first, at which was smoke the

alone. nature by produced is smoke this rather, or he, said fire, This
throats. sore our all cure will which there, spring sulphur a is There

cold! a got havent I that pity a What Pencroft. cried Captain!

the which from place the towards steps their directed then settlers The
abundantly flowed which spring sulphur a saw there They escaped. smoke
acid sulphuric strong a discharged waters its and rocks, the between
air. the of oxygen the absorbed having after odor,

touch. the to oily water the felt hand, his in dipping Harding, Cyrus
he that temperature, its to As sweet. rather it found and it tasted He
on asked having Herbert Fahrenheit. degrees ninety-five at estimated
calculation,-- this based he what

the into hand my plunging in for, he, said boy, my simple, quite Its
the has it Therefore cold. or heat of either sensation no felt I water,
degrees. ninety-five about is which body, human the as temperature same

they settlers, the to use actual any of being not spring sulphur The
some began which forest, the of border thick the towards proceeded
off. paces hundred

clear flowed stream the of waters the conjectured, had they as There,
betrayed which of color the earth, red of banks high between limpid and
Creek Red of name the color, this From iron. of oxide of presence the
watercourse. the to given immediately was

mountain the of formed clear, and deep stream, large a only was It
over peacefully rippling here torrent, half river, half which, water,
cascade, a in down dashing or rocks the against falling there sand, the
breadth its half, a and mile a of distance a over lake, the towards ran
was it and sweet, were waters Its feet. forty to thirty from varying
circumstance, fortunate A also. so were lake the of those that supposed
dwelling suitable more a borders its on finding their of event the in
Chimneys. the than

of banks the shaded downwards feet hundred some which trees, the to As
abound which species the to part, most the for belonged, they creek, the
those to longer no and Tasmania, and America of zone temperate the in
explored already island the of portion that in observed coniferae
the year, the of time this At Heights. Prospect from miles some to
of month the represents which April, of month the of commencement
they autumn, of beginning the is, that hemisphere, this in October,
and casuarinas of principally consisted They leaf. full in still were
to similar manna, sweet a yield would year next which of some eucalypti,
sloping the on rose cedars Australian of Clumps East. the of manna the
in tussac called grass high the with covered also were which banks,
the of archipelagoes the in abundant so cocoanut, the but Holland; New
doubtless, latitude, the island, the in wanting be to seemed Pacific,
low. too being

such has which and tree, useful a such Herbert, said pity! a What
nuts! beautiful

eucalypti the of branches scanty the among swarmed they birds, the to As
wings. their of display the hinder not did which casuarinas, and
colors, all of plumage with paroquets, cockatoos, gray or white, Black,
lories, blue red, with crowned and green sparkling a of kingfishers
prism, a through as sides, all on appeared birds other various and
strange a Suddenly, clamor. deafening a producing and about fluttering
The thicket. a of midst the in resounded voices discordant of concert
quadrupeds, of cry the birds, of song the successively heard settlers
escaped have to believed have might they which clacking of sort a and
bush, the towards rushed Herbert and Neb native. a of lips the from
Happily, prudence. of principles elementary most the even forgetting
dangerous a nor beast wild formidable a neither there, found they
as known birds, singing and mocking dozen a half merely but native,
to end an put soon stick a from blows skillful few A pheasants. mountain
dinner. evenings the for food excellent procured and concert, their

wings, bronzed with pigeons magnificent some discovered also Herbert
at congeners their like green, in draped others crested, superbly some
and crows the or them, reach to impossible was it but Port-Macquarie;
flocks. in away flew which magpies

these among slaughter great made have would shot small of charge A
and stones, and sticks to limited still were hunters the but birds,
insufficient. very proved weapons primitive these

of troop a when shown clearly more still was insufficiency Their
regular feet, thirty of leaps making bounding, jumping, quadrupeds,
a such at and quickly so thickets, the over fled mammiferae, flying
to tree one from passed they that thought have would one that height,
squirrels. like another

Herbert. cried Kangaroos!

Pencroft. asked eat? to good they Are

best the to equal is flesh their reporter, the replied Stewed,
venison!--

sailor, the when sentence exciting this finished not had Spilett Gideon
Cyrus tracks. kangaroos the on darted Herbert, and Neb by followed
hunters the for too vain in was it But vain. in back them called Harding
a After balls. like away bounding went which game, agile such pursue to
all time same the at and breath, their lost they minutes, five of chase
more not was Top wood. the in disappeared which creatures, the of sight
masters. his than successful

had reporter the and engineer the when Pencroft, said Captain,
we unless on get cant we well quite see you Captain, them, rejoined
possible? be that Will guns. few a make

first by begin will we but engineer, the replied Perhaps,
will you that doubt dont I and arrows, and bows some manufacturing
hunters. Australian the as them of use the in clever as become

for well very all Thats scornfully. Pencroft said arrows! and Bows
children!

and Bows reporter. the replied Pencroft, friend proud, be Dont
blood. with earth the stain to centuries for sufficient were arrows
human the as old as is war and yesterday, of thing a but is Powder
race--unhappily.

always I and sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. true, thats Faith,
me! excuse must You quickly. too speak

History, Natural science, favorite his to constant Herbert Meanwhile,
saying,-- kangaroos, the to reverted

most is which species the with now just deal to had we Besides,
not am I if but fur; gray long with giants were They catch. to difficult
rat and kangaroos, rock kangaroos, red and black exist there mistaken,
there that reckoned is It of. hold get to easy more are which kangaroos,
species. dozen a about are

species one only is there sententiously, sailor the replied Herbert,
the just its and spit, the on kangaroo is that me, to kangaroos of
evening! this got havent we one

classification. new Pencrofts Master at laughing help not could They
to dinner for reduced being at regret his hide not did sailor honest The
to obliging itself showed more once fortune but pheasants, singing the
him.

ferreted and went concerned was interest his that felt who Top, fact, In
even was It appetite. ferocious a by doubled instinct an with everywhere
none clutches, his into fall did game of piece some if that probable
account; own his on hunting was Top if hunters, the for left be would
well. did he and him watched Neb but

gruntings and brushwood the in disappeared dog the oclock three Towards
rushed Neb animal. some with struggle a in engaged was he that showed
ten which quadruped, a devouring eagerly Top saw soon and him, after
But stomach. Tops in recognizing past been have would later seconds
he victim the besides and brood, a upon fallen had dog the fortunately
to belonged question in animals rodents--the other two devouring, was
turf. the on strangled order--lay that

hand. each in rodents the of one holding triumphantly reappeared Neb
mingled yellow, was hair their rabbit, a of that exceeded size Their
tails. of rudiments merest the had they and spots, green with

these of name right the for loss no at were Union the of citizens The
their than larger little a agouti, of sort a maras, were They rodents.
long with rabbits, American regular countries, tropical of congeners
the distinguish which molars, five with side each on armed jaws ears,
agouti.

go can we now and arrived! has roast the Pencroft, cried Hurrah!
home.

of waters limpid The resumed. was instant, an for interrupted walk, The
gigantic and banksias, casuarinas, of arch an under flowed Creek Red the
Other feet. twenty of height a to rose lilacs Superb gum-trees.
the over bent naturalist, young the to unknown species, arborescent
verdure. of bowers the beneath murmuring heard be could which stream,

that supposed Harding Cyrus and wider, much grew stream the Meanwhile
a beneath from emerging on fact, In mouth. its reach soon would they
eyes. their before appeared suddenly it trees, beautiful of clump thick

place The Grant. Lake of shore western the on arrived had explorers The
of circumference a of water, of extent This at. looking worth well was
reposed acres, fifty and hundred two of area an and miles seven nearly
curtain a through east, the Towards trees. diversified of border a in
of horizon an sparkled places, some in raised picturesquely verdure, of
sharp the with contrasted which north, the at curved was lake The sea.
shores the frequented birds aquatic Numerous part. lower its of outline
American its of isles thousand the which in Ontario, little this of
some surface, its from emerged which rock a by represented were namesake
several harmony in lived There shore. southern the from feet hundred
watching motionless, grave, stone, a on perched kingfishers of couples
and cry, sharp a with in plunged they down, darting then fish, for
the on and shores the On beaks. their in prey their with reappeared
philedons, red-beaks, water-hens, pelicans, ducks, wild strutted islets,
the of specimens two or one and brush, a like tongue a with furnished
lyre. a like gracefully expands which of tail the menura, splendid

from and dark, rather limpid, sweet, was it lake, the of water the to As
other each crossed which circles concentric the and bubblings, certain
fish. in abounded it that doubted be not could it surface, the on

on live could We Spilett. Gideon said beautiful! really is lake This
borders! its

Harding. replied there! live will We

way, shortest the by Chimneys the to return to wishing settlers, The
of junction the by south the on formed angle the towards descended
path a broke they that difficulty without not was It bank. lakes the
the by aside put been never had which brushwood and thickets the through
at arrive to as so shore, the towards went thus they and men, of hand
direction, this in cleared were miles Two Heights. Prospect of north the
the appeared trees, of curtain last the passed had they after then, and
sea. infinite the that beyond and turf, thick with carpeted plateau,

obliquely plateau the cross to enough was it Chimneys, the to return To
by formed elbow the to descend to then and mile, a of space the for
how know to desired engineer the But Mercy. the of detour first the
the and escaped, lake the from water the of overplus the where and
towards half a and mile a for trees the under prolonged was exploration
and somewhere, existed overfall an that probable most was It north. the
short, in only, was lake This granite. the in cleft a through doubtless
and creek, the by degrees by filled was which basin, center immense an
so, was it If fall. some by sea the to pass necessarily must waters its
this utilize to possible be perhaps might it that thought engineer the
one. any to profit without lost actually power, its borrow and fall
the climbing by Grant Lake of shores the follow to then continued They
Harding Cyrus direction, this in mile a gone having after but, plateau;
exist must however, which, overfall, the discover to able been not had
somewhere.

was it dinner for prepare to order In four. half-past then was It
little The dwelling. their to return should settlers the that necessary
Mercy, the of bank left the by and therefore, steps, their retraced band
Chimneys. the at arrived companions his and Harding Cyrus

of functions the whom on Pencroft, and Neb and lighted, was fire The
the to Negro, of quality his in one the to devolved, naturally cooks
which to agouti, broiled some prepared quickly sailor, of that in other
justice. great did they

about was one each when moment the at terminated; length at repast The
little pocket his from drew Harding Cyrus sleep, to up himself give to
said,-- just and minerals, of sorts different of specimens

is this clay, is this pyrite, a this mineral, iron is this friends, My
business our is It things. these us gives Nature coal. is this and lime,
operations. commence will we To-morrow them. of use right a make to



13 Chapter

next Pencroft asked begin? to going we are where captain, Well,
engineer. the of morning

Harding. Cyrus replied beginning, the At

very the at begin to compelled were settlers the fact, in And
making for necessary tools the even possess not did They beginning.
having who, nature, of condition the in even not were they and tools,
to had they since time, no had They strength. her husbands time,
though, and existence, their of wants immediate the for provide
they still invent, to nothing had they experience, acquired by profiting
in only yet as were steel their and iron their make; to everything had
their clay, of state the in earthenware their minerals, of state the
material. textile of state the in clothes their and linen

complete the in men were settlers the that however, said, be must It
been have not could Harding engineer The word. the of sense higher and
and devotion more with nor companions, intelligent more by seconded
abilities. their knew He them. tried had He zeal.

to as so everything learned having reporter, talented a Spilett, Gideon
head his with largely contribute would everything, of speak to able be
from back draw not would He island. the of colonization the to hands and
till what of business a make would he sportsman, determined a task: any
him. to pleasure a been only had then

natural the in informed well remarkably already boy, gallant a Herbert,
cause. common the to service greater render would sciences,

indefatigable, intelligent, Clever, personified. devotion was Neb
forge, the of work the about little a knew he health, iron with robust,
colony. the in useful very be to fail not could and

the in carpenter a sea, every over sailed had he Pencroft, to As
state, the of vessels the in tailor assistant Brooklyn, in dockyards
seamen, all like and etc., holidays, his during cultivator, gardener,
everything. do to how knew he anything, for fit

to fitted better men, five unite to difficult been have would It
it. over triumph to certain more fate, against struggle

which of beginning this Now said. had Harding Cyrus beginning, the At
would which apparatus an of construction the was spoke engineer the
in plays heat which part The substances. natural the transform to serve
for ready was coal, or wood fuel, Now known. is transformations these
it. use to built be must oven an use, immediate

Pencroft. asked for? oven this is What

Harding. replied of, need have we which pottery the make To

oven? the make we shall what of And

bricks. With

bricks? the And

establish will we trouble, save To friends. my start, us Let clay. With
provisions, bring will Neb production. of place the at manufactory our
food. the cook to fire of lack no be will there and

of want for food of lack a is there if but reporter; the replied No,
chase? the for instruments

sailor. the cried knife! a had only we if Ah,

Harding. Cyrus asked Well?

be could there then and arrows, and bow a make soon would I Well!
larder! the in game of plenty

speaking was he if as engineer, the said blade. sharp a knife, a Yes,
himself. to

the on about running was who Top, upon fell eyes his moment this At
animated. became face Hardings Suddenly shore.

he. said here, Top,

between head Tops took latter The call. masters his at came dog The
his round wore animal the which collar the unfastening and hands, his
saying,-- two, in it broke he neck,

Pencroft! knives, two are There

a of made was collar Tops reply. the was sailor the from hurrahs Two
of piece a on it sharpen to only had They steel. tempered of piece thin
was sandstone Now stone. finer a on edge the raise to then sandstone,
the in tools of stock the after hours two and beach, the on abundant
solid in fixed easily were which blades, sharp two of consisted colony
handles.

It triumph. a as hailed was tools first their these of production The
one. opportune very a and labor, their of result valuable a indeed was
out. set They

of shore western the to return should they that proposed Harding Cyrus
which of ground clayey the noticed had he before day the where lake, the
Mercy, the of bank the followed therefore They specimen. a possessed he
they more or miles five of walk a after and Heights, Prospect traversed
Grant. Lake from feet hundred two situated glade, a reached

the which of branches the tree, a discovered had Herbert way the On
the was It bows. their making for employ America South of Indians
Long fruit. edible bear not does which family, palm the of crejimba,
shaped, was it off; stripped leaves the cut, were branches straight
nothing and extremities, the at slender more middle, the in stronger
bow-string. the make to fit plant a find to but done be to remained
such of fibers furnishes which heterophyllus, hibiscus the was This
of tendons the to compared been have they that tenacity remarkable
he which for strength, tolerable of bows obtained thus Pencroft animals.
branches, stiff straight with made easily were These arrows. wanted only
is that armed, be must they which with points the but knots, without
so with met be not could iron, of lieu in serve to substance a say, to
chance work, the of part his done having that said, Pencroft But easily.
rest. the do would

day the discovered been had which ground the on arrived settlers The
making for used is which clay of sort the of composed Being before.
was There question. in work the for useful very was it tiles, and bricks
sand, with clay the scour to enough was It it. in difficulty great no
fire. wood a of heat the by them bake and bricks the mold to then

himself contented engineer the but molds, in formed are bricks Generally
were following day the and day that All hand. by them making with
feet the by mixed was water, in soaked clay, The work. this in employed
equal of pieces into divided then and manipulators, the of hands and
ten about machine, a without make, can workman practiced A size.
five the work days two their in but hours; twelve in bricks thousand
thousand, three than more made not had Island Lincoln on brickmakers
complete their when time the until other, each near ranged were which
is that oven, the building in used be to them permit would desiccation
days. four or three in say, to

fixing in himself employed had Harding that April of 2nd the on was It
spot precise the words, other in or, island, the of orientation the
when hour the exactly noted had he before day The rose. sun the where
the for allowance making horizon, the beneath disappeared sun the
which at hour the exactly, less no noted, he morning This refraction.
twenty-four hours, twelve rising and setting this Between reappeared. it
the rising, its after minutes twelve hours, six Then, passed. minutes
sky the of point the and meridian the pass exactly would day this on sun
hour, said the At north. the be would moment this at occupied it which
trees two sun the with line a in putting and point, this marked Cyrus
meridian invariable an obtained thus he marks, for him serve would which
operations. ulterior his for

in built was oven the before days two the employed settlers The
picked they and glade, the round all cut were Branches fuel. collecting
with hunt to able also were They trees. the under wood fallen the all up
armed arrows dozen some possessed now Pencroft since success, greater
bringing by points, these furnished had who Top was It points. sharp with
to thanks value, great of but eating, inferior rather porcupine, a in
the at firmly fixed were quills These bristled. it which with quills the
some by certain more made was which of flight the arrows, the of ends
skilful very became soon Herbert and reporter The feathers. cockatoos
Chimneys, the at abounded consequence in sorts all of Game archers.
these of part greater The etc. grouse, agouties, pigeons, capybaras,
the of bank left the on forest the of part the in killed were animals
of remembrance in Wood, Jacamar of name the gave they which to Mercy,
first their on when pursued had Herbert and Pencroft which bird the
exploration.

by hams, capybara some preserved they but fresh, eaten was game This
with them perfumed having after wood, green of fire a above them smoking
strengthening, very although food, this However, leaves. sweet-smelling
delighted been have would party the and roast, upon roast always was
pot a till wait must they but hearth, the on bubbling soup some hear to
built. was oven the till consequently, and, made, be could

the from far extended not were which excursions, these During
of animals of passage recent the discern could hunters the brick-field,
recognize not could they but claws, powerful with armed size, large a
the as careful, very be to them advised Harding Cyrus species. the
beasts. dangerous many enclosed probably forest

an saw day one Herbert and Spilett Gideon Indeed, right. did he And
attack not did creature the Happily jaguar. a resembled which animal
soon As wound. severe a without escaped have not might they or them,
which guns the of one say, to is that weapon, regular a get could he as
war desperate make to resolved Spilett Gideon for, begged Pencroft
island. the from them exterminate and beasts, ferocious the against

for comfortable, more made not was days few these during Chimneys The
convenient more a necessary, if build or discover, to hoped engineer the
leaves dry and moss spreading with themselves contented They dwelling.
tired the couches primitive these on and passages, the of sand the on
soundly. slept workers

from and Island, Lincoln on passed had they days the reckoned also They
Wednesday, was which April, of 5th The account. regular a kept time that
this on castaways the threw wind the when time the from days twelve was
shore.

were companions his and engineer the daybreak, at April, of 6th the On
perform to going were they where place the at glade, the in collected
open the in be to had this Naturally bricks. the baking of operation the
an made bricks of agglomeration the rather, or kiln, a in not and air,
well-prepared of made fuel, The itself. bake would which kiln, enormous
dried of rows several with surrounded and ground the on laid was fagots,
which of exterior the to cube, enormous an formed soon which bricks,
till not was it and day, all lasted work The air-holes. contrived they
night, that slept one No fagots. the to fire set they that evening the
fire. the up keep to carefully watching all

then It perfectly. succeeded and hours, forty-eight lasted operation The
time this during and cool, to mass smoking the leave to necessary became
of made hurdle a on brought, Harding, Cyrus by guided Pencroft, and Neb
stones, common and lime of carbonate of loads branches, interlaced
when stones, These lake. the of north the to abundant, very were which
by increased greatly quicklime, strong very a made heat, by decomposed
calcination the by produced been had it if as pure as least at slacking,
mortar. excellent made lime the sand with Mixed marble. or chalk of

April, of 9th the on that, was, works different these of result The
some and lime prepared of quantity a disposal his at had engineer the
bricks. of thousands

of construction the began they therefore, instant, an losing Without
domestic their for indispensable was which pottery, the bake to kiln a
kiln the after, days Five difficulty. much without succeeded They use.
to open lying discovered had engineer the which coal, with supplied was
escaped smoke first the and Creek, Red the of mouth the towards sky the
a into transformed was glade The high. feet twenty chimney a from
this from that believing in wrong far not was Pencroft and manufactory,
industry. modern of products the all issue would kiln

common a was manufactured first settlers the what meantime the In
to clay, was material chief The food. their cook to which in pottery
regular made paste This quartz. and lime little a added Harding which
stones on molded cups bowls, manufactured they which with pipe-clay,
of shape The etc. water, hold to pots and jars great size, proper a of
baked been had they after but defective, and clumsy was objects these
a with provided was Chimneys the of kitchen the temperature, high a in
beautifully most the as settlers the to precious as utensils, of number
if know to desirous Pencroft, that here mention must We china. enameled
some made pipe-clay, of name its of worthy was prepared thus clay the
no had he alas! which, for but charming, thought he which pipes, large
tobacco But Pencroft. to privation great a was that and tobacco,
absolute of burst a in repeated, he else! everything like come, will
confidence.

employed. well was time the and April, of 15th the till lasted work This
When pottery. but nothing made potters, become having settlers, The
become would they smiths, into them change to Harding Cyrus suited it
all Sunday, Easter also and Sunday, being day next the But smiths.
men, religious were Americans These rest. by day the sanctify to agreed
situation their and Bible, the of precepts the of observers scrupulous
all of Author the towards confidence of sentiments develop but not could
things.

Chimneys, the to returned they April of 15th the of evening the On
until extinguished being furnace the pottery, the them with carrying
fortunate a by marked was return Their use. new a to it put could they
tinder. replaced which substance a discovered engineer the incident;
certain a from procured is flesh velvety spongy, a that known is It
extremely is it prepared, Properly polyporous. genus the of mushroom
with saturated previously been has it when especially inflammable,
potash. of chlorate or nitrate of solution a in boiled or gunpowder,
of any even or polypores these of any found not had they then, till But,
seeing engineer, the day, this On them. replace could which morels the
which of species principal the genus, wormwood the to belonging plant a
and, tufts, several gathered etc., tarragon, balm-mint, absinthe, are
said,-- sailor, the to them presenting

you. please will this Pencroft, Here,

hair, silky long with covered plant, the at attentively looked Pencroft
down. soft with clothed being leaves the

tobacco? it Is Pencroft. asked captain? that, Whats

learned, the to wormwood Chinese wormwood; is it Harding, replied No,
tinder. be will it us to but

very a with them provided it dried properly was wormwood the When
had engineer the when afterwards especially substance, inflammable
possessed island the which of potash, of nitrate with it impregnated
saltpeter. truth in is which and beds, several

agouti some prepared Neb evening. that supper good a had colonists The
of tubercules boiled the added was which to ham, capybara smoked a soup,
family. arum the of plant herbaceous an macrorhizum, caladium the
something being nutritious, very were and taste, excellent an had They
of name the under England in sold is which substance the to similar
the which bread, for substitute good a also were they sago; Portland
possess. yet not did Island Lincoln in settlers

companions his and Harding sleeping, before finished, was supper When
evening; the in oclock eight was It beach. the on air the take to went
days five full been had which moon, The magnificent. was night the
those by silvered already was horizon the but risen, yet not had before,
the At moon. the of dawn the called be might which shades pale soft,
all above and constellations, circumpolar the glittered zenith southern
on greeted had engineer the before days some which Cross, Southern the
Franklin. Mount of summit the

which constellation, splendid this at time some for gazed Harding Cyrus
at magnitude, first the of stars two base its at and summit its at has
the of star a arm right its at and second, the of star a arm left its
magnitude. third

thought-- minutes some after Then,

April? of 15th the this not is lad, the of asked he Herbert,

Herbert. replied captain, Yes,

in days four the of one be will to-morrow mistaken, not am I if Well,
that time; average with identical is time real the which in year the
will sun the seconds, some within to to-morrow, that boy, my say, to is
fine is weather the If clocks. the by midday at just meridian the pass
an with island the of longitude the obtain shall I that think I
degrees. some of approximation

Spilett. Gideon asked sextant? without instruments, Without

will I clear, is night the since Also, engineer. the replied Yes,
the calculating by latitude our obtain to evening, very this try,
the above pole southern the from is, that Cross, Southern the of height
work the undertaking before that friends, my understand, You horizon.
this that out found have to enough not is it earnest in installation of
distance what at know possible, as nearly as must, we island; an is land
from or Australia, or continent American the from either situated, is it
Pacific. the of archipelagoes principal the

would it house a building of instead reporter, the said fact, In
a than more not are we chance by if boat, a build to important more be
coast. inhabited an from miles hundred

to evening this try to going am I Harding, returned why, is That
I midday, at to-morrow, and Island, Lincoln of latitude the calculate
longitude. the calculate to try will

the which with apparatus an sextant, a possessed had engineer the If
there precision, great with measured be can objects of distance angular
the by evening This operation. the in difficulty no been have would
the at sun the of passing the by day next the pole, the of height
had they as But island. the of position the obtain would he meridian,
deficiency. the supply to have would he one not

two cut he fire the of light the By Chimneys. the entered then Harding
form to as so end one at together joined he which rulers, flat little
The together. come or separate could legs whose compasses, of pair a
the in found was which thorn acacia strong a with fixed was fastening
beach, the to returned engineer the finished, instrument This pile. wood
a above from pole the of height the take to necessary was it as but
southern the hid Cape Claw as and horizon, sea a is, that horizon, clear
best The station. suitable more a for look to obliged was he horizon,
but south; the to directly exposed shore the been have evidently would
Harding difficulty. a was that and crossed, be to have would Mercy the
Heights, Prospect from observation his make to consequence, in resolved,
sea--a the of level the above height its consideration into taking
of process simple a by day next calculate to intended he which height
geometry. elementary

of bank left the ascending plateau, the to went therefore, settlers, The
and northwest looked which edge the on themselves placed and Mercy, the
the bordered which rocks curiously-shaped the above is, that southeast,
river.

which bank, left the of heights the commanded plateau the of part This
of side southern the to and Cape, Claw of extremity the to away sloped
horizon the swept which gaze, their intercepted obstacle No island. the
horizon, the south the To End. Reptile to cape the from semi-circle a in
against defined clearly very was moon, the of rays first the by lighted
sky. the

an in observer the to itself presented Cross Southern the moment this At
to nearer is which base, its marking Alpha star the position, inverted
pole. southern the

the as pole antarctic the to near as situated not is constellation This
twenty-seven about is Alpha star The pole. arctic the to is Star Polar
for allowance made and this knew Harding Cyrus but it, from degrees
it when moment the observe to also care took He calculation. his in it
operation. the simplify would which pole, the below meridian the passed

the horizon, the to compasses the of leg one pointed Harding Cyrus
angular the him gave legs two the between space the and Alpha, to other
the fix to order In horizon. the from Alpha separated which distance
a on wood of pieces two the thorns with fastened he obtained, angle
properly be should separation their that so transversely, placed third
maintained.

the back bringing by calculate to angle the only was there done, That
the consideration into taking sea, the of level the to observation
height the measuring necessitate would which horizon, the of depression
Alpha, of height the give would angle this of value The cliff. the of
the say, to is that horizon, the above pole the of that consequently and
is globe the of point a of latitude the since island, the of latitude
point. this of horizon the above pole the of height the to equal always

every oclock ten at and day, next the for left were calculations The
soundly. sleeping was one



14 Chapter


issued settlers the Sunday, Easter and April, of 16th the day, next The
The linen. their wash to proceeded and daybreak, at Chimneys the from
the procure could he as soon as soap manufacture to intended engineer
question important The oil. or fat potash, or materials--soda necessary
and time proper the in of treated be would wardrobe their renewing of
longer, months six least at last would clothes their rate any At place.
But labor. manual of wear the resist could and strong, were they for
inhabited to regard with island the of situation the on depend would all
permitted. weather the if to-day settled be would This land.

one day, magnificent a announced horizon, clear a above rising sun The
the of farewells last the like are which days autumn beautiful those of
season. warm

before evening the of observations the complete to necessary now was It
sea. the of level the above cliff the of height the measuring by

used you which one the to similar instrument an need not you Shall
engineer. the to Herbert said yesterday?

differently, proceed to going are we latter, the replied boy, my No,
way. a precise as in but

to engineer the followed could, he everything learn to wishing Herbert,
occupied and behind remained reporter the and Neb, Pencroft, beach. the
ways. different in themselves

feet twelve stick, straight a with himself provided had Harding Cyrus
with it comparing by possible as exactly as measured had he which long,
plumb-line a carried Herbert hair. a to knew he which height, own his
fastened stone simple a say, to is that him, given had Harding which
feet twenty about spot a reached Having fiber. flexible a of end the to
cliff, the from feet hundred five nearly and beach, the of edge the from
into feet two pole the thrust Harding perpendicularly, rose which
the of means by managed, he carefully, up it wedging and sand, the
horizon. the of plane the with perpendicularly it erect to plumb-line,


sand, the on lying when, distance, necessary the retired he done, That
of crest the and pole the of top the at time same the at glanced eye his
stick. little a with place the marked carefully He cliff. the

geometry? of principles first the know you Herbert--Do addressing Then
asked. he

himself put to wish not did who Herbert, replied captain, Slightly,
forward.

triangles? similar two of properties the are what remember You

proportional. are sides homologous their Herbert; replied Yes,

right-angled similar two constructed just have I boy, my Well,
perpendicular the sides its for has smallest, the first, the triangles;
the of foot the from stick little the separates which distance the pole,
sides its for has second the hypothenuse; for ray visual my and pole
the measure, to wish we which of height the cliff, perpendicular the
the of bottom the from stick little the separates which distance
be to proves which hypothenuse, its forms also ray visual my and cliff,
triangle. first the of that of prolongation

the from distance the As Herbert. cried understand! I captain, Ah,
the of base the to stick the from distance the to is pole the to stick
cliff. the of height the to pole the of height the is so cliff,

the measured have we when and engineer; the replied Herbert, so, Just
have only shall we pole, the of height the knowing distances, first two
cliff, the of height the us give will which do, to proportion in sum a
directly. it measuring of trouble the us save will and

whose pole, the of means by out found were distances horizontal two The
feet. ten exactly was sand the above length

place the and stick the between feet fifteen was distance first The
sand. the into thrust was pole the where

was cliff the of bottom the and stick the between distance second The
feet. hundred five

the to returned lad the and Harding Cyrus finished, measurements These
Chimneys.

one from back brought had he which stone flat a took then engineer The
easy was it which on slate, of sort a excursions, previous his of
following the proved then He shell. sharp a with figures trace to
proportions:--


15:500::10:x

5000 = 10 x 500

333.3 = 15 / 5000


in feet 333 measured cliff granite the that proved was it which From
height.

evening the made had he which instrument the took then Harding Cyrus
distance angular the giving legs two its between space the before,
the exactly, very measured, He horizon. the and Alpha star the between
equal 360 into divided he which circumference a on angle this of opening
which degrees twenty-seven the it to adding by angle this Now, parts.
of level the to reducing by and pole, antarctic the from Alpha separated
made, been had observation the which on cliff the of height the sea the
being degrees fifty-three These degrees. fifty-three be to found was
the to pole the from distance degrees--the ninety from subtracted
concluded, Harding Cyrus degrees. thirty-seven remained equator--there
degree thirty-seventh the on situated was Island Lincoln that therefore,
the through consideration into taking or latitude, southern the of
must it that degrees, five of error an performance, the of imperfection
parallel. fortieth the and thirty-fifth the between situated be

the of position the and obtained, be to longitude the only was There
same the this attempt to hoped engineer The determined, be would island
meridian. the pass would sun the moment which at oclock, twelve at day,

an rather or walk, a in spent be should Sunday that decided was It
of north the between island the of side that to expedition, exploring
their push would they time was there if and Gulf, Shark and lake the
would They Mandible. South Cape of side northern the to discoveries
evening. till return not and downs, the on breakfast

the of edge the following was band little the eight half-past At
gravely were birds numerous Islet, Safety on side, other the On channel.
much which cry, their by recognized easily divers, were They strutting.
in them considered only Pencroft donkey. a of braying the resembles
their that satisfaction some with learnt and view, of point eatable an
food. bad not is blackish, though flesh,

sand; the on crawling seen be also could creatures amphibious Great
of place a for islet the chosen have to appeared who doubtless, seals,
alimentary an in animals those of think to impossible was It refuge.
Cyrus however, detestable; is flesh oily their for view, of point
he idea, his known making without and attentively, them observed Harding
the to visit a pay would they soon very that companions his to announced
would which of some shells, innumerable with strewn was beach The islet.
the others, among were, there conchologist; a of heart the rejoiced have
was use, more of be would what But etc. terebratual, the phasianella,
the among oysterbed large a of tide, low at Neb, by discovery, the
Chimneys. the from miles five nearly rocks,

the at looking Pencroft, cried day, his lost have not will Neb
oyster-bed. spacious

is it as and reporter, the said discovery, fortunate a really is It
eggs, thousand sixty to fifty from yearly produces oyster each that said
there. supply inexhaustible an have shall we

Herbert. said nourishing, very not is oyster the that believe I Only

and nitrogen, little very contains oyster The Harding. replied No,
than less not eat to have would he them, on exclusively lived man a if
day. a dozen sixteen to fifteen

without dozens and dozens swallow might We Pencroft. replied Capital!
breakfast? for some take we Shall bed. the exhausting

would it that knowing proposal, this to reply a for waiting without And
molluscs. the of quantity a detached Neb and sailor the of, approved be
had Neb which fiber, hibiscus of net of sort a in them put They
to continued then they food; contained already which and manufactured,
sea. the and downs the between coast the climb

in prepared be to as so watch, his consulted Harding time to time From
midday. at exactly made be to had which observation, solar the for time

point the as far as barren very was island the of part that All
South Cape of name the received had which and Bay, Union closed which
with mingled shells, and sand but there seen be could Nothing Mandible.
gulls, coast, desolate this frequented sea-birds few A lava. of debris
great a had Pencroft which for duck, wild as well as albatrosses, great
result, without but arrow, an with over some knock to tried He fancy.
wing. the on them hit not could he and perched, seldom they for

engineer,-- the to repeat to sailor the led This

we fowling-pieces, two or one not have we as long so captain, see, You
anything! get never shall

you. on depends it but reporter, the replied Pencroft, Doubtless,
saltpeter. hammers, the for steel barrels, the for iron some us Procure
fulminate, the for acid nitric and mercury powder, for sulphur and coal
guns. first-rate us make will captain the and shot, the for lead and

these all find doubt, no might, we engineer, the replied Oh!
needs and instrument, delicate a is gun a but island, the on substances
later! see shall we However, tools. particular very

the all overboard throw to obliged we were Pencroft, cried Why,
our even implements, our all car, the in us with had we weapons
pocket-knives?

have would balloon the Pencroft, away, them thrown not had we if But
Herbert. said sea! the of bottom the to us thrown

sailor. the replied boy, my true, is say you What

Jonathan astounded how he, said idea,--Think, another to passing Then
found they morning, next when, been have must companions his and Forster
away! flown machine the and empty, place the

thought, have may they what knowing about indifferent utterly am I
reporter. the said

air. satisfied a with Pencroft, said that! idea, my all was It

and laughing, Spilett, Gideon replied Pencroft! idea, splendid A
are. we where us placed has which

the cried Southerners, the of hands the in than here be rather would I
and come to enough kind been has captain the since especially sailor,
again. us join

want? we do what Besides, reporter. the replied truly! I, would So
Nothing.

shrugging and laughing Pencroft, replied not--everything! is that If
going of means find shall we other, or day some But, shoulders. his
away!

engineer, the remarked friends, my imagine, you than perhaps, Sooner,
island, inhabited an from distance medium a but is Island Lincoln if
the of map a not have I hour. an in know shall We continent. a from or
of recollection clear very a preserved has memory my but Pacific,
New placed yesterday obtained I which latitude The part. southern its
the to Chile of coast the and Island, Lincoln of west the to Zealand
least at of distance a is there countries, two these between But east.
in point what determined be to therefore, has, It miles. thousand six
give will longitude the this and occupies, island the space great this
hope. I approximation, sufficient a with presently, us

in us to point nearest the Pomoutous the of archipelago the not Is
Herbert. asked latitude?

from us separates which distance the but engineer, the replied Yes,
miles. hundred twelve than more is it

extreme with conversation the followed who Neb, asked way? that And
south. the to pointing interest,

Pencroft. replied nothing, way, That

engineer. the added indeed, Nothing,

than more not is Island Lincoln if reporter, the asked Cyrus, Well,
Chile? or Zealand New from miles thousand three or two

build will we house a building of instead engineer, the replied Well,
command-- in put be shall Pencroft Master and boat, a

soon captain--as be to ready quite am I sailor, the cried then, Well
sea! at keep to able thats craft a make can you as

Harding. Cyrus replied necessary, is it if it, do shall We

talking, were nothing, at hesitated really who men, these while But
Cyrus What made. be to was observation the which at approached hour the
of meridian the at sun the of passage the ascertain to do to was Harding
guess. not could Herbert sort, any of instrument an without island, the

from far not Chimneys, the from miles six about then were observers The
his after found been had engineer the which in downs the of part that
for prepared and place this at halted They preservation. enigmatical
fresh some for went Herbert eleven. half-past was it for breakfast,
which jug, a in back it brought and near, ran which stream a from water
provided. had Neb

his for everything arranged Harding preparations these During
which shore, the on place clear a chose He observation. astronomical
as was sand fine of bed This level. perfectly left had tide ebbing the
importance little of was It place. of out grain a not ice, as smooth
the whether much matter not did it and not, or horizontal was it whether
On perpendicularly. rose there, planted was which high, feet six stick
to is that south, the towards it inclined engineer the contrary, the
must it for sun, the to opposite coast the of direction the in say,
was island the as Island, Lincoln in settlers the that forgotten be not
its describe planet radiant the saw Hemisphere, Southern the in situated
horizon. southern the above not and northern, the above arc diurnal

to proceed to going was engineer the how understood now Herbert
the passing its say to is that sun, the of culmination the ascertain
was It south. due determine words, other in or, island the of meridian
for which, way a stick, the by sand the on cast shadow the of means by
result the to approach suitable a him give would instrument, an of want
obtain. to wished he which

length of minimum its reach would shadow this when moment the fact, In
the watch to enough be would it and oclock, twelve exactly be would
after when, instant the ascertain to as so shadow, the of extremity
his inclining By lengthen. to began it diminished, successively having
shadow the made Harding Cyrus sun, the to opposite side the to stick
easily more be would modifications its consequently and longer,
more the is, dial a of needle the longer the fact, In ascertained.
the of shadow The followed. be point its of movement the can easily
and come, had moment The dial. a of needle the but nothing was stick
he which pegs, wooden little with and sand, the on knelt Harding Cyrus
the of diminutions successive the mark to began he sand, the into stuck
operation the watched him, over bending companions, His shadow. sticks
hand, his in chronometer his held reporter The interest. extreme with
its at be would shadow the when marked it which hour the tell to ready
April, of 16th the on working was Harding Cyrus as Moreover, shortest.
hour the identical, are time average the and true the which on day the
which Washington, at then hour true the be would Spilett Gideon by given
advanced, slowly sun the as Meanwhile calculation. the simplify would
that Harding Cyrus to appeared it when and diminished, slowly shadow the
it? is oclock What asked, he increase, to beginning was it

now had They directly. Spilett Gideon replied five, past minute One
be could It easier. be could Nothing operation. the calculate to only
hours five of difference a numbers, round in existed, there that seen
is that Island, Lincoln of that and Washington of meridian the between
oclock five already was it when Island Lincoln in midday was it say, to
movement apparent its in sun, the Now Washington. in evening the in
fifteen or minutes, four in degree one traverses earth, the round
give hours five by multiplied degrees Fifteen hour. an degrees
degrees. seventy-five

seventy-seven say to as much as 11 3 77deg is Washington since Then,
Americans the which Greenwich of meridian the from counted degrees
the with concurrently longitudes for starting-point their for take
and seventy-seven situated be must island the that followed English--it
say, to is that Greenwich, of meridian the of west degrees seventy-five
longitude. west of degree fifty-second and hundred the on

into taking and companions, his to result this announced Harding Cyrus
he latitude, the for done had he as observation, of errors consideration
Island Lincoln of position the that affirm positively could he believed
and parallel, thirty-seventh the and thirty-fifth the between was
fifty-fifth and hundred the and fiftieth and hundred the between
Greenwich. of meridian the of west the to meridian

was, observation the in errors to attributed he which fault possible The
miles sixty at which, sides, both on degrees five of seen, be may it
and latitude in miles hundred three of error an give would degree, a to
position. exact the for longitude

was it which determination the influence not would error this But
a such at was Island Lincoln that evident very was It take. to necessary
to hazardous too be would it that island or country every from distance
boat. frail a in one reach to attempt

from miles hundred twelve least at it placed calculation this fact, In
than more Pomoutous, the of archipelago the of islands the and Tahiti
thousand four than more and Zealand, New from miles hundred eighteen
coast! American the from miles hundred five

in remember not could he memory, his consulted Harding Cyrus when And
the Pacific, the of part that in occupied, island an such that way any
Island. Lincoln to assigned situation



15 Chapter

addressed were words first sailors the April, of 17th the day, next The
Spilett. Gideon to

to-day? do we shall what asked, he sir, Well,

reporter. the replied pleases, captain the What

potters, and brickmakers been had companions engineers the then Till
metallurgists. become to were they now

point the as far as explored had they breakfast, after before, day The
long the There, Chimneys. the from distant miles seven Cape, Mandible of
There appearance. volcanic a had soil the and ended, downs of series
and strange a but Heights, Prospect at as cliffs high longer no were
two the between gulf narrow the surrounded which border capricious
at Arrived volcano. the by up thrown matter, mineral of formed capes,
entered nightfall at and steps, their retraced settlers the point this
knowing of question the before sleep not did they but Chimneys; the
definitely was not or Island Lincoln leaving of think could they whether
settled.

Pomoutous the from island the separated which miles hundred twelve The
it, cross not could boat A distance. considerable a was Island
expressly had Pencroft season. bad the of approach the at especially
necessary the with even boat simple a construct to Now, this. declared
they tools having not colonists the and work, difficult a was tools,
etc., planes, augers, saws, adzes, axes, hammers, making by begin must
they that therefore, decided, was It time. some take would which
more a for look would they that and Island, Lincoln at winter would
winter the pass to which in Chimneys, the than dwelling comfortable
months.

iron the make to necessary was it done be could else anything Before
northwest the in traces some observed had engineer the which of ore,
or iron into either it converting by use for fit island, the of part
steel. into

the For state. pure a in ground the in found generally not are Metals
case the was Such sulphur. or oxygen with combined are they part most
of one back, brought had Harding Cyrus which specimens two the with
sulphuret called also pyrite, a other the carbonated, not iron, magnetic
must they which iron, of oxide the first, the therefore was, It iron. of
in it obtain to oxygen, the of rid get say, to is that coal, with reduce
to coal with ore the subjecting by made is reduction This state. pure a
method, Catalan easy and rapid the by either temperature, high a
single a in iron into ore the transforming of advantage the has which
then ore, the smelts first which furnace, blast the by or operation,
of cent. per four to three the away carrying by iron, into it changes
it. with combined is which coal,

as soon as it obtain to wished he and iron, wanted Harding Cyrus Now
and pure very itself in was up picked had he which ore The possible.
a of masses confused in found is which iron, oxydulous the was It rich.
the of form the in crystallized dust, black a gives it color; gray deep
iron and ore, this of consist lodestones Native octahedron. regular
and Sweden which with that from Europe in made is quality first the of
vein the was vein this from far Not supplied. abundantly so are Norway
the for ingredients The settlers. the by of use made already coal of
treatment the facilitate greatly would together close being manufacture
Great in mines the of wealth the of cause the is This ore. the of
from extracted metal the of manufacture the aids coal the where Britain,
itself. as time same the at soil same the

ore? iron work to going are we Pencroft, said captain, Then,

which that--something for and engineer, the replied friend, my Yes,
islet. the on hunt seal a having by begin must you--we please will

Are Spilett. Gideon towards turning sailor, the cried hunt! seal A
iron? make to needed seals

reporter. the replied so! said has Cyrus Since

prepared Pencroft and Chimneys, the left already had engineer the But
explanation. other any received having without hunt, seal the for

were sailor the and Neb, Spilett, Gideon Herbert, Harding, Cyrus
ford a left channel the where place a at shore, the on collected soon
without it traverse therefore could hunters The tide. low at passable
knee. the than higher wet getting

companions his and first, the for islet the on foot his put then Harding
time. second the for

them. at fearlessly looked penguins of hundreds some landing their On
they but easily, them killed have could sticks, with armed hunters, The
to not important was it as massacre, useless such of guilty not were
lengths cable several sand the on lying were who seals, the frighten
wings whose birds, innocent-looking certain respected also They off.
ornamented fins, like out spread stumps, of state the to reduced were
prudently therefore, settlers, The appearance. scaly a of feathers with
with riddled ground over walking point, north the towards advanced
the Towards sea-birds. the for nests formed which holes, little
above just floating heads black great appeared islet the of extremity
motion. in rocks of appearance the exactly having water, the

necessary, was It captured. be to were which seals the were These
short close, their with for land, to them allow to first however,
is it swimmers, excellent being conformation, fusiform their and hair,
webbed short, their land on while sea, the in them catch to difficult
movement. waddling slow, a than more having their prevent feet

till waiting advised he and creatures, these of habits the knew Pencroft
send would long, before sun, the when sand, the on stretched were they
knock and retreat their off cut to manage then must They sleep. to them
head. the on them

waited rocks, the behind themselves concealed having hunters, The
silently.

could They sand. the on play to came seals the before passed hour An
of point the round went then Herbert and Pencroft dozen. a half count
retreat. their off cut and rear, the in them take to as so islet, the
the behind crawling Neb, and Spilett, Harding, Cyrus time this During
combat. of scene future the towards glided rocks,

shouted. Pencroft appeared. sailor the of figure tall the once at All
and sea the between themselves threw companions two his and engineer The
rest the but sand, the on dead lay soon animals the of Two seals. the
safety. in sea the regained

advancing sailor, the said captain! required, seals the are Here
engineer. the towards

them! of bellows make will We Harding. replied Capital,

seals! lucky are these Well! Pencroft. cried Bellows!

of treatment the for necessary blowing-machine, a fact, in was, It
the of skins the with manufacture to wished engineer the that ore the
did length their for size, medium a of were They creatures. amphibious
head. the about dog a resembled They feet. six exceed not

the both of weight the with themselves burden to useless was it As
Cyrus while spot, the on them skin to resolved Pencroft and Neb animals,
islet. the explore to continued reporter the and Harding

three and operation, the performed cleverly Negro the and sailor The
skins, seals two disposal his at had Harding Cyrus afterwards hours
any to them subjecting without state, this in use to intended he which
process. tanning

the crossing and low, again was tide the till waited settlers The
Chimneys. the entered they channel

means by sewn and wood of frame a on stretched be to then had skins The
escape. to much too allowing without air the preserve to as so fibers of
collar, Tops from blades steel two the but nothing had Harding Cyrus
much so with him aided companions his and clever, so was he yet and
of stock colonys little the afterwards days three that intelligence,
air the inject to destined blowing-machine, a by augmented was tools
heat--an to subjected be should it when ore the of midst the into
operation. the of success the to condition indispensable

the as period, metallic the began April of 20th the of morning the On
been has as decided, had engineer The notes. his in it called reporter
to according Now, ore. and coal of both veins the near operate to said,
northeast the of foot the at situated were veins these observations, his
from miles six of distance a say, to is that Franklin, Mount of spurs
the to day every return to therefore, impossible, was It home. their
a under camp should colony little the that agreed was it and Chimneys,
night followed be could operation important the that so branches, of hut
day. and

the dragged Pencroft and Neb morning. the in out set they settled, This
which animals, and vegetables of quantity a also hurdle; a on bellows
way. the on renew could besides they

from obliquely traversed they which Wood, Jacamar through led road The
to necessary was It part. thickest the in and northwest, to southeast
to road direct most the form future the in would which path, a beat
species the to belonging trees, The Franklin. Mount and Heights Prospect
among ones, new some found Herbert magnificent. were discovered, already
their of spite in for, leeks; sham called Pencroft which some others
chive, onion, the as family liliaceous same the of were they size,
when which, roots ligneous produce trees These asparagus. or shallot,
agreeable very a fermentation, by them, from excellent; are cooked,
roots. the of store good a made therefore They made. is liquor

so and day, whole the lasted it long; was wood the through journey The
who Top, fauna. and flora the examining for time of plenty allowed
brushwood, and grass the through ran fauna, the of charge special took
two killed Spilett Gideon and Herbert game. of sorts all up putting
strongly which animal an also and arrows, and bows with kangaroos
first the like was It ant-eater. an and hedgehog a both resembled
the and spines, with bristled and ball, a into itself rolled it because
terminated which snout slender long a claws, sharp had it because second
thorns little with covered tongue, extendible an and beak, birds a in
insects. the hold to served which

be it will what naturally, Pencroft asked pot, the in is it when And
like?

Herbert. replied beef, of piece excellent An

sailor. the replied it, from more ask not will We

did however, which boars, wild several saw they excursion this During
would they if as appeared it and band, little the attack to offer not
wood, the of part thick a in when, beasts; dangerous any with meet not
lower the among him, from paces some saw, he thought reporter the
he which and bear, a for took he which animal an tree, a of branches
in animal the Spilett, Gideon for Happily draw. to began tranquilly very
plantigrades. the of family redoubtable the to belong not did question
being sloth, the of name the under known better koala, a only was It
color, dirty a of hair stiff having and dog, large a of size the about
and trees climb to it enabled which claws, strong with armed paws the
not did they which animal, the identified Having leaves. the on feed
sketch, his of title the from bear erased Spilett Gideon disturb,
resumed. was journey the and place, its in koala putting

halt. to signal the gave Harding Cyrus evening, the in oclock five At
spurs powerful the of beginning the at forest, the outside now were They
some of distance a At west. the towards Franklin Mount supported which
fresh of plenty consequently and Creek, Red the flowed feet hundred
reach. their within was water

the of edge the on hour, an than less In organized. soon was camp The
creepers, with interlaced branches of hut a trees, the among forest,
geological Their shelter. tolerable a offered clay, with over pasted and
good a prepared, was Supper day. next the till off put were researches
oclock, eight at and turned, roast the hut, the before blazed fire
wild any case in fire, the up keep to watched settlers the of one while
soundly. slept others the neighborhood, the in prowl should beasts

Herbert, by accompanied Harding Cyrus April, of 21st the day, next The
already had he which on formation, ancient of soil the for look to went
the near ground, above vein the found They ore. of specimen a discovered
This spurs. northeastern the of one of foot the at creek, the of source
perfectly was veinstone, fusible its in enclosed iron, in rich very ore,
employ; to intended engineer the which reduction of mode the to suited
in used is it as simplified, but method, Catalan the is, that
the requires called, so properly method, Catalan the fact, In Corsica.
coal, the and ore the which in crucibles, and kilns of construction
Cyrus But reduced, and transformed are layers, alternate in placed
to simply wished and constructions, these economize to intended Harding
he which of center the to mass, cubic a coal, the and ore the with form,
proceeding the was it Doubtless, bellows. his from wind the direct would
inhabited the of metallurgists first the and Tubalcain, by employed
which and Adam, of grandson the with succeeded had which that Now world.
not could fuel, and ore in rich countries in results good yielded still
Island. Lincoln in settlers the with succeed but

the on trouble without collected was ore, the as well as coal, The
pieces, little into ore the broke first They ground. the of surface
their soiled which impurities the from hand the with them cleansed and
successive in and heaps in arranged were ore and coal Then surface.
to wishes he which wood the with does charcoal-burner the as layers,
the by projected air the of influence the under way, this In carbonize.
then acid, carbonic into transformed be would coal the blowing-machine,
is that iron, of oxide the reduce to being use its carbon, of oxide into
oxygen. the of it rid to say, to

its at furnished sealskin, of bellows The proceeded. engineer the Thus
fabricated previously been had which clay, of nozzle a with extremity
the Using ore. of heap the near established was kiln, pottery the in
counterpoise, and fiber of cords frame, a of consisted which mechanism
the raising by which air, of abundance an mass the into threw he
produce to transformation chemical the with concurred also temperature
iron. pure time in

the of ingenuity the all patience, the All difficult. was operation The
lump a was result the and succeeded, it last at but needed; was settlers
shingle to necessary was it which state, spongy a to reduced iron, of
liquefied the it from expel to as so forge to say, to is that fagot, and
were they but hammer; no course, of had, smiths amateur These veinstone.
did therefore and metallurgist, first the than situation a worse no in
do. to had he doubt, no what,

forge to hammer a as used was and lump, first the to fixed was handle A
but coarse a obtained they thus and anvil, granite a on second the
25th the on fatigue, much and trials many after length, At metal. useful
tools, into transformed and forged, were iron of bars several April of
Neb and Pencroft which etc., spades, pickaxes, pincers, crowbars,
most its in yet not was metal the But jewels. real be to declared
iron of combination a is steel Now steel. of is, that state, serviceable
from taking by ore, liquid the from either extracted, is which coal, and
which coal the it to adding by iron the from or coal, of excess the it
metal, the of decarburation the by obtained first, The wanting. was
carburation the by produced second, the steel; puddled or natural gives
cementation. of steel gives iron, the of

possessed he as forge, to intended Harding Cyrus which last the was It
powdered with metal the heating by succeeded He state. pure a in iron
clay from manufactured been previously had which crucible a in coal
purpose. the for suitable

cold, or hot when both malleable is which steel, this worked then He
hatchets, made directed, cleverly Pencroft, and Neb hammer. the with
an acquired water, cold into suddenly plunged and red-hot, heated which,
temper. excellent

manufactured; also were fashioned, roughly course of instruments, Other
transformed be to steel of pieces hatchets, axes, planes, for blades
nails, hammers, pickaxes, spades, for iron then chisels; saws, into
smiths the ended, period metallic the May, of 5th the on last, At etc.
take to them authorize soon would work new and Chimneys, the to returned
title. fresh a



16 Chapter

in November of 6th the to corresponds which day a May, of 6th the was It
for obscured been had sky The Hemisphere. Northern the of countries the
winter. the for preparations make to importance of was it and days, some
centigrade a and lower, much yet as not was temperature the However,
an marked have still would Island, Lincoln to transported thermometer,
surprising, not was This zero. above degrees twelve to ten of average
and thirty-fifth the between situated probably Island, Lincoln since
to Hemisphere, Southern the in subject, be would parallel, fortieth
as But Hemisphere. Northern the in Greece or Sicily as climate same the
doubtless so ice, and snow producing cold, severe have Sicily and Greece
was it and winter the of part severest the in Island Lincoln would
it. against provide to advisable

would season rainy the them, threaten yet not did cold if case any In
the of fury the all to exposed island, lonely this on and begin,
probably and frequent, be would weather bad mid-ocean, in elements,
Chimneys the than dwelling comfortable more a of question The terrible.
on. resolved promptly and considered seriously be therefore must

he which retreat the for predilection some had naturally, Pencroft,
The found. be must another that understood well he but discovered, had
circumstances under sea, the by visited already been had Chimneys
similar a to again exposed be to do not would it and known, are which
accident.

things these of talking was day this who Harding, Cyrus added Besides,
take. to precautions some have we companions, his with

reporter. the said inhabited, not is island The Why?

yet not have we although engineer, the replied probable, is That
that fear I found, are beings human no if but interior; the explored
a against guard to necessary is It abound. may animals dangerous
night, every watch to obliged be not shall we that so attack, possible
everything. foresee must we friends, my then, And fire. a up keep to or
Malay by frequented often Pacific the of part a in here are We
pirates--

land? from distance a such at Herbert, said What!

as sailors bold are pirates These engineer. the replied boy, my Yes,
accordingly. measures take must we and enemies, formidable as well

savages against ourselves fortify will we Pencroft, replied Well,
will captain, But, four. with savages against as well as legs two with
undertaking before island the of part every explore to best be not it
else? anything

Spilett. Gideon added best, be would That

caverns the of one side opposite the on find not might we if knows Who
here? vain in for searched have we which

that friends, my forget, you but engineer, the replied true, is That
a of neighborhood the in ourselves establish to necessary be will it
not could we Franklin, Mount of summit the from that, and watercourse,
we contrary, the on Here, river. or stream either west, the towards see
not must which advantage an Grant, Lake and Mercy the between placed are
not is east, the towards looking side, this besides, And, neglected. be
hemisphere this in which trade-winds, the to is other the as exposed
northwest. the from blow

edge the on house a build us let sailor, the replied captain, Then,
been having After now. wanting are tools nor bricks Neither lake. the of
to how know surely shall we smiths, and smelters, potters, brickmakers,
masons! be

consider must we decision any to coming before but friend; my Yes,
work, much us spare would dwelling natural A thoroughly. matter the
against defended well as be would it for retreat, surer a be would and
outside. from those as interior the from enemies

already have we but reporter, the replied Cyrus, true, is That
a not hole, a not is there and granite, of mass that all examined
cranny!

a out dig to able were we if Ah, Pencroft. added one! not No,
reach the of out be to as so height, good a at cliff, that in dwelling
looks which front the on that see can I capital! be would that harm, of
rooms-- six or five seaward,

laughing. Herbert, said them! light to windows With

Neb. added them! to up climb to staircase a And

impossible there is What why? and sailor, the cried laughing, are You
Captain Wont spades? and pickaxes got we Havent propose? I what in
true, it Isnt mine? the up blow to powder make to able be Harding
it? want we day very the powder make will you that captain,

his developing Pencroft enthusiastic the to listened Harding Cyrus
was mine, a by even granite, of mass this attack To projects. fanciful
them help not could nature that vexing really was it and work, Herculean
by except sailor the to reply not did engineer the But need. their at
the of mouth the from attentively, more cliff the examine to proposing
north. the on it terminated which angle the to river

extreme with made was exploration the and therefore, out, went They
bare, the in place no in But miles. two nearly of extent an over care,
pigeons rock the of nests The found. be cavity any could cliff, straight
the at bored holes reality, in only, were summit its at fluttered which
granite. the of edge irregular the on and top, very

either cliff, this attacking to as and circumstance, provoking a was It
it excavation, sufficient a effect to as so powder, with or pickaxe with
the of part this all on that, happened so It of. thought be to not was
to is that shelter, habitable only the discovered had Pencroft shore,
abandoned. be to had now which Chimneys, the say,

angle north the at themselves found colonists the ended, exploration The
the on away died which slopes long in terminated it where cliff, the of
formed only it west, the in limit extreme its to place, this From shore.
bound sand, and earth, stones, of mass thick a declivity, of sort a
only of angle an at inclined grass and bushes, plants, by together
were which slopes, these on grew trees of Clumps degrees. forty-five
extend not did vegetation the But grass. thick with carpeted also
slopes, these of foot the at began which plain, sandy long, a and far,
beach. the to reached

lake the of overplus the that reason, without not thought, Harding Cyrus
Red the by furnished water of excess The side. this on overflow must
had engineer the Now other. or channel some by escape also must Creek
explored, already shore the of part any on channel this found yet not
Prospect of west the on stream the of mouth the from say, to is that
Heights.

to and slope, the climb to companions his to proposed now engineer The
northern the exploring while heights, the by Chimneys the to return
few a in and accepted, was proposal The lake. the of shores eastern and
Gideon Harding, Cyrus plateau. upper the on were Neb and Herbert minutes
steps. sedate more with followed Pencroft and Spilett,

rays the under trees the through glittered water of sheet beautiful The
feasted eye The charming. was country the direction this In sun. the of
black showed age, with bent trunks, old Some trees. of groups the on
brilliant of Crowds ground. the covered which grass verdant the against
one from hopping prisms, moving branches, the among screamed cockatoos
another. to bough

lake, the of bank north the to directly going of instead settlers The
mouth the join to as so plateau, the of edge the round circuit a made
a and mile a than more of detour a was It bank. left its on creek the of
considerable a left spread, widely trees the for easy, was Walking half.
point, this at stopped evidently zone fertile The them. between space
of course the between part the in vigorous less be would vegetation and
Mercy. the and Creek the

great with ground new this over walked companions his and Harding Cyrus
only their were points iron sharp with sticks and arrows, Bows, care.
that probable was it and itself, showed beast wild no However, weapons.
the but south; the in forests thick the rather frequented animals these
snake a before stop Top seeing of surprise disagreeable the had settlers
Neb length. in feet fifteen to fourteen from measuring size, great of
reptile, the examined Harding Cyrus stick. his from blow a by it killed
diamond of species that to belonged it for venomous, not it declared and
possible was it But rear. Wales South New of natives the which serpents
with vipers deaf the as such mortal was bite whose existed others that
snakes, winged those or feet, the under up rise which tails, forked
great with proceed to them enable which ears, two with furnished
chase reptile a began over, surprise of moment first the Top, rapidity.
called master His safety. his for feared they that eagerness, such with
directly. back him

lake, the into entered it where place the at Creek, Red the of mouth The
the shore opposite the on recognized explorers The reached. soon was
Cyrus Franklin. Mount from descent their on visited had they which point
was creek the from it into water of flow the that ascertained Harding
the for place some provided have therefore must Nature considerable.
could it if which, fall, a formed doubtless This overplus. the of escape
use. great of be would discovered, be

other, each from far straying not but apart, walking colonists, The
water The steep. very was which lake, the of edge the skirt to began
some make to resolved Pencroft and fish, of full be to appeared
some. catch and try to as so fishing-rods,

supposed been have might It doubled. be to first was point northeast The
the of extremity the for place, this at was water of discharge the that
of signs no But plateau. the of edge the with level a on almost was lake
bank, the explore to continued colonists the and discovered, were this
shore. the to parallel descended bend, slight a after which,

and here trees, of clumps but woody, less were banks the side this On
was Grant Lake country. the of picturesqueness the to added there,
the disturbed breath no and extent, its all in thence from viewed
of flocks up put bushes, the beating in Top, waters. its of surface
with saluted Herbert and Spilett Gideon which kinds, different of birds
Top grass. marshy some into fell and lad, the by hit was One arrows.
color, slate a of bird, swimming beautiful a brought and forward, rushed
It white. with edged wings and plate, frontal developed very beak, short
of group the to belonging partridge, large a of size the coot, a was
birds wading of order the between transition the form which macrodactyls
from far is flavor its and truth, in game, Sorry palmipeds. of that and
masters, his as things these in particular so not was Top But pleasant.
supper. his for be should coot the that agreed was it and

they and lake, the of bank eastern the following now were settlers The
knew. already they which part the reaching in long be not would
the of indication any seeing not at surprised much was engineer The
he and him, with talked sailor the and reporter The water. of discharge
astonishment. his conceal not could

of signs gave then, till quiet very been had who Top, moment this At
the on forwards and backwards went animal intelligent The agitation.
if as raised, paw one water, the at looked and suddenly, stopped shore,
and furiously, barked he then game; invisible some at pointing was he
silent. suddenly was

attention any paid first at had companions his nor Harding Cyrus Neither
that frequent so became soon barking dogs the but behavior; Tops to
it. noticed engineer the

asked. he Top? there, is What

then and uneasy, very be to seeming master, his towards bounded dog The
the into plunged he once, at all Then, bank. the towards again rushed
lake.

venture to dog his like not did who Harding, Cyrus cried Top! Here,
water. treacherous the into

of surface the examining Pencroft, asked there? down happening Whats
lake. the

Herbert. replied creature, amphibious some smells Top

reporter. the said perhaps, alligator, An

in with met only are Alligators Harding. replied so, think not do I
latitude. in elevated less regions

the regained had and call, masters his at returned had Top Meanwhile
grass, tall the among in plunged he quiet; stay not could he but shore:
which being invisible some follow to appeared he instinct, by guided and
water the However water. the of surface the under along slipping was
settlers the times Several surface. its disturbed ripple a not calm; was
appeared. Nothing attentively. it observed and bank, the on stopped
there. mystery some was There

puzzled. was engineer The

he. said end, the to exploration this pursue us Let

the of angle southeast the at arrived all had they after hour an Half
of banks the of examination the point this At Heights. Prospect on lake,
able been not had engineer the yet and finished, considered was lake the
doubt no is There discharged. were waters the where and how discover to
must it visible not is it since and repeated, he exists, overflow this
west! the at cliff granite the through go

Cyrus? dear my that, knowing to attach you do importance what But
Spilett. Gideon asked

flows it if for engineer; the replied importance, Considerable
easy be would it which cavity, some probably is there cliff the through
water. the away turning after habitable render to

the at away flows water the that captain, possible, not it is But
some by sea the reaches it that and Herbert, said lake, the of bottom
passage? subterranean

be shall we so be it should and engineer, the replied be, might That
for it done not has nature since ourselves, house our build to obliged
us.

to return to plateau the traverse to begin to about were colonists The
fury, with barked He agitation. of signs new gave Top when Chimneys, the
time second a plunged had he him, restrain could master his before and
lake. the into

off, feet twenty than more already was dog The bank. the towards ran All
the from emerged head enormous an when back, him calling was Cyrus and
place. that in deep be to appear not did which water,

the which to amphibian of species the directly recognized Herbert
mustaches, silky long with adorned and eyes, large with head, tapering
belonged.

cried. he lamantin! A

of order the of species that of one but lamantin, a not was It
were nostrils its for dugong, the of name the bear which cetaceans,
the on rushed animal enormous The snout. its of part upper the at open
master His shore. the towards returning by escape to tried who dog,
Herbert or Spilett Gideon before and him, save to nothing do could
had dugong, the by seized Top, bows, their bending of thought
water. the beneath disappeared

and help, Tops to go to wished hand, his in spear iron-tipped his Neb,
element. own its in animal dangerous the attack

servant. courageous his restraining engineer, the said Neb, No,

inexplicable an water, the beneath on going was struggle a Meanwhile,
and resist; possibly not could Top situation his in for struggle,
terrible a also be must it surface the of bubbling the by judging
But dog! the of death the in terminate but not could and struggle,
in Thrown reappeared. Top circle, foaming a of middle the in suddenly,
the of surface the above feet ten rose he power, unknown some by air the
soon then and waters, agitated the of midst the into again fell lake,
saved. miraculously wounds, severe any without shore, the gained

not was What it. understand not could companions his and Harding Cyrus
on. going be to appeared still struggle the that was inexplicable less
having after animal, powerful some by attacked dugong, the Doubtless,
last not did it But account. own its on fighting was dog, the released
dugong, the of body the and blood, with red became water The long.
on stranded soon around, spread which scarlet of sheet the from emerging
towards ran colonists The lake. the of angle south the at beach little a
sixteen or fifteen animal, enormous an was It dead. was dugong The it.
At pounds. thousand four to three from weighed have must and long, feet
sharp a by produced been have to appeared which wound, a was neck its
blade.

terrible this by who, been, have creature amphibious the could What
much and tell, could one No dugong? formidable the destroyed had blow
the to returned companions his and Harding incident, this in interested
Chimneys.



17 Chapter

to Neb leaving Spilett, Gideon and Harding May, of 7th the day, next The
Pencroft and Herbert while Heights, Prospect climbed breakfast, prepare
wood. of store their renew to river, the by ascended

the which on beach little the reached soon reporter the and engineer The
mass the attacked had birds of flocks Already stranded. been had dugong
to wished Cyrus for stones, with away driven be to had and flesh, of
flesh animals the to As colony. the of use the for fat the keep
Malay the of islands the in for food, excellent furnish would it
of table the for reserved especially is it elsewhere, and Archipelago
affair. Nebs was that But princes. native the

interested much was He thoughts. other had Harding Cyrus moment this At
mystery the penetrate to wished He before. day the of incident the in
given have could monster what ascertain to and combat, submarine that of
lake, the of edge the at remained He wound. a strange so dugong the
waters, tranquil the under appeared nothing but observing; looking,
sun. rising the of rays first the in sparkled which

was water the dugong, the of body the lay which on beach, the At
sloped lake the of bottom the point this from but shallow, tolerably
the in considerable was depth the that probable was it and gradually,
was which basin, center large a as considered be might lake The center.
Creek. Red the from water the by filled

suspicious nothing be to seems there reporter, the said Cyrus, Well,
water. this in

know not do really I and engineer, the replied Spilett, dear my No,
yesterday. of incident the for account to how

creature this given wound the that Spilett, returned acknowledge, I
was Top how either explain cannot I and strange, very least, at is,
a that thought have could One water. the of out up cast vigorously so
killed dagger a with arm same the that and up, him hurled arm powerful
dugong! the

is there thoughtful; become had who engineer, the replied Yes,
understand better you do But understand. cannot I that there something
drawn was I myself--how saved was I way what in Spilett, dear my either,
I Now, true? not it Is No! downs? the to carried and waves, the from
shall we doubtless, which, there, mystery some is there that sure feel
singular these on dwell not do but observe, us Let day. some discover
ourselves, to remarks our keep us Let companions. our before incidents
work. our continue and

to able been yet as not had engineer the that remembered be will It
must it knew he but escaped, water surplus the where place the discover
this at current strong a see to surprised much was He somewhere. exist
the towards set it that found he wood of bits some in throwing By place.
point south the at arrived and current, the followed He angle. southern
lake. the of

suddenly was it if as water, the in depression of sort a there was There
ground. the in fissure some in lost

very he lake, the of level the to ear his placing listened; Harding
fall. subterranean a of noise the heard distinctly

there, water; the of discharge the is rising, he, said There,
through sea, the joins it cliff, granite the in passage a by doubtless,
it! find can I Well, profit. our to use can we which cavities

plunging and leaves, its of it stripped branch, long a cut engineer The
large a was there that found he banks, two the between angle the into it
the was hole This water. the of surface the beneath only foot one hole
was current the of force the and vain, in for looked long so opening
disappeared. and hands engineers the from torn was branch the that such

the is There Harding. repeated now, it about doubt no is There
view! to open it lay will I and outlet,

Spilett. Gideon asked How?

feet. three lake the of water the of level the lowering By

level? the lower you will how And

this. than larger outlet another opening By

Cyrus? place, what At

coast. the nearest bank the of part the At

Spilett. observed granite! of mass a is it But

the and granite, the up blow will I Harding, Cyrus replied Well,
opening-- this bare lay to as so subside, will escaping, water

reporter. the added beach, the to on falling by waterfall, a make And

come! Come, Cyrus. replied of! use make shall we that fall A

was Harding in confidence whose companion, his away hurried engineer The
how yet, And succeed. would enterprise the doubt not did he that such
imperfect with and powder, without opened be to wall granite this was
above bent so was engineer the which upon work this not Was instruments?
strength? their

Herbert found they Chimneys, the entered reporter the and Harding When
wood. of raft their unloading Pencroft and

laughing, sailor, the said captain. finished, just have woodmen The
masons-- want you when and

engineer. the replied chemists, but Masons,--no,

island-- the up blow to going are we reporter, the added Yes,

Pencroft. cried island? the up Blow

Spilett. replied least, at it, of Part

them to known made he And engineer. the said friends, my me, to Listen
observations. his of result the

in exist must considerable, less or more cavity, a him, to According
intended he and Heights, Prospect supported which granite of mass the
water the which through opening the this, do To it. into penetrate to
larger a making by lowered level the and cleared, be first must rushed
which manufactured, be must substance explosive an Therefore outlet.
what was This shore. the of part other some in trench deep a make would
at placed nature which minerals the with attempt to going was Harding
disposal. his

Pencroft, especially all, enthusiasm what with say to useless is It
a create granite, the open means, great employ To project. this received
chemist a be soon as just would he And sailor. the suited that cascade,
would He chemicals. wanted engineer the since bootmaker, or mason a as
deportment, and dancing of professor a even liked, they that all be
necessary. ever was that if Neb, to he said

the from grease the extract to told all of first were Pencroft and Neb
perfect Such food. for destined was which flesh, the keep to and dugong,
directly, out set they that engineer, the in they had confidence
Harding, Cyrus them, after minutes few A question. a asking even without
vein the towards went hurdle, the dragging Spilett, Gideon and Herbert,
the in with met are which abound pyrites shistose those where coals, of
a found already had Harding which of and soil, transition recent most
these of quantity a carrying in employed being day the All specimen.
tons. several had they evening by Chimneys, the to stones

manipulations. his began engineer the May, of 8th the day, next The
flint, coal, of principally composed being pyrites shistose These
necessary was excess--it in latter iron--the of sulphuret and alumina,
as sulphate into it transform and iron, of sulphuret the separate to
could acid sulphuric the obtained, sulphate The possible. as rapidly
extracted. be then

agents the of one is acid Sulphuric attained. be to object the was This
a of importance manufacturing the and employed, frequently most the
acid This it. of made is which consumption the by measured be can nation
of manufacturing the in settlers, the to use great of be later would
for it reserved engineer the time this but etc., skins, tanning candles,
use. another

ground the where site a Chimneys, the behind chose, Harding Cyrus
and branches of layer a placed he ground this On level. perfectly was
pyrites, shistose of pieces some piled were which on wood, chopped
thin a with covered being whole the other, the against one buttressed
nut. a of size the to reduced previously pyrites, of layer

the to communicated was heat the wood, the to fire set they done, This
new Then sulphur. and coal contains it since kindled, soon which shist,
immense an form to as so arranged were pyrites bruised of layers
several grass, and earth with covered was which of exterior the heap,
be to was which wood of stack a was it if as left, being air-holes
charcoal. make to carbonized

would it and itself, complete to transformation the left then They
be to iron of sulphuret the for days twelve or ten than less take not
alumina, of sulphate into alumina the and iron of sulphate to changed
and coal, burnt flint, others, the substances, soluble equally two
so. being not cinders,

with proceeded Harding Cyrus on, going was work chemical this While
was zeal,--it than more with pursued were which operations, other
eagerness.

it placed and dugong, the from fat the away taken had Pencroft and Neb
glycerine the separate to necessary then was It pots. earthen large in
to had it result, this obtain to Now, it. saponifying by fat the from
these of other or one fact, In lime. or soda with either treated be
by soap a form would fat, the attacked having after substances,
the which glycerine this just was it and glycerine, the separating
by treatment only lime, of want no was There obtain. to wished engineer
useless, consequently and insoluble, soap, calcareous give would lime
soap, soluble a contrary, the on furnish, would soda by treatment while
Cyrus like man, practical a Now, use. domestic to put be could which
for No; difficult? this Was soda. obtain to try rather would Harding,
all and ficoides, glass-wort, shore, the on abounded plants marine
plants these of quantity large A wrack. form which fucaceae those
The air. open the in holes in burnt then dried, first collected, was
result the and days, several for up kept was plants these of combustion
of name the under known long been has which mass, gray compact a was
soda. natural

a both gave which soda, with fat the treated engineer the obtained, This
glycerine. substance, neutral that and soap soluble

future his of view in needed, still Harding Cyrus all. not was this But
known better is which potash, of nitrate substance, another preparation,
saltpeter. of or niter, salt of name the under

the treating by substance this manufactured have could Harding Cyrus
of cinders the from extracted easily be would which potash, of carbonate
would he and wanting, was acid this But acid. azotic by vegetables, the
the furnished happily not had nature if difficulty, some in been have
it picking of that than trouble other any them giving without saltpeter,
they and Franklin, Mount of foot the at it of vein a found Herbert up.
salt. this purify but do to nothing had

before finished were They week. a lasted works different These
been had iron of sulphate into sulphuret the of transformation the
to time had settlers the days following the During accomplished.
for serve to arrangement, particular a of bricks of furnace a construct
All obtained. been had it when iron or sulphate the of distillation the
the when time the at nearly May, of 18th the about finished was this
and Neb, Herbert, Spilett, Gideon terminated. transformation chemical
clever most become had engineer, the by directed skillfully Pencroft,
and to, listened most one the is necessity masters, all Before workmen.
best. the teaches who

result the fire, by reduced entirely been had pyrites of heap the When
alumina, of sulphate iron, of sulphate of consisting operation, the of
water. of basinful a in placed was cinders and coal, of remains flint,
obtained and it, decanted then settle, it let mixture, this stirred They
of sulphate and iron of sulphate solution in containing liquid clear a
insoluble. are they since solid, remaining matters other the alumina,
of sulphate of crystals evaporated, partly being liquid this Lastly,
the contained which liquid, evaporated not the and deposited, were iron
away. thrown was alumina, of sulphate

sulphate these of quantity large a disposal his at now had Harding Cyrus
The extracted. be to had acid sulphuric the which from crystals, iron of
Considerable manufacture. expensive very a is acid sulphuric of making
of apparatus an tools, of set special necessary--a are works
the which in and acid, the by unassailable chambers, leaden platina,
his at these of none had engineer The etc. performed, is transformation
is acid sulphuric especially, Bohemia in that, knew he but disposal,
of advantage the also have which means, simple very by manufactured
the that thus is It concentration. of degree superior a to it producing
made. is acid Nordhausen of name the under known acid

make, to operation one only had Harding Cyrus acid, sulphuric obtain To
the that so vase, closed a in crystals iron of sulphate the calcine to
condensation, by vapor, which vapor, in distil should acid sulphuric
acid. the produce would

would furnace the from heat the and pots, in placed were crystals The
and completed, successfully was operation The acid. sulphuric the distil
engineer the it, commencing after days twelve May, of 20th the on
many so in use to hoped he later which agent the of possessor the was
ways. different

acid; azotic produce to Simply agent? this for wish he did why Now,
gives acid, sulphuric by attacked saltpeter, since easy, was that and
distillation. by acid nitric, or azotic,

His acid? azotic this employ to going he was how all, after But,
of them informed not had he for this, of ignorant still were companions
aimed. he which at result the

a by and purpose, his accomplished nearly had engineer the However,
much so given had which substance the procure would he operation last
trouble.

been had which glycerine, with it mixed he acid, azotic some Taking
and water-bath, the to subjected evaporation, by concentrated previously
pints several mixture, refrigerant a employing even without obtained, he
mixture. yellow oily an of

at place, retired a in alone, made had Harding Cyrus operation last This
explosion, an of danger the feared he for Chimneys, the from distance a
contented he friends, his to liquid this of bottle a showed he when and
saying,-- with himself

nitro-glycerine! is Here

is power explosive the which of production, terrible this really was It
so caused already has which and powder, ordinary of that tenfold perhaps
into it transform to found been has way a since However, accidents. many
or clay substance, solid some it with mix to say, to is that dynamite,
used been has liquid dangerous the it, hold to enough porous sugar,
the when time the at known yet not was dynamite But security. some with
Island. Lincoln on worked settlers

said rocks? our up blow to going is that liquid that it is And
incredulously. Pencroft

will nitro-glycerine this and engineer, the replied friend, my Yes,
and hard, extremely is granite the as effect, more the much so produce
explosion. the to resistance greater a oppose will

captain? this, see we shall when And

the replied mine, the for hole a dug have we as soon as To-morrow,
engineer.

point the to went miners the daybreak, at May, of 21st the day, next The
hundred five only was and Grant, Lake of shore eastern the formed which
from downwards inclined plateau the place, this At coast. the from feet
Therefore, case. granite their by restrained only were which waters, the
form and opening the by escape would water the broken, was case this if
plateau, the of surface inclined the over flowing which, stream, a
would lake the of level the Consequently, beach. the to on rush would
be would escaped water the where opening the and lowered, greatly be
aim. final their was which exposed,

which pickaxe, a with armed Pencroft, directions, engineers the Under
was hole The granite. the attacked vigorously, and skillfully handled he
a meet should it that so slanting, shore, the of point the on made
the way this In lake. the of water the of that than level lower much
for place large a open would rock, the scattering by force, explosive
out. rush to water the

great a produce to wishing engineer, the for time, some took work The
nitro-glycerine of quarts seven than less not devote to intended effect,
that well, so did Neb, by relieved Pencroft, But operation. the to
finished. was mine the evening, the in oclock four towards

raised. was substance explosive the to fire setting of question the Now
in which fulminate, of caps by ignited is nitro-glycerine Generally,
produce to needed therefore is shock A explosion. the cause bursting
without burn would substance this lighted, simply for, explosion, the
exploding.

In cap. percussion a fabricated have certainly could Harding Cyrus
to similar substance a obtain easily could he fulminate, of default
substance, This disposal. his at acid azotic had he since guncotton,
would nitro-glycerine, the among introduced and cartridge, a in pressed
explosion. the cause and fuse, a of means by burst

shock. a by explode would nitro-glycerine that knew Harding Cyrus But
not did this if way, another try and means, this employ to resolved He
succeed.

spread nitro-glycerine, of drops few a on hammer a of blow the fact, In
the But explosion. an create to enough was surface, hard a on out
victim a becoming without blow, the give to there be not could operator
of mass a suspending of thought therefore, Harding, operation. the to
just upright an to fiber, a of means by pounds, several weighing iron,
sulphur, with impregnated previously fiber, long Another mine. the above
lay other the while end, one by first, the of middle the to attached was
being fiber second The mine. the from distant feet several ground the on
catching This first. the reached it till burn would it fire, on set
the on fall would iron of mass the and break, would turn, its in fire
after engineer, the arranged, then being apparatus This nitro-glycerine.
the that so hole, the filled distance, a to companions his sent having
few a threw he then opening; the with level a on was nitro-glycerine
was iron of mass the which above rock, the of surface the on it of drops
suspended. already

the leaving and fiber, sulphured the of end the lit Harding done, This
Chimneys. the to companions his with returned he place,

fact, in and, minutes, twenty and five burn to intended was fiber The
was explosion tremendous most a afterwards minutes twenty and five
Stones foundation. very its to tremble to appeared island The heard.
shock The volcano. a of eruption the by if as air the in projected were
the of rocks the that such, was air the of displacing the by produced
miles two than more were they although settlers, The shook. Chimneys
ground. the on thrown were mine, the from

bank the where place the towards ran and plateau, the climbed rose, They
explosion. the by shattered been have must lake the of

rapid A granite! the in seen was rent large A them! escaped cheer A
a down dashed and plateau the across foaming rushed water of stream
beach! the to on feet hundred three of height



18 Chapter

usual his to according but, succeeded, had project Hardings Cyrus
he look, fixed a and lips closed with satisfaction; no showed he habit
joy, with bounded Neb ecstasies, in was Herbert motionless. remained
words,-- these murmuring head, great his nodded Pencroft

capitally! on gets engineer our Come,

it which opening The powerfully. acted indeed had nitro-glycerine The
through escaped which water of volume the that large so was made had
the through passed before which that treble least at was outlet new this
level the operation the after time short a that was, result The one. old
more. or feet, two lowered be would lake the of

iron-tipped pickaxes, some take to Chimneys the to went settlers The
to returned then they steel; and flint fibers, of made string spears,
them. accompanying Top plateau, the

engineer,-- the to saying help not could sailor the way the On

you liquid charming that of means by that captain, think, you Dont
island? our of whole the up blow could one made, have

itself, world the and continents, island, the doubt, any Without
quantity. of question a only is It engineer. the replied

firearms? loading for nitro-glycerine this use not you could Then
sailor. the asked

easy be would it But substance. a explosive too is it for Pencroft; No,
acid, azotic have we as powder, ordinary even or guncotton, some make to
have we which guns the is it Unhappily, coal. and sulphur, saltpeter,
got. not

determination-- little a with sailor, the replied captain, Oh,

Lincoln of dictionary the from impossible word the erased had Pencroft
Island.

immediately went Heights, Prospect at arrived having settlers, The
now opening old the was which near lake the of point that towards
no water the since practicable, become now had outlet This uncovered.
the explore to easy be doubtless would it and it, through rushed longer
interior.

lake, the of point lower the reached had settlers the minutes few a In
attained. been had object the that them showed glance a and

the of surface the above now and lake, the of side the in fact, In
bare left ridge, narrow A opening. long-looked-for the appeared water,
orifice This it. approach to them allowed water, the of retreat the by
like was It height. in two scarcely but width, in feet twenty nearly was
did therefore and pavement, the of edge the at drain a of mouth the
taking Pencroft, and Neb but settlers; the to passage easy an offer not
height. suitable a of it made soon pickaxes, their

opening, the of sides the that found and approached, then engineer The
to thirty from than more of slope a not had least, at part upper its in
that provided and, practicable, therefore was It degrees. thirty-five
the to even descend to easy be would it increase, not did declivity the
in existed cavity vast some probable, was as then, If sea. the of level
use. great of be perhaps, might, it granite, the of interior the

impatient sailor, the asked for? stopping we are what captain, Well,
us! before got has Top see You passage. narrow the enter to

and go Neb, way. our see must we But engineer. the replied well, Very
branches. resinous some cut

other and pines with shaded lake, the of edge the to ran Herbert and Neb
made they which branches, some with returned soon and trees, green
Cyrus and steel, and flint with lighted were torches The torches. into
the which passage, dark the into ventured settlers the leading, Harding
filled. formerly had lake the of overplus

passage the of diameter the supposed, been have might what to Contrary
able were soon very they that so proceeded, explorers the as increased
time, infinite an for water the by worn granite, The upright. stand to
were settlers the But dreaded. be to were falls and slippery, very was
ascending in done frequently is as cord, a by other each to attached all
regular forming granite, the of projections some Happily mountains.
the from hanging still Drops, perilous. less descent the made steps,
and torches, the of light the under there and here shone rocks,
innumerable with clothed were sides the that guessed explorers the
a not was There granite. black this examined engineer The stalactites.
extremely an of and compact, was mass The it. in break a not stratum,
the of origin very the from then, dated, passage The grain. close
it. hollowed had little by little which water the not was It island.
wall the on and hand, own his with it bored had Neptune not and Pluto
washing the all which distinguished, be could work eruptive an of traces
efface. to totally able been not had water the of

certain a feel but not could They slowly. very descended settlers The
time first the for depths, unknown these into venturing this in awe,
and thought; they but speak, not did They beings. human by visited
other or polypus some that one, than more to came thought the
in were which cavities, interior the inhabit might cephalopod gigantic
little the of head the at kept Top However, sea. the with communication
fail not would who dog, the of sagacity the on rely could they and band,
it. for need any was there if alarm the give to

road, winding a following feet, hundred a about descended having After
up came companions his and stopped, before, on walking was who Harding
a form to as so wider, was halted had they where place The him. with
but vault, the from fell water of Drops dimensions. moderate of cavern
simply were They rock. the through oozed they that prove not did that
through thundered long so had which torrent the by left traces last the
but damp, slightly though pure was there air the and cavity, this
exhalation. mephitic no producing

secure very a is here Spilett, Gideon said Cyrus, dear my Well,
however, is, it but rock, the of depths the in hid well retreat,
uninhabitable.

sailor. the asked uninhabitable? Why

dark. too and small too is it Because

light in let to openings make out, it hollow it, enlarge we Couldnt
impossible. nothing thought now who Pencroft, replied air? and

lower Perhaps Harding. Cyrus said exploration, our with on go us Let
labor. this us spared have will nature down,

Herbert. observed way, the of third a gone only have We

feet hundred a descended have we for Harding, replied third, a Nearly
farther feet hundred a that impossible not is it and opening, the from
down--

master. his interrupting Neb, asked Top? is Where

there. not was dog the but cavern, the searched They

Pencroft. said on, gone has he likely Most

Harding. replied him, join us Let

the all observed carefully engineer The continued. was descent The
he detours, many so notwithstanding and passage, the of deviations
went which direction, general its of account an given have easily could
sea. the towards

was attention their when farther, feet fifty some gone had settlers The
stopped They depths. the from up came which sounds distant by attracted
an through as passage the through carried sounds, These listened. and
ear. the to clearly came tube, acoustic

Herbert. cried barking! Top is That

furiously! barking is dog brave our and Pencroft, replied Yes,

your on Keep Harding. Cyrus said spears, iron-tipped our have We
forward! and guard,

in Spilett Gideon murmured interesting, more and more becoming is It
the to rushed companions his and Harding nodded. who ear, sailors the
perceptible, more and more became barking Tops dog. their of help
some with struggle a in engaged he Was fierce. strangely seemed it and
danger the of thinking Without disturbed? had he retreat whose animal
an by impelled now were explorers the exposed, be might they which to
they lower feet sixteen minutes, few a in and curiosity, irresistible
Top. rejoined

cavern. magnificent and vast a in ended passage the There

and Pencroft furiously. barking forwards, and backwards running was Top
and crevice; every into light the threw torches, their waving Neb,
spears their Herbert, and Spilett, Gideon Harding, time, same the at
enormous The arise. might which emergency any for ready were raised,
was There direction. every in it explored settlers The empty. was cavern
continued Top yet and being; human a not animal, an not there, nothing
silent. be him make could threats nor caresses Neither bark. to

lake the of waters the which by somewhere, place a be must There
engineer. the said sea, the reached

into tumble to not care take must we and Pencroft, replied course, Of
hole. a

Harding. cried go! Top, Go,

the of extremity the towards ran words, masters his by excited dog, The
barking. his redoubled there and cavern,

mouth the perceived torches, the of light the by and him, followed They
escaped; water the that this by was It granite. the in well regular a of
a but passage, practicable and oblique an not was it time this and
venture. to impossible was it which into well, perpendicular

Harding seen. be could nothing opening: the over held were torches The
resin, blazing The abyss. the into it threw and branch, lighted a took
its of rapidity the by more still increased power illuminating whose
The appeared. nothing yet but well, the of interior the up lighted fall,
reached had it that showed which hiss, slight a with out went then flame
sea. the of level the say, to is that water, the

to able was fall, its in employed time the calculating engineer, The
ninety about be to found was which well, the of depth the calculate
feet.

the above feet ninety situated be thus must cavern the of floor The
sea. the of level

Harding. Cyrus said dwelling, our is Here

whose Spilett, Gideon replied creature, some by occupied was it But
satisfied. yet not was curiosity

this through off made has otherwise, or amphibious creature, the Well,
us. for place the left has and engineer, the replied opening,

just Top be to much very like should I sailor, the added mind, Never
nothing! for bark doesnt he for hour, an of quarter a for

were who companions his of those and dog, his at looked Harding Cyrus
words,-- these murmur him heard have might him near

many great a about do we than more knows Top that believe I Yes,
things.

satisfied. part most the for were settlers the of wishes the However,
them done had leader, their of sagacity marvelous the by aided Chance,
size the cavern, vast a disposal their at now had They service. great
their of light feeble the by calculated properly be not could which of
by rooms, into it divide to easy be certainly would it but torches,
as least at house, a as not if it, use to or partitions, brick of means
The return. not could it left had which water The apartment. spacious a
free. was place

this lighting of possibility the firstly, remained; difficulties Two
of necessity the secondly, rock; solid of midst the in excavation
of think to useless was It easy. more access of means the rendering
granite the of thickness enormous the of because above, from it lighting
sea the next wall outer the perhaps but ceiling; the composed which
roughly had descent, the during Harding, Cyrus pierced. be might
passage, the of length the consequently and obliqueness, its calculated
very be not could wall outer the that believe to led therefore was and
for access, of means a would so obtained, thus was light If thick.
an establish to and windows, as door a pierce to easy as be would it
ladder. exterior

companions. his to ideas his known made Harding

my have I Pencroft. replied work! to set us let captain, Then,
I shall Where wall. this through way my make soon shall I and pickaxe,
strike?

considerable a sailor sturdy the showing engineer, the replied Here,
thickness. the diminish much would which side, the in recess

the of light the by hour, an half for and granite, the attacked Pencroft
then him, relieved Neb him. around fly splinters the made he torches,
place. Nebs took Spilett

spot this at that fear to began they and hours, two lasted had work This
by given blow last a at when pickaxe, the to yield not would wall the
outside. fell rock, the through passing instrument, the Spilett, Gideon

Pencroft. cried hurrah! Hurrah!

thickness. in feet three there measured only wall The

ground the overlooked which aperture, the to eye his applied Harding
the sea-coast, the extended was him Before feet. eighty of height a from
sea. open the beyond and islet,

and cavern splendid the inundating hole, this by entered light of Floods
than more measure not did it side left its On effect! magic a producing
and enormous, was it right the on but breadth, and height in feet thirty
feet. eighty than more of height a to rose roof vaulted its

the supported disposed, irregularly pillars, granite places some In
lateral forming here cathedral, a of nave the in those as roof, vaulted
losing moldings, pointed with adorned arches, elliptical there piers,
glimpses which of arches fantastic the amid bays, dark in themselves
projections of profusion a with covered shade, the in caught be could
of mixture picturesque a was cavern This pendants. many so like formed
produced ever architecture Gothic or Roman, Byzantine, of styles the all
alone She nature. of work the only was this yet And man. of hand the by
granite. of mass a in Alhambra fairy this hollowed had

only had they Where admiration. with overwhelmed were settlers The
marvelous of sort a found had they cavity, narrow a find to expected
transported been had he if as hat, his off taken had Neb and palace,
temple! a into

the and resounded, Hurrahs mouth. every from issued admiration of Cries
naves. dark the in away died it till again and again repeated was echo

the lighted have we when Harding, Cyrus exclaimed friends! my Ah,
in storehouses and rooms our arranged have and place, this of interior
will we which cavern, splendid this have still shall we part, left the
museum! our and study our make

Herbert. asked it?-- call will we And

again companions his which name a Harding; replied House, Granite
cheer. a with saluted

return to obliged were they as and consumed, almost now were torches The
put to decided was it plateau, the of summit the reach to passage the by
till dwelling new their of arrangement the for necessary work the off
day. next the

well, dark the over more once leaned Harding Cyrus departing, Before
listened He sea. the of level the to perpendicularly descended which
the which water, the of that even not heard, was noise No attentively.
flaming A depths. its in agitate sometimes must surge the of undulations
an for up lighted were well the of sides The in. thrown again was branch
seen. was suspicious nothing time, first the at as but instant,

the of retreat the by unawares surprised been had monster marine some If
subterranean the by sea the regained have time this by would he water,
him. to offered been had opening new the before passage,

the on fixed eyes his motionless, standing was engineer the Meanwhile,
word. a uttering without gulf,

he. said Captain! arm, his touching and him, approached sailor The

returned had he if as engineer, the asked friend? my want, you do What
dreams. of land the from

out. go soon will torches The

Harding. Cyrus replied Forward!

dark the through ascend to began and cavern the left band little The
The then. and now every growling still rear, the closed Top passage.
the in minutes few a rested settlers The enough. painful was ascent
long the up halfway landing-place of sort a made which grotto, upper
again. climb to began they Then staircase. granite

no evaporation, by dried water, of drops The felt. was air fresher Soon
The dim. grow to began torches flaring The walls. the on sparkled longer
their find to wish not did they if and out, went carried Neb which one
hasten. must they dark, the in way

the when moment the at oclock, four before little a and done, was This
companions his and Harding Cyrus turn, its in out went torch sailors
passage. the of out passed



19 Chapter

dwelling new their of arrangement the May, of 22nd the day, next The
insufficient the exchange to longed settlers the fact, In commenced. was
midst the in retreat, healthy and large this for Chimneys the of shelter
sky. and sea the of both water the from sheltered and rock, solid of
for abandoned, entirely be to however, not, was dwelling former Their
works. important for it of manufactory a make to intended engineer the
of front the of position the out find to was care first Hardings Cyrus
the as and beach, the to went He outside. the from House Granite
fallen have must reporter the of hands the from escaped it when pickaxe
be would it finding the cliff, the of foot the to perpendicularly
the in pierced been had hole the where place the show to sufficient
granite.

a in seen be could hole the and found, easily was pickaxe The
Some sand. the in stuck was it where spot the above line perpendicular
they opening; narrow the of out and in flying already were pigeons rock
for purpose on discovered been had House Granite that thought evidently
the of portion right the divide to intention engineers the was It them.
light to and passage, entrance an by preceded rooms, several into cavern
Pencroft front. the in pierced door, a and windows five of means by it
the understand not could he but windows, five the with pleased much was
through staircase, natural a offered passage the since door, the of use
House. Granite enter to easy be always would it which

our reach to us for easy is it if Harding, replied friend, My
besides others for easy equally be will it passage, this by dwelling
it seal to opening, that up block to contrary, the on mean, I us.
entrance the hide completely to necessary, is it if and, hermetically,
rise. to lake the of water the causing thus and dam, a making by

sailor. the asked in? get we shall how And

which, ladder, rope a Harding, Cyrus replied ladder, outside an By
impossible. dwelling our to access render will up, drawn once

no seen have we yet As Pencroft. asked precautions? many so why But
dont I natives, by inhabited being island our to As animals. dangerous
it! believe

at looking engineer, the asked Pencroft? that, of sure quite you Are
sailor. the

every in it explored have we till sure, quite be not shall we course Of
Pencroft. replied direction,

But yet. as it of portion small a only know we for Harding, said Yes,
from come may they interior, the in enemies no have we if rate, any at
be must We dangerous. very are Pacific the of parts for exterior, the
contingency. every against provided

objection, further any making without and wisely; spoke Harding Cyrus
orders. his execute to prepared Pencroft

a and windows five by lighted be to then was House Granite of front The
would which ones, oval smaller some and window bay large a besides door,
be to was which nave marvelous the into enter to light of plenty admit
above feet eighty of height a at situated facade, This room. chief their
with it saluted sun rising the and east, the to exposed was ground, the
which cliff the of part that at just be to found was It rays. first its
perpendicular a and Mercy the of mouth the at projection the between was
Thus Chimneys. the formed which rocks of heap the above traced line
was it for obliquely, it strike only would northeast the from winds the
made, were window-frames the until Besides, projection. the by protected
which shutters, thick with openings the close to meant engineer the
be could which and entering, from rain or wind either prevent would
need. in concealed

long too taken have would This openings. the make to was work first The
ingenious an was Harding that known is it and alone, pickaxe the with
he and disposal, his at nitro-glycerine of quantity a still had He man.
was rock the substance explosive this of means By usefully. it employed
the with Then, engineer. the by chosen places very the at open broken
the shaped, properly were doors and windows the spade, and pickaxe
of beginning the after days few a and off, smoothed were edges jagged
sun, rising the by lighted abundantly was House Granite work, the
the Following recesses. secret most its into penetrated rays whose
five into divided be to was space the Harding, Cyrus by proposed plan
a with entry an right, the to sea; the on out looking compartments
a long; feet thirty kitchen, a then ladder; the meet would which door,
and size; equal of sleeping-room, a feet; forty measuring dining-room,
was which and Pencroft, by for petitioned room, Visitors a lastly,
rooms, of suite this rather or rooms, These hall. great the to next
a also be would There cave. the of depth the all occupy not would
stores and provisions, tools, their which in storehouse, a and corridor
as well as flora the island, the of productions the All kept. be would
preservation, of state possible best the in there be to were fauna, the
so space, of want no was There damp. the from sheltered completely and
colonists the Besides, arranged. methodically be could object each that
cavern, great the above grotto little the disposal their at still had
dwelling. new the of garret the like was which

miners The execution. into put be to only had it settled, plan This
of foot the to brought were bricks the then again, brickmakers became
entered only had companions his and Harding then, Till House. Granite
them obliged communication of mode This passage. long the by cavern the
bank, rivers the by detour a making Heights, Prospect climb to first
to having passage, the through feet hundred two descend to then and
great a was This plateau. the to return to wished they when far as climb
therefore, Harding, Cyrus fatiguing. very also was and time, of loss
of fabrication the to delay further any without proceed to resolved
House Granite render would raised, once which, ladder, rope strong a
inaccessible. completely

formed uprights, its and care, extreme with manufactured was ladder This
thick a of strength the had cane, of species a of fibers twisted the of
with cedar, red of sort a of made were they rounds, the to As cable.
masterly the by wrought was apparatus this and branches; strong light,
Pencroft. of hand

a with crane of sort a and fibers, vegetable with made were ropes Other
be easily could bricks way this In door. the at fixed was tackle
thus being materials the of transport The House. Granite into raised
immediately. begin could interior the of arrangement the simplified,
there were bricks of thousands some and lime, of want no was There
very raised, soon was partitions the of framework The used. be to ready
rooms into divided was cave the time, short a in and first, at roughly
upon. agreed plan the to according storehouses, and

the of direction the under rapidly progressed works different These
came labor No trowel. the and hammer the handled himself who engineer,
and intelligent his to example an set thus who Harding, Cyrus to amiss
Pencroft gaily, even confidence, with worked They companions. zealous
sometimes carpenter, sometimes crack, to joke some having always
to humor good his communicated he while mason, sometimes rope-maker,
engineer the in faith His world. little their of members the all
of capable him believed He it. disturb could nothing complete; was
boots of question The everything. in succeeding and anything undertaking
the during light of question,--that serious a clothes--assuredly and
transforming island, the of parts fertile the utilizing months, winter
Cyrus him; to easy appeared all it flora, cultivated into flora wild the
canals of dreamed He time. in done be would everything helping, Harding
workings ground; the of riches the of transport the facilitating
manufacture; industrial every for machines mines; and quarries of
day one certainly would network a which of railroads! yes, railroads;
Island. Lincoln cover

of aspirations the down put not did He talk. Pencroft let engineer The
smiled even he is; confidence communicable how knew He heart. brave this
future the for uneasiness the of nothing said and speak, him hear to
course the of out Pacific, the of part that in fact, In felt. he which
It them. to come ever would help no that feared be to was it vessels, of
depend, must settlers the that alone, themselves on themselves, on was
that such, was land other all from Island Lincoln of distance the for
construction, inferior necessarily a of boat, a in themselves hazard to
thing. perilous and serious a be would

of sails the of out wind the took quite they said, sailor the as But,
miracle. a by done was everything whom for Robinsons, the

an where succeed will man energetic an energetic; were they fact, In
perish. inevitably and vegetate would one indolent

and intelligent was He works. these in himself distinguished Herbert
Harding Cyrus and well; performed he quickly, understanding active;
and lively a had Herbert boy. the to attached more and more became
which sympathy close the saw Pencroft engineer. the for love reverent
Neb jealous. least the in not was he but two, the between existed
devotion, zeal, courage, always, be would he what was he Neb: was
that master his in faith same the had He personified. self-denial
was sailor the When vehemently. less it showed he but had, Pencroft
be could Nothing say, would he if as looked always Neb enthusiastic,
friends. great were he and Pencroft natural. more

less not was and work, common the in part took he Spilett, Gideon to As
astonished rather always which companions, his than it in skilful
in but understanding, in only not clever, journalist, A sailor. the
everything. performing

less not were There May. of 28th the on fixed finally was ladder The
feet. eighty of height perpendicular this in rounds hundred a than
profiting parts, two in it divide to fortunately, able, been had Harding
above feet forty projection a made which cliff the of overhanging an by
a made pickaxe, the by leveled carefully projection, This ground. the
the which of ladder, first the fixed they which to platform, of sort
be to it permitted rope a and one-half, diminished thus was oscillation
was it ladder, second the to As House. Granite of level the to raised
at and projection, the on rested which part, lower its at both secured
had ascent the short In door. the to fastened was which end, upper its
establish to later hoped Harding Cyrus Besides, easier. much made been
time, of loss and fatigue all avoid would which apparatus, hydraulic an
House. Granite of inhabitants the for

were They ladder. this of use the to habituated became soon settlers The
up run to accustomed sailor, a as Pencroft, and active, and light
also was it But lessons. them give to able was shrouds, and masts the
was paws, four his with dog, poor The Top. to them give to necessary
zealous a such was Pencroft But exercise. of sort this for formed not
soon and ascents, his performing properly by ended Top that master,
not need It circus. the in brethren his as readily as ladder the mounted
once than more However, pupil. his of proud was sailor the that said be
of. complained never Top which back, his on him hoisted Pencroft

actively were which works, these during that here, mentioned be must It
question alimentary the approaching, was season bad the for conducted,
been had who Herbert, and reporter the day, Every neglected. not was
yet, As chase. the to hours some devoted colony, the to purveyors voted
for because, river, the of left the on Wood, Jacamar in hunted only they
the All crossed. been yet not had Mercy the boat, or bridge a of want
been had West Far the of Forests the of name the which to woods, immense
the for excursion important this reserved They explored. not were given,
game; of full was Wood Jacamar But spring. next the of days fine first
and spears iron-tipped hunters the and abounded, boars and kangaroos
the towards discovered Herbert Besides, wonders. did arrows and bows
meadow, damp slightly a warren, natural a lagoon the of point southwest
such air, the scented which herbs aromatic and willows with covered
labiated the of species sweet-scented the all savory, basil, thyme, as
of. fond particularly be to appeared rabbits the which plants,

the for spread was table the since that observing reporter the On
wanting, be should themselves rabbits the that strange was it rabbits,
it rate, any At warren. the explored carefully sportsmen two the
had have would naturalist a and plants, useful of abundance an produced
kingdom. vegetable the of specimens many studying of opportunity good a
betony, balm, rosemary, basil, the of shoots several gathered Herbert
pectoral, some properties, medicinal different possess which etc.,
When, anti-rheumatic. or anti-spasmodic, others febrifuge, astringent,
herbs,-- of collection this of use the asked Pencroft afterwards,

ill. are we when us treat to lad, the replied medicine, For

asked island? the in doctors no are there since ill, be we should Why
seriously. quite Pencroft

his with on went lad the but that, to made be to reply no was There
House. Granite at received well was it and same, the all collection
America North in known plant a added he herbs, medicinal these Besides
beverage. excellent an made which tea, Oswego as

site real the at arrived hunters the thoroughly, searching by last, At
sieve. a like perforated was ground the There warren. the of

Herbert. cried burrows! the are Here

see. I so reporter, the replied Yes,

inhabited? they are But

question. the is That

animals, little of hundreds immediately, Almost answered. soon was This
that rapidity such with direction, every in fled rabbits, to similar
these vain; in ran dog and Hunters them. overtake not could Top even
the leave to not resolved reporter the But easily. them escaped rodents
quadrupeds. the of half-a-dozen least at captured had he until place,
they which those domesticate and first, larder their stock to wished He
a with this, do to difficult been have not would It later. take might
moment this at But burrows. the of openings the at stretched snares few
must, They of. them make to anything nor snares, neither had they
it in rummaging and hole, each visiting with satisfied be therefore,
in done be not could what do to patience of dint by hoping stick, a with
way. other any

holes. their in taken were rodents four hour, an half after last, At
by known commonly are and brethren, European their to similar were They
rabbits. American of name the

figured and House, Granite to back brought was chase the of produce This
be to all at not were warren the of tenants The repast. evening the at
the of resource valuable a was It delicious. were they for despised,
inexhaustible. be to appeared it and colony,

only now had rooms The finished. were partitions the May of 31st the On
A days. winter long the for work be would this and furnished, be to
kitchen. a as served which room, first the in established was chimney
to trouble some gave outside smoke the conduct to destined pipe The
of it make to Harding to simplest appeared It bricklayers. amateur these
to not was plateau upper the to it for outlet an creating as clay; brick
of window the above granite the in pierced was hole a of, thought be
Perhaps stove. iron an of that like it met pipe the and kitchen, the
chimney the make would facade the against directly blew which winds the
was cook, the Neb, Master besides, and rare, were winds these but smoke,
that. about particular very so not

occupied engineer the finished, were arrangements interior these When
any prevent to as so lake, the by outlet the up blocking in himself
and entrance the to rolled were rock of Masses way. that by access
plan his realize yet not did Harding Cyrus together. cemented strongly
restoring by lake, the of waters the under opening this drowning of
with himself contented He dam. a of means by level former their to them
the in planted were which shrubs, and grass with obstruction the hiding
thickly. sprout would spring next which and rocks, the of interstices
fresh of stream small a lead to as so waterfall the used he However,
level, their below made trench, little A dwelling. new the to water
inexhaustible and pure a from derivation this and result; this produced
be never would There day. a gallons thirty or twenty-five yielded source
was it and finished, was all last At House. Granite at water of want any
of windows the closed shutters Thick near. was season bad the for time,
glass. make to time had engineer the until facade, the

projections rocky the on arranged artistically very had Spilett Gideon
streaming long as well as kinds, different of plants windows the around
which green, in framed picturesquely were openings the that so grass,
effect. pleasing a had

not could dwelling, secure and healthy, solid, this of inhabitants The
over extended windows the from view The work. their with charmed be but
the on Capes Mandible two the by closed was which horizon, boundless a
them. before spread was Bay Union All south. the on Cape Claw and north,
was Pencroft and satisfied, be to reason had settlers brave our Yes,
on apartments his called, humorously he what of praise his in lavish
ground! the above floor fifth the



20 Chapter

with corresponds which June, of month the with in set season winter The
showers with began It Hemisphere. Northern the in December of month the
The intermission. without other each succeeded which squalls, and
dwelling a of advantages the appreciate could House Granite of tenants
have would Chimneys The weather. inclement the from them sheltered which
and winter, of rigor the against them protect to insufficient quite been
irruption. another make would tides high the that feared be to was it
as so contingency, this against precautions taken had Harding Cyrus
were which furnace and forge the possible as much as preserve to
there. established

different in employed was time the June of month the of whole the During
larder the fishing, nor hunting neither excluded which occupations,
had he as soon so Pencroft, supplied. abundantly therefore, being,
great expected he which from traps, some set to proposed leisure,
the which of aid the by creepers, with snares some made soon He results.
employed Neb rodents. of quota its furnished day every henceforth warren
their insured which meat, smoking or salting in time his all nearly
now was clothes of question The provisions. of plenty having always
those than garments other no having settlers the discussed, seriously
were clothes These island. the on them threw balloon the when wore they
their of as well as them of care great taken had they good; and warm
be to need soon would they but whole, perfectly were they and linen,
suffer would settlers the severe, was winter the if Moreover, replaced.
cold. from greatly

provide must They fault. at was Harding of ingenuity the subject this On
a in lay and dwelling, their settle wants, pressing most their for
question the before them upon come might cold the thus food; of store
to minds their up make therefore must They settled. been had clothes of
season fine the When clothing. additional without winter first this pass
been had which musmons those hunt regularly would they again, round came
collected, once wool the and Franklin, Mount to expedition the on seen
How? stuff.... warm strong into it make to how know would engineer the
consider. would He

Pencroft. said House! Granite at ourselves roast to free are we Well,
it. sparing for reason no and fuel, of heaps are There

under situated not is Island Lincoln Spilett, Gideon added Besides,
Did severe. not are here winters the probably and latitude, high very a
that to corresponded parallel thirty-fifth this that Cyrus, say, not you
hemisphere? other the in Spain of

very are Spain in winters some but engineer, the replied Doubtless,
as just is Island Lincoln perhaps and ice; and snow of want No cold!
that hope I such, as and island, an is it However, tried. rigorously
moderate. more be will temperature the

Herbert. asked captain? Why,

in reservoir, immense an as considered be may boy, my sea, the Because
restores it comes, winter When summer. the of heat the stored is which
medium a ocean the near regions the for insures which heat, this
winter. in low less but summer, in high less temperature,

bother to want dont I But Pencroft. replied that, prove shall We
that certain, is thing One not. or cold be will it whether about myself
we Suppose long. evenings the and short, already are days the that is
light. of question the about talk

Harding. replied easier, is Nothing

sailor. the asked about? talk To

settle. To

begin? we shall when And

hunt. seal a having by To-morrow,

candles? make To

Yes.

had he since feasible, quite was it and project; engineers the was Such
furnish would islet the of amphibians the while acid, sulphuric and lime
manufacture. the for necessary fat the

to agreed they and Sunday Whit was It June. of 4th the at now were They
offered were prayers and suspended, was work All feast. this observe
in settlers The thanksgivings. now were prayers these But Heaven. to
the on thrown castaways miserable the longer no were Island Lincoln
the day, next The thanks. gave more--they nothing for asked They islet.
islet. the for out set they weather, uncertain rather in June, of 5th
was it and Channel, the cross to tide low the by profit to had They
they as well as purpose, this for construct, would they that agreed
and easier, much so communication render would which boat a could,
grand their of time the at Mercy, the ascend to them permit also would
the till off put was which island, the of southwest the of exploration
days. fine first

iron-tipped their with armed hunters, the and numerous, were seals The
and them, skinned Pencroft and Neb half-a-dozen. killed easily spears,
being skin this skin, and fat their House Granite to back brought only
boots. of manufacture the for intended

all fat, of pounds hundred three nearly this: was hunt the of result The
candles. of fabrication the in employed be to

absolutely yield not did it if and simple, extremely was operation The
would Harding Cyrus useful. very least at were they results, perfect
acid this heating by but acid, sulphuric disposal his at had have only
from then glycerine; the separate could he bodies fatty neutral the with
and margarin, the olein, the separated easily he combination, new this
operation, the simplify to But water. boiling employing by stearin, the
a obtained he this By lime. of means by fat the saponify to preferred he
precipitated which acid, sulphuric by decompose to easy soap, calcareous
acids. fatty the liberated and sulphate, of state the into lime the

being first, stearic-the and margaric, acids-oleic, three these From
others, two the to As pressure. sufficient a by out driven was liquid,
molded. be to were candles the which of substance very the formed they

wicks, The hours. twenty and four than more last not did operation This
the in dipped and fibers, vegetable of made were trials, several after
the by molded candles, stearic regular formed they substance, liquefied
doubtless not would They polish. and whiteness wanted only which hand,
boracic with impregnated are which wicks the of advantages the have
but consumed, entirely are and burn they as vitrify which and acid,
these snuffers, of pair beautiful a manufactured having Harding Cyrus
Granite in evenings long the during appreciated greatly be would candles
House.

new their of interior the in work of want no was there month this During
which tools, their improved They do. to plenty had joiners The dwelling.
also. others added and rough, very were

last at were settlers the and things, other among made were Scissors
their trim least at or shave, to also and hair, their cut to able
were companions their but little, but Neb none, had Herbert beards.
scissors. said the of making the justified which way a in bristling

an last at but trouble, infinite cost hand-saw a of manufacture The
the divide could handled, vigorously when which, obtained was instrument
cupboards, seats, tables, made then They wood. the of fibers ligneous
bedding the all which of bedsteads, and rooms, principal the furnish to
which on shelves, its with kitchen, The mattresses. grass of consisted
Neb and well, very looked stove, brick its utensils, cooking the rested
laboratory. chemists a in was he if as earnestly as there away worked

the fact, In carpenters. by replaced be to soon had joiners the But
two of construction the rendered explosion the by created waterfall
Now shore. the on other the Heights, Prospect on one necessary, bridges
watercourse, a by divided transversely were shore the and plateau the
To island. the of part northern the reach to crossed be to had which
detour, considerable a make to obliged been had colonists the it avoid
to was thing simplest The Creek. Red the of source the to up climbing by
to twenty from bridges two shore, the on and plateau, the on establish
needed was that work carpenters the All length. in feet twenty and five
some of business a was this branches: their of trees some clear to was
profited Pencroft and Neb established, were bridges the Directly days.
the near discovered been had which oyster-bed the to go to them by
the replaced which cart, rough of sort a them with dragged They downs.
oysters, of thousands some back brought and hurdle, inconvenient former
of mouth the at bed a formed and rocks the among increased soon which
colonists the and quality, excellent of were molluscs These Mercy. the
daily. some consumed

as had inhabitants its although Island, Lincoln that seen been has It
almost to contributed already it, of portion small a explored only yet
most its into hunted they if that probable was It wants. their all
Reptile and Mercy the between part wooded the all in recesses, secret
treasures. new find would they Point,

no was There privation. one still had Island Lincoln in settlers The
which roots ligneous those products; vegetable of nor meat, of want
drink, acid an them gave fermentation, to subjected when found, had they
canes without sugar, made also they water; cold to preferable was which
acer the from distils which liquor the collecting by beet-roots, or
temperate the all in flourishes which maple-tree, of sort a saceharinum,
made they number; great a possessed island the which of and zones,
warren; the from brought herbs the employing by tea agreeable very a
in used is which mineral only the salt, of abundance an had they lastly,
wanting. was bread but food...

equivalent, some by want this replace could settlers the time in Perhaps
tree breadfruit the or sago the find might they that possible was it
these with met yet as not had they but south, the of forests the among
an in aid, their to directly came Providence However, trees. precious
his all with Harding, Cyrus but true, is it proportion infinitesimal
produce to able been have never would ingenuity, his all intelligence,
lining the in found day one Herbert chance, greatest the by which, that
rights. to setting in occupied was he which waistcoat, his of

assembled were settlers the torrents, in raining was it as day, this On
at all out cried lad the when House, Granite in hall great the in
once,--

corn! of grain captain--A here, Look

hole a from grain--which single grain--a a companions his showed he And
waistcoat. his of lining the into got had pocket his in

when Herbert, that fact the by explained was grain this of presence The
a him made had Pencroft which of pigeons, some feed to used Richmond, at
present.

quickly. engineer the said corn? of grain A

one! only one, but captain; Yes,

capitally, on getting were laughing, Pencroft, said boy, my Well,
corn? of grain one with make we shall What word! my upon

Harding. Cyrus replied it, of bread make will We

this that bread the Come, sailor. the replied tarts! cakes, Bread,
soon! very us choke wont make will corn of grain

to going was discovery, his to importance much attaching not Herbert,
it, examined it, took Harding but question; in grain the away throw
the in full sailor the looking and condition, good in was it that found
grain one ears many how know you do quietly, asked he face--Pencroft,
produce? can corn of

question. the at surprised sailor, the replied suppose! I One,

bears? ear one grains many how know you do And Pencroft! Ten,

word. my upon No,

at grain, this plant we if Then, Harding. Cyrus said eighty! About
second the at which grains hundred eight reap shall we crop first the
hundred five third, the at thousand; forty and hundred six produce will
of thousands hundred four than more fourth, the at millions; twelve and
proportion. the is There millions!

numbers These answering. without listened companions Hardings
however. exact, were They them. astonished

arithmetical the are such engineer, the continued friends, my Yes,
multiplication this is what yet and nature; prolific of progressions
grains, hundred eight bears only ear the which of corn, of grain the of
to seeds; thousand thirty-two bears which poppy-plant, the to compared
In thousand? sixty and hundred three produces which tobacco-plant, the
arrests which destruction, of causes numerous the without years, few a
earth. the overrun would plants these fecundity, their

lecture. his finished not had engineer the But

four bushels many how know you do continued, he Pencroft, now, And
make? would grains of millions thousand hundred

nothing am I that is, know do I what but sailor; the replied No,
fool! a than better

thirty and hundred a at millions, three than more make would they Well,
Pencroft. bushel, a thousand

Pencroft. cried millions! Three

millions. Three

years? four In

I as if, years, two in even and Harding, Cyrus replied years, four In
year. a crops two obtain can we latitude this in hope,

reply not could Pencroft custom, usual his to according that, At
hurrah. tremendous a by than otherwise

great of discovery a made have you engineer, the added Herbert, So,
the in us serve can everything friends, my Everything, us. to importance
you. of beg I that, forget not Do are. we which in condition

ever if and Pencroft; replied it, forget shant we no, captain, No,
and hundred three by multiply which tobacco-seeds, those of one find I
must what now, And away! it throw wont I you assure I thousand, sixty
do? we

Herbert. replied grain, this plant must We

bears it for care, possible every with and Spilett, Gideon added Yes,
harvests. future our itself in

sailor. the cried grows! it Provided

Harding. Cyrus replied grow, will It

this sowing for propitious then was time The June. of 20th the was This
in it plant to proposed first was It corn. of grain precious single
and nature, to it leave to decided was it reflection upon but pot, a
needless is it and day, very that done was This earth. the to it confide
might experiment the that taken was precaution every that add, to
succeed.

above height the climbed settlers the cleared, having weather The
sheltered well spot, a chose they plateau, the on There, House. Granite
place The sun. midday the of heat the all to exposed and wind, the from
worms; and insects for searched and weeded, carefully cleared, was
was it made; was lime, little a with improved earth, good of bed a then
earth. damp the in buried was grain the and railing; a by surrounded

some of stone first the laying were settlers the if as seem not it Did
only his lighted he which on day the Pencroft to recalled It edifice?
thing the time this But operation. the of anxiety the all and match,
able always been have would castaways the fact, In serious. more was
supply could power human no but other, or mode some in fire, procure to
lost! be should this unfortunately if corn, of grain another



21 Chapter

to going without pass day single a let not did Pencroft time this From
insects the to woe And corn-field. his called gravely he what visit
them. shown was mercy No there! venture to dared which

weather the rain, incessant after June, of month the of end the Towards
thermometer Fahrenheit a 29th the on and colder, decidedly became
is that zero, above degrees twenty only announced have certainly would
June, of 30th the day, next The freezing-point. the below considerably
year, northern the in December of 31st the to corresponds which day the
but day, bad a on finished year the that remarked Neb Friday. a was
one, good a on begin would next the naturally that replied Pencroft
better. was which

the at accumulated Ice cold. severe very by commenced it rate any At
the of expanse whole the before long not was it and Mercy, the of mouth
frozen. was lake

wood. of store their renew to obliged been frequently had settlers The
had but frozen, was river the till waited not wisely had also Pencroft
was current The destination. their to wood of rafts enormous brought
the conveying in employed was it and power, moving indefatigable an
fuel the To it. enchained frost the when moment the to wood floating
several added they forest, the by supplied abundantly so was which
of spurs the of foot the from brought be to had which coal, of cartloads
in appreciated greatly was coal the of heat powerful The Franklin. Mount
of degrees eight to fell July of 4th the on which temperature, low the
had fireplace second A zero. below degrees thirteen is, that Fahrenheit,
at together worked all they where dining-room, the in established been
Harding Cyrus cold, of period this During avocations. different their
Granite to brought having on himself congratulate to cause great had
frozen the below Taken Grant. Lake from water of stream little the House
fluidity, its preserved it passage, the through conducted and surface,
the at out hollowed been had which reservoir interior an at arrived and
to well the through ran overflow the while storeroom, the of part back
sea. the

clothed colonists, the dry, extremely being weather the time, this About
of exploration the to day a devote to resolved possible, as warmly as
wide a was It Cape. Claw and Mercy the between island the of part that
for sport, good find probably would they and land, marshy of extent
there. swarm to ought water-birds

there, go to miles nine or eight about be would it that reckoned They
occupied. be would day the of whole the that so return, to much as and
whole the explored, be to about was island the of part unknown an As
at July, of 5th the on Accordingly, expedition. the in part took colony
Harding, Cyrus broken, scarcely had day when morning, the in oclock six
snares, spears, with armed Pencroft, and Neb, Herbert, Spilett, Gideon
House, Granite left provisions, with provided and arrows, and bows
them. before bounded who Top, by preceded

covered then which ice, the on Mercy the cross to was way shortest Their
it.

place the take not could that observed, justly engineer the as But,
noted was bridge regular a of construction the So, bridge! regular a of
works. future of list the in

bank right the on foot set had settlers the that time first the was It
superb and gigantic those of midst the into ventured and Mercy, the of
snow. with over sprinkled now coniferae

of family whole a thicket a from when mile a half gone not had they But
forth rushed Top, by disturbed there, home a made had who quadrupeds,
country. open the into

troop the saw he when Herbert, cried foxes! are those say should I Ah!
decamping. rapidly

of sort a uttered who size, large very a of but foxes, were They
stopped he for astonished, much very be to seemed Top which at barking,
disappear. to time animals swift the gave and chase, the in short

History. Natural know not did he as surprised, be to reason had dog The
tails black hair, reddish-gray with foxes, these barking, their by But,
Herbert So origin. their betrayed had tuft, white a in terminating
Arctic of name real their them give to hesitating, without able, was
Islands, Falkland the in Chile, in with met frequently are They foxes.
fortieth and thirtieth the by traversed America of parts all in and
catch to able been not had Top that regretted much Herbert parallels.
carnivora. these of one

the regarded only who Pencroft, asked eat? to good they Are
of point special one from island the in fauna the of representatives
view.

the if out found yet not have zoologists but Herbert; replied No,
to correct is it whether or nocturnal, or diurnal is foxes these of eye
called. so properly dog, genus the in them class

which reflection, lads the hearing on smiling help not could Harding
he when moment the from sailor, the to As mind. thoughtful a showed
were they eatable, genus the in classed not were foxes the that found
Granite at established was poultry-yard a when However, him. to nothing
precautions some take to best be would it that observed he House,
one no and plunderers, four-legged these from visit probable a against
this. disputed

by washed beach long a saw settlers the point, the turned having After
very was sky The morning. the in oclock eight then was It sea. open the
walk, their by warmed but cold; prolonged after is often it as clear,
atmosphere the of sharpness the felt companions his nor Harding neither
more much it made which wind, no was there Besides severely. too
just was action, calorific any without but sun, brilliant A bearable.
a of that as blue and tranquil as was sea The ocean. the from issuing
form the in bent Cape, Claw clear. is sky the when gulf, Mediterranean
To southeast. the to miles four nearly away tapered yataghan, a of
point. little a by ended abruptly was marsh the of edge the left the
the from sheltered nothing which Bay, Union of part this in Certainly,
would winds east the by beaten ships sandbank, a even not sea, open
in sea, the of tranquillity the by perceived They shelter. no found have
was which color, uniform its by waters, the troubled shallows no which
the that reef, a even of absence the by shades, yellow no by stained
in Behind abyss. deep a covered there ocean the that and steep was coast
the of trees first the rose miles, four of distance a at but west, the
on be to themselves believed have might They West. Far the of forests
ice the which regions Antarctic the in island some of coast desolate the
of fire A breakfast. for place this at halted colonists The invaded. had
breakfast the prepared Neb and lighted, was seaweed dried and brushwood
tea. Oswego of cups some added he which to meat, cold of

was Island Lincoln of part This them. around looked they eating While
reporter The part. western the all with contrasted and sterile, very
the on first at them thrown had chance if that observe to led thus was
domain. future their of idea deplorable a but had have would they shore,

the replied it, reach to able been have not should we that believe I
we which on rock a not is there and deep, is sea the for engineer,
were there least, at House, Granite Before refuge. taken have could
Here, safety. of chances our multiplied which islet, an sandbanks,
depths! the but nothing

comparatively this that Spilett, remarked enough, singular is It
of diversity This ground. varied such present should island small
One extent. certain a of continents to belongs only logically aspect,
and rich so Island, Lincoln of part western the that say, really would
that and Mexico, of Gulf the of waters warm the by washed is fertile, so
Arctic of sort a over extend southeast the and north the to shores its
sea.

also have I Harding, Cyrus replied Spilett, dear my right, are You
island this of nature the also and form the think I this. observed
presents, continent a which aspects the all of summary a is It strange.
formerly. continent a was it if surprised be not should I and

Pencroft. cried Pacific? the of middle the in continent a What!

New Australia, not should Why Harding. Cyrus replied not? Why
have Pacific, the of archipelagoes the to united Australasia, Ireland,
Asia, or Europe as important as world, the of part sixth a formed once
all that possible quite is it mind, my To Americas? two the or Africa as
of summits the but are ocean, vast this from emerging islands, these
a at waters the above was which but submerged, now continent, a
period. prehistoric

Herbert. replied formerly, was Atlantis the As

existed. it however, if, boy... my Yes,

asked continent? that of part a been have Island Lincoln would And
Pencroft.

sufficiently, would that and Harding, Cyrus replied probable, is It
surface. its on seen are which productions of variety the explain

Herbert. added it, inhabit still which animals of number great the And

an with me furnish you and engineer, the replied boy, my Yes,
seen, have we what after certain, is It theory. my support to argument
that strange, more is what and island, this in numerous are animals that
to and that, for reason a is There varied. extremely are species the
vast some of part a been formerly have may Island Lincoln that is it me
Pacific. the below sunk gradually had which continent

entirely be to appear not did who Pencroft, said day, fine some Then,
its in disappear may continent ancient this of rest the convinced,
Asia. and America between nothing be will there and turn,

and millions which continents new be will there Harding, replied Yes,
moment. this at building are animalculae of millions

Pencroft. asked masons? these are what And

the made they work constant By Harding. Cyrus replied insects, Coral
the in islands coral other numerous and Clermont-Tonnerre, of island
weigh to needed are insects these of millions Forty-seven Ocean. Pacific
of elements solid the absorb, they sea-salt the with yet, and grain, a
and limestone, produce animalculae these assimilate, they which water
hardness the which of erections, submarine enormous forms limestone this
creation, of periods first the at Formerly, granite. equal solidity and
these to entrusts she now but land, the up heaved fire, employing nature
which of agent, this replacing of task the creatures microscopic
evidently has globe the of interior the in power dynamic the
of surface the on volcanoes of number the by proved is diminished--which
succeeding centuries that believe I And extinct. actually now earth, the
be day one may Pacific this insects, to insects and centuries, to
and inhabit will generations new which continent, vast a into changed
turn. their in civilize

Pencroft. said time, long a take will That

engineer. the replied it, for time has Nature

It Herbert. asked continents? new of use the be would what But
is countries habitable of extent present the that me to appears
uselessly. nothing does nature Yet humanity. for sufficient

is this but engineer, the replied certainly, uselessly, Nothing
the on exactly and future, the for continents new of necessity the how
least At explained. be may islands, coral the by occupied zone tropical
plausible. appears explanation this me to

Herbert. said captain, listening, are We

globe our day some that admit generally philosophers idea: my is This
be longer no will life vegetable and animal that rather or end, will
subjected. be will it which to cold intense the of because possible,
think Some cold. this of cause the is upon, agreed not are they What
the which temperature, the of falling the from arise will it that
gradual the from others, years; of millions after experience will sun
a have which globe, our of interior the in fires the of extinction
last this to hold I supposed. generally is than it on influence greater
cold a really is moon the that fact the on it grounding hypothesis,
throw to continues sun the although habitable, longer no is which star,
become has moon the then, If, heat. of amount same the surface its on
of stars the all do as which, to fires interior the because is it cold,
Lastly, extinct. completely are origin, its owes it world, stellar the
this but day, some cold become will globe our cause, the be may whatever
temperate The then? happen, will What gradually. operate only will cold
than habitable more be not will period, distant less or more a at zones,
the as well as men, of population the Then are. now regions polar the
under directly more are which latitudes the towards flow will animals,
Europe, place. take will emigration immense An influence. solar the
as well as abandoned, be gradually will America, North Asia, Central
will vegetation The America. South of parts lower the and Australasia
Equator the towards retreat will flora The emigration. human the follow
and America South of parts central The fauna. the as time same the at
the and Laplanders The inhabited. chiefly continents the be will Africa
the of shores the on regions polar the of climate the find will Samoides
regions equatorial the period, this at that say, can Who Mediterranean.
Now, humanity? terrestrial nourish and contain to small, too be not will
vegetable the all to refuge give to as so nature, provident not may
new a of foundation the laying present at be emigration, animal and
these entrusted have not she may and Equator, the under continent
these all of thought often have I it? of construction the with insects
our of aspect the that believe seriously I and friends, my things,
new of raising the by that changed; completely be day some will globe
ages, future in that, and old, the cover will sea the continents
the of Chimborazo, of islands the discover to go will Columbus a
Asia, America, submerged a of remains Blanc, Mont of or Himalayas,
turn, their in become, will continents new these Then Europe. and
when body a from heat the does as away, die will heat uninhabitable;
for not if globe, the from disappear will life and it; left has soul the
rest--will will spheroid our then, Perhaps period. a for least at ever,
But conditions! superior under day some revive death--to to left be
and things; all of Author the of secret the is friends, my that, all
be myself let perhaps have I insects, the of work the by beginning
future. the of secrets the investigating in far, too carried

me, to prophecies are theories these Spilett, replied Cyrus, dear My
day. some accomplished be will they and

engineer. the said God, of secret the is That

with listened had who Pencroft, said then good, and well is that All
has Island Lincoln if captain, me, tell you will but might, his all
insects? your by made been

origin. volcanic purely a of is it Harding; replied No,

day? some disappear will it Then

probable. is That

then. here be wont we hope I

no have we as then, here be not shall we Pencroft; uneasy, be dont No,
time. some away get to hope and here, die to wish

ourselves establish us let Spilett, Gideon replied meantime, the In
halves. by things doing in use no is There forever. if as here

was exploration the finished, was Breakfast conversation. the ended This
marshy the of border the at arrived settlers the and continued,
which coast rounded the to extent, the which of marsh a was It region.
miles. square twenty about was southeast, the at island the terminated
vegetable with mingled flint-earth, clayey of formed was soil The
there and Here etc. grass, reeds, rushes, of remains the as such matter,
pools icy places many In it. covered carpet, a as thick grass, of beds
sudden a by increased river, any nor rain Neither sun. the in sparkled
concluded naturally therefore They ponds. these supply could swelling,
was it and soil the of infiltrations the by fed was marsh the that
would miasmas heat the during that feared be to also was It so. really
fevers. produce might which arise,

water, stagnant the of surface the on plants, aquatic the Above
in there lived snipe teal, duck, Wild birds. of numbers fluttered
easily be to themselves allowed birds fearless those and flocks,
approached.

the of dozen some down brought have certainly would gun a from shot One
obliged however, were, explorers The together. close so were they birds,
the but less, was result The arrows. and bows with themselves content to
the while birds, the frightening not of advantage the had arrow silent
marsh. the of parts all to them dispersed have would firearms of noise
had which ducks, dozen a with time, this for satisfied, were hunters The
white, black, wings head, green a cinnamon, of band a with bodies white
in helped Top tadorns. them called Herbert beak. flattened and red, and
of part marshy this to given was name whose birds, these of capture the
game. aquatic of reserve abundant an here had settlers The island. the
was it and carefully, more it explore to meant they time future some At
least at or domesticated, be might there birds the of some that probable
within more be would they that so lake, the of shores the to brought
reach. their

companions his and Harding Cyrus evening the in oclock five About
and Fens, Tadorns traversing by dwelling their to steps their retraced
ice-bridge. the on Mercy the crossed

House. Granite entered all they evening the in eight At



22 Chapter

however, without, August, of 15th the till lasted cold intense This
atmosphere the When mentioned. already Fahrenheit of degree the passing
blew, wind the when but borne, easily was temperature low the calm, was
Pencroft severely. it felt clothed, insufficiently settlers, poor the
of families few a of home the not was Island Lincoln that regretted
seals. and foxes many so of than rather bears

more no ask I and dressed, well very generally are he, said Bears,
their on have they which cloaks warm the winter the for borrow to than
backs.

to consent not would bears the perhaps laughing, Neb, replied But,
Martins. St. not are beasts These Pencroft. cloaks, their you give

Pencroft, replied them, make would we Neb, it, do them make would We
tone. authoritative an quite in

any at or island, the in exist not did carnivora formidable these But
themselves. shown yet not had they rate

occupied reporter the and Pencroft, Herbert, meanwhile, the In
of border the at and Heights Prospect on traps making with themselves
forest. the

lawful a be would was, it whatever animal, any sailor, the to According
snares new the into get might which carnivora or rodents the and prize,
House. Granite at received well be would

ground, the in dug pits being simple; extremely besides were traps The
and opening, the concealed which above, grass and branches of platform a
It animals. attract would which of scent the bait, some bottom the at
but random, at dug been not had they that also, mentioned be must
quadrupeds that showed footprints numerous where places certain at
three at and day, every visited were They ground. the frequented
Antarctic those of specimens days, first the during times, different
were Mercy the of bank right the on seen already had they which foxes
them. in found

when Pencroft, cried country! this in foxes but nothing are there Why,
at Looking pit. the of out animals the of one drew he time third the for
nothing! for good are which beasts added, he disgust, great in it

something! for good are they Spilett, Gideon said Yes,

that? is what And

creatures! other attract to bait make To

the with baited henceforward were traps the and right, was reporter The
carcasses. foxes

certain a of fibers tough long the from snares made also had sailor The
day a Rarely traps. the than successful more even were they and plant,
always was It caught. being warren the from rabbits some without passed
not did settlers the and sauces his vary to how knew Neb but rabbit,
complaining. of think

supplied traps the August, of week second the in twice or once However,
several namely, foxes, than useful more animals other with hunters the
of north the to seen been already had which boars wild small those of
He eatable. were beasts these if ask to need no had Pencroft lake. the
Europe. and America of pig the to resemblance their by that see could

that, of you warn I him, to Herbert said pigs, not are these But
Pencroft.

one out drawing and trap the over bending sailor, the replied boy, My
appendage little the by sus of family the of representatives these of
pigs. are these that believe me Let tail. a as it served which

Why?

me! pleases that Because

Pencroft? then, pig of fond very you Are

feet, its of particularly sailor, the replied pig, of fond very am I
much! as twice it like should I four, of instead eight had it if and

of one to belonging peccaries were they question, in animals the to As
of also were they and family, the in included are which species four the
absence the and color deep their by recognizable Tajacu, of species the
armed. are congeners their of mouths the which with teeth long those of
they that probable was it and herds, in live generally peccaries These
island. the of parts woody the in abounded

not did Pencroft and foot, to head from eatable were they rate, any At
them. from more ask

suddenly was atmosphere the of state the August, of 15th the Towards
rose temperature The northwest. the to shifting wind the by moderated
in long not was air the in vapor accumulated the and degrees, some
white, of sheet a with covered was island the All snow. into resolving
fell snow The aspect. new a under inhabitants its to itself showed and
two of thickness a reached soon it and days, several for abundantly
feet.

Granite of height the at and violence, great with blew also wind The
some In reefs. the against thundering heard be could sea the House
tall into snow the formed corners, the round eddying wind, the places,
their on round turn which waterspouts those resembling columns, whirling
the However, gun. a from shot a with attack vessels which and base,
the and island, the across blew northwest, the from coming storm,
attack. direct a from it preserved House Granite of position

been had it if as terrible as snow-storm, this of midst the in But
companions his nor Harding Cyrus neither country, polar some in produced
they and forth, venture it, for wish their notwithstanding could,
August. of 25th the to 20th the from days, five for up shut remained
surely would which Wood, Jacamar in raging tempest the hear could They
the by up torn be doubt no would trees the of Many it. from suffer
have not would he that thinking by himself consoled Pencroft but roots,
down. them cutting of trouble the

repeated. he alone, it let woodman, turning is wind The

so. do to wished had they if it, stopping of way no was there Besides,

for Heaven to were then House Granite of inhabitants the grateful How
Harding Cyrus retreat! immovable and solid this them for prepared having
Nature was it all, after but thanks, of share legitimate his also had
it. discovered only had he and cavern, vast this out hollowed had who
If them. reach not could tempest the and safety, in were all There
Heights, Prospect on wood and bricks of house a constructed had they
to As storm. this of fury the resisted have not would certainly it
sea, the for uninhabitable, absolutely been have must it Chimneys, the
in here, But it. against furiously beat would islet, the over passing
sea the neither which over mass, solid a of middle the in House, Granite
fear. to nothing was there influence, any had air nor

inactive. remain not did settlers the seclusion of days these During

and storeroom, the in planks, into up cut wood, of want no was There
the constructing furnishing; their completed they little by little
and Neb spared. not was material for chairs, and tables of solid most
they which furniture, heavy rather this of proud very were Pencroft
account. any on changed have not would

badly succeed not did they and basket-makers, became carpenters the Then
the to projected which lake the of point the At manufacture. new this in
number large a grew which in osier-bed an discovered had they north,
cut had Herbert and Pencroft season, rainy the Before osiers. purple of
now could prepared, well branches, their and shrubs, useful these down
but crude, somewhat were attempts first The employed. effectively be
workmen, the of intelligence and cleverness the of consequence in
by and seen, had they which models the recalling and consulting, by
increased soon were colony the of possessions the other, each emulating
with provided was storeroom The sizes. different of baskets several by
rhizomes, of collection his placed Neb baskets special in and them,
etc. almonds, stone-pine

again. moderated weather the August of month the of week last the During
colonists The abated. tempest the and little, a fell temperature The
shore, the on snow of feet two certainly was There directly. out sallied
hardened the on difficulty much without walk to able were they but
Heights. Prospect climbed companions his and Harding Cyrus surface.

the in especially green, left had they which woods, The change! a What
uniform a under disappeared had predominated, firs the which at part
shore, the to Franklin Mount of summit the from white, was All color.
Mercy the of waters The river. the lake, the plains, the forests, the
the of ebbing and rising each at which, ice, of roof a under flowed
the over fluttered birds Numerous crashes. loud with up broke tide,
were guillemots and teal snipe, and Ducks lake. the of surface frozen
were flowed cascade the which among rocks The thousands. in assembled
a by escaped water the that said have might One icicles. with bristling
the of artist an of imagination the all with shaped gargoyle, monstrous
that forest, the in storm the by caused damage the to As Renaissance.
snowy the till wait to have would they ascertained; be yet as not could
dissipated. was covering

of opportunity this miss not did Herbert and Pencroft, Spilett, Gideon
the under easily, them find not did They traps. their visit to going
to not careful be to also had They covered. were they which with snow
and dangerous both been have would which them, of other or one into fall
avoided they happily But snares! own their in taken be to humiliating;
animal No intact. perfectly traps their found and unpleasantness, this
were neighborhood the in footprints the yet and them, into fallen had
Herbert claws. of marks clear very certain others, among numerous, very
had species feline the of animal some that affirm to hesitate not did
dangerous that opinion engineers the justified which there, passed
generally doubtless animals These Island. Lincoln in existed beasts
had they hunger, by pressed but West, Far the of forests the in lived
the out smelled had they Perhaps Heights. Prospect as far as ventured
creatures? feline these are what Now, House. Granite of inhabitants
those thought I Herbert. replied tigers, are They Pencroft. asked
countries? hot in found only were beasts

to Mexico from found are they lad, the replied continent, new the On
the under nearly is Island Lincoln as Now, Aires. Buenos of Pampas the
that surprising not is it Plata, La of provinces the as latitude same
it. in with met be to are tigers

Pencroft. replied them, for out look must we Well,

the under dissolving quickly disappeared, soon snow the However,
white of sheet the and fell, Rain temperature. rising the of influence
renewed settlers the weather, bad the Notwithstanding vanished. soon
syrup rhizomes, almonds, stone-pine things, different of stores their
warren, the from rabbits part; vegetable the for maple-tree, the from
several necessitated This part. animal the for kangaroos and agouties,
trees of number great a that found they and forest, the into excursions
pushed also Neb and Pencroft hurricane. last the by down blown been had
tons several back brought and coal, of vein the as far as cart the with
severely been had kiln pottery the that passing in saw They fuel. of
off. blown been having it of feet six least at wind, the by damaged

Granite at renewed was wood of store the coal, the as time same the At
become again having Mercy the of current the by profited they and House,
period cold the that see could They rafts. several down float to free,
ended. not was

but not could settlers the and Chimneys, the to paid also was visit A
the during there living been having not on themselves congratulate
ravages. its of traces unquestionable left had sea The hurricane.
half passages, the assailed furiously had it islet, the over Sweeping
rocks. the covered seaweed of beds thick while sand, with them filling
Harding Cyrus wood, collected or hunted Pencroft and Herbert, Neb, While
rights, to Chimneys the putting in themselves busied Spilett Gideon and
as protected unhurt, almost bellows the and forge the found they and
sand. of heaps the by first the from been had they

done not had settlers The uselessly. made been not had fuel of store The
Hemisphere, Northern the in that, known is It cold. rigorous the with
of fallings rapid by distinguished principally is February of month the
end the and Hemisphere, Southern the in same the is It temperature. the
not does America, North of February the is which August, of month the of
law. climatic this escape

shifted wind the rain, to snow from change another after 25th, the About
According severe. very suddenly, became, cold the and southeast, the to
Fahrenheit a of column mercurial the calculation, engineers the to
zero, below degrees eight than less marked have not would thermometer
gale, sharp a by painful more still rendered cold, intense this and
Granite in up shut again were colonists The days. several for lasted
openings the all seal hermetically to necessary was it as and House,
the air, the renewing for passage narrow a leaving only facade, the of
cavern the them, economize To considerable. was candles of consumption
not was fuel which on hearths, blazing the by lighted only often was
the to descended settlers the of other or one times, Several spared.
but tide, each at up heaped waves the which ice of midst the in beach
pain without not was it and House, Granite to again up climbed soon they
ladder. the of rounds the to hold could hands their that difficulty and
when burned if as felt fingers their cold, intense the of consequence In
tenants the which hours, leisure the occupy To rounds. the touched they
an undertook Harding Cyrus disposal, their at had now House Granite of
indoors. performed be could which operation

than disposal their at sugar other no had settlers the that know We
deep making by maple, the from drew they which substance liquid the
this collecting with themselves contented They tree. the in incisions
culinary different for state this in it employing and jars in liquor
to began liquid this old, growing on as so, more the and purposes,
consistence. syrupy a of be to and white become

Cyrus day one and it, of made be to better something was there But
refiners. into turn to going were they that announced Harding

think. I trade, warm a rather is That Pencroft. replied Refiners!

engineer. the answered warm, Very

sailor. the said seasonable! be will it Then

elaborate an of thoughts mind the in awake not need refining word This
this crystallize to No! workmen. numerous and apparatus with manufactory
fire the on Placed required. is operation easy extremely an only liquor,
and evaporation, to subjected simply was it pots, earthen large in
thicken, to began this as soon As surface. its to arose scum a soon
the accelerated this spatula; wooden a with it removed carefully Neb
an contracting from it prevented time same the at and evaporation,
flavor. empyreumatic

to good much as did which fire, hot a on hours several for boiling After
transformed was latter the upon, operated substance the as operators the
previously molds, clay into poured was syrup This syrup. thick a into
various given had they which to and stove, kitchen the in fabricated
cakes formed and cold, become had syrup this day next The shapes.
nearly but color, reddish a rather of sugar was This tablets. and
taste. delicious a of and transparent

in prisoners the and September, of middle the to continued cold The
every Nearly tedious. rather captivity their find to began House Granite
constantly They prolong. not could they which sorties attempted they day
working. while talked They dwelling. their of improvement the at worked
explaining principally things, many in companions his instructed Harding
no had colonists The science. of applications practical the them to
always was which book a was engineer the but disposal; their at library
answered which book a wanted, one which page the at open always hand, at
thus time The consulted. often they which and questions, their all
fears any have to appearing not men brave these pleasantly, away passed
future. the for

the least at season, fine the not if see, to anxious were all However,
a in clothed been had they only If cold. insupportable the of cessation
to either attempted, have would they excursions many how it, meet to way
approached, easily been have would Game Fens! Tadorns to or downs the
Cyrus But productive. most been have certainly would chase the and
his injure should one no that importance of it considered Harding
followed. was advice his and hands, his all of need had he for health,

this of impatient most was who one the that said, be must it But
found dog faithful The Top. was perhaps, Pencroft after imprisonment,
one from forwards and backwards ran He narrow. very House Granite
shut being of was he weary how way his in showing another, to room
which well dark the approached he when that remarked often Harding up.
back the at opened orifice the which of and sea, the with communicated
round and round ran He growlings. singular uttered Top storeroom, the of
he even Sometimes lid. wooden a with covered been had which hole, this
it. raise to wished he if as lid, the under paws his put to tried
and anger once at showed which way, peculiar a in yelped then He
uneasiness.

times. several maneuver this observed engineer The

the on impression an such make to abyss this in be there could What
Could certain. was that sea, the to led well The animal? intelligent
island? the of foundations the through it from spread passages narrow
bottom the at breathe to time, to time from come monster marine some Did
not could and think, to what know not did engineer The well? this of
go to Accustomed improbabilities. strange many of dreaming from refrain
allow not would he reality, scientific of regions the into far
the of almost and strange the of regions the into drawn be to himself
dogs sensible those of one Top, why explain to how yet but supernatural;
in persist should moon, the at barking in time their waste never who
nothing was there if abyss, this fathom to hearing and scent with trying
even Harding Cyrus puzzled conduct Tops uneasiness? his cause to there
himself. to acknowledge to cared he than more

Gideon to impressions his communicated only engineer the events, all At
the companions his to explain to useless it thought he for Spilett,
fancy. Tops only was perhaps what from arose which suspicions

snow, with mingled squalls rain, been had There ceased. cold the last At
ice The last. not did inclemencies these but wind, of gusts hailstorms,
of banks the plateau, the shore, the disappeared; snow the melted,
spring of return This practicable. became again forest, the Mercy, the
it in passed only soon they and House, Granite of tenants the delighted
sleeping. and eating for necessary hours the

to Pencroft led which September, of part second the in much hunted They
by promised been had asserted he which firearms, the for entreat again
it tools special without that well knowing latter, The Harding. Cyrus
be would which gun a manufacture to him for impossible nearly be would
future some to operation the off put and back drew still use, any of
had Spilett and Herbert that way, dry usual his in observing time,
animals, excellent of sorts many that so archers, skilful very become
snipes, ducks, wild bustards, pigeons, capybaras, kangaroos, agouties,
arrows, their to victims fell feathers, and fur with both game short, in
would sailor obstinate the But wait. could they consequently, that, and
till peace no engineer the give would he and this, of nothing to listen
supported however, Spilett, Gideon desire. his satisfy to promised he
Pencroft.

wild by inhabited is island the he, said doubted, be may which If,
may time A them. exterminate and with fight to how think must we beasts,
duty. first our be will this when come

occupied which firearms of question the not was it period, this at But
passed had wore settlers the which Those clothes. of that but Harding,
of Skins winter. next until last not would they but winter, this
and price, any at procured be must ruminants of wool the or carnivora
the on consult to agreed was it musmons, of plenty were there since
the of use the for up brought be might which flock a forming of means
the for poultry-yard a animals, domestic the for enclosure An colony.
were such island, the in farm of sort a establish to word a in birds,
season. fine the for projects important two the

became it establishments, future these of view in and consequence In
unknown yet the all into penetrate should they that importance much of
which forest thick that through say, to is that Island, Lincoln of parts
extremity the to mouth its from Mercy, the of bank right the on extended
western its of whole the on as well as Peninsula, Serpentine the of
this before pass must month a and weather, settled needed this But side.
undertaken. profitably be could exploration

occurred incident an when impatience, some with waited therefore They
their of whole the visit to had settlers the desire the increased which
domain.

his visit to gone had Pencroft day, this On October. of 24th the was It
found he them of one In baited. properly kept always he which traps,
a were They larder. the for welcome very be would which animals three
ones. young two her and peccary female

capture, his with enchanted House, Granite to returned then Pencroft
game. his of show great a made he usual, as and,

you And exclaimed. he captain! feast, grand a have shall we Come,
some! eat will you Spilett, Mr. too,

am I that it is what but reporter; the replied happy, very be shall I
eat? to going

Suckling-pig.

you that thought I you, hear To Pencroft? suckling-pig, indeed, Oh,
truffles! with stuffed partridge young a back bringing were

nose your up turn you that say to mean you Do Pencroft. cried What?
suckling-pig? at

provided enthusiasm; any showing without Spilett, Gideon replied No,
much. too eat doesnt one

pleased not was who sailor, the returned right, thats right, Thats
objections. make to like You of. light made chase his heard he whenever
only been have would you island, the on landed we when ago, months Seven
game! such with met have to glad too

nor perfect, never is man reporter, the replied well, Well,
contented.

Look himself. distinguish will Neb that hope I Pencroft, said Now,
old! months three than more not are peccaries little two These here!
look will I come! Neb, along, Come quails! as tender as be will They
myself. cooking the after

were they where kitchen, the entered Neb, by followed sailor, the And
labors. culinary their in absorbed soon

prepared therefore, Neb, way. own their in it do to allowed were They
smoked a soup, kangaroo peccaries, little two repast--the magnificent a
they that best the all fact, in tea; Oswego almonds, stone-pine ham,
savory the rank first the in figured dishes the all among but had,
peccaries.

House. Granite of dining-room the in served was dinner oclock five At
excellent. it found They table. the on smoking was soup kangaroo The

carving on insisted Pencroft which peccaries, the succeeded soup the To
the of each to portions monstrous out served he which of and himself,
guests.

devouring was Pencroft and delicious, really were suckling-pigs These
escaped oath an and cry a once at all when gusto, great with share his
him.

Harding. Cyrus asked matter? the Whats

the replied tooth! a broken just have I that is matter the matter? The
sailor.

Spilett. Gideon said peccaries? your in pebbles there are What,

which object the lips his from drawing Pencroft, replied so, suppose I
grinder--! a him cost had

bullet. leaden a was pebble--it a not was It





2 PART

ABANDONED



1 Chapter

been had voyagers balloon the since months seven exactly now was It
the notwithstanding time, that During Island. Lincoln on thrown
smoke No discovered. been had being human no made, had they researches
No island. the of surface the on man of presence the betrayed had even
late a at or early an at either that showed handiwork his of vestiges
uninhabited be to appear now it did only Not there. lived man had period
that believe to compelled were colonists the but themselves, but any by
reasonings of scaffolding this all now, And inhabited. been had never it
inoffensive an of body the in found metal, of ball simple a before fell
who and firearm, a from issued have must bullet this fact, In rodent!
weapon? a such used have could being human a but

looked companions his table, the on bullet the placed had Pencroft When
result to likely consequences the All astonishment. intense with it at
insignificance, apparent its notwithstanding incident, this from
a of apparition sudden The minds. their of possession took immediately
completely. more them startled have not could being supernatural

suggestions the to utterance give to hesitate not did Harding Cyrus
to fail not could unexpected, and surprising once at fact, this which
rolled over, and over it turned bullet, the took He mind. his in raise
asked,-- he Pencroft, to turning then, thumb; and finger his between it

than more not was bullet this by wounded peccary the that sure you Are
old? months three

mother its sucking still was It Pencroft. replied captain, more, Not
trap. the in it found I when

a months three within that proves that engineer, the said Well,
Island. Lincoln in fired was gun-shot

not though wounded, Spilett, Gideon added bullet, a that And
animal. little this mortally,

the are these and Harding, Cyrus said unquestionable, is That
was island the that incident: this from drawn be must which deductions
three within here landed have men that or arrival, our before inhabited
by involuntarily, or voluntarily here arrive men these Did months.
be only can point This wrecked? being by or shore the on disembarking
or enemies Malays, or Europeans were, they what to As later. up cleared
inhabit still they if and guess; possibly cannot we race, our of friends
questions these But not. know we it, left have they if or island, the
unsettled. long remain to allowed be to importance much too of are

sailor, the cried no! times thousand a no! times hundred a No!
on ourselves than men other no are There table. the from up springing
been had it if and large isnt island The faith! my By Island! Lincoln
before long inhabitants the of some seen have should we inhabited,
this!

Herbert. said astonishing, very be would contrary the fact, In

the observed think, should I astonishing, more much be would it But
inside! its in bullet a with born been had peccary this if reporter,

had-- not has Pencroft if seriously, Neb said least, At

a have could I think you Do Pencroft. out burst Neb, here, Look
out? it finding without months six or five for jaw my in bullet
the show to mouth his opening asked, he hidden? be it could Where
and Neb, well, Look furnished. was it which with teeth two-and-thirty
a half out pull you let will I set, this in tooth hollow one find you if
dozen!

who, Harding, replied inadmissible, certainly is supposition Nebs
smile. a restrain not could thoughts, his of gravity the notwithstanding
three within island, the in fired been has gun a that certain is It
landed who people the that think to inclined am I But most. at months
just they that or ago, time short very a here only were coast this on
of summit the from island the surveyed we when if, for here; touched
we or them seen have should we inhabited, been had it Franklin, Mount
within that probable therefore, is It ourselves. seen been have should
of part some on storm a by thrown been have castaways weeks few a only
this have to us to consequence of is it be, may that However coast. the
settled. point

reporter. the said caution, with act should we that think I

that feared be to is it for Harding, Cyrus replied advice, my is Such
island! the on landed have pirates Malay

before plan, good a be not it would sailor, the asked Captain,
the ascend either could we which in canoe a build to out, setting
be to do not will It inland? the round coast liked, we if or, river,
unprovided.

wait cannot we but engineer, the replied Pencroft, good, is idea Your
boat. a build to month a least at take would It that. for

a for one want not do we but sailor; the replied boat, real a Yes,
construct to undertake will I most, the at days five in and voyage, sea
Mercy. the navigate to fit canoe a

boat? a build to Neb, cried days, Five

fashion. Indian the in boat a Neb; Yes,

unconvinced. still looking Negro, the asked wood? Of

that captain, repeat, I bark. of rather or Pencroft, replied wood, Of
finished! be will work the days five in

engineer. the replied it, be then, days, five In

Herbert. said watchful, very be must we time that till But

to you beg I and Harding; replied friends, my indeed, watchful Very
House. Granite of neighborhood the to excursions hunting your confine

hoped. had Pencroft than gaily less ended dinner The

the than others by inhabited been, had or was, island the then, So,
was it bullet, the of incident the by was it as Proved settlers.
but not could discovery a such and fact, unquestionable an hereafter
colonists. the among uneasiness great cause

about long conversed sleeping, before Spilett, Gideon and Harding Cyrus
not might incident this chance by if themselves asked They matter. the
had engineer the which in way inexplicable the with connection some have
them struck had which circumstances peculiar other the and saved, been
the discussed having after Harding, Cyrus However, times. different at
saying,-- by ended question, the of cons and pros

Spilett? dear my opinion, my know to like you would short, In

Cyrus. Yes,

we island, the explore we minutely however this: is it then, Well,
nothing. find shall

with boat a build to mean not did He work. to set Pencroft day next The
be would which canoe, flat-bottomed a simply but planking, and boards
its approaching for all, Mercy--above the navigating for suited well
bark, of Pieces shallow. be naturally would water the where source,
of case in and boat; light a form would other, the to one fastened
be would it necessary, portage a render would which obstacles, natural
means by bark of pieces the secure to intended Pencroft carried. easily
water-tight. being canoe the insure to nails, of

strong a afford would which trees the select to necessary first was It
a down brought had storm last the Now work. the for bark supple and
suited perfectly be would which of bark the birch-trees, large of number
had they and ground, the on lay trees these of Some purpose. their for
to owing all, of thing difficult most the was which barked, be to only
overcame they However, possessed. settlers the which tools imperfect the
difficulties. all

himself occupied thus engineer, the by seconded sailor, the While
idle. not were Herbert and Spilett Gideon hour, an losing without

but not could reporter The colony. the to purveyors made were They
and bow the handling in skill great acquired had who boy, the admire
of presence that of much and courage great showed also Herbert spear.
two These bravery. of reasoning the called be justly may which mind
recommendations, Hardings Cyrus remembering chase, the of companions
but House; Granite round miles two of radius a beyond go not did
agoutis, of tribute sufficient a furnished forest the of borders the
traps the from result the if and etc.; peccaries, kangaroos, capybaras,
accustomed its yielded warren the still cold, the during than less was
Island. Lincoln in colony the all fed have might which quota,

the on Spilett Gideon with talked Herbert excursions, these during Often
from drew engineer the which deductions the and bullet, the of incident
Spilett, Mr. said--But, October--he of 26th the was day--it one and it,
have castaways any if that, extraordinary very it think not you do
Granite near themselves shown yet not have they island, the on landed
House?

but reporter, the replied here, still are they if astonishing Very
longer! no here are they if all at astonishing not

island? the quitted already have people these that think you So
Herbert. returned

and prolonged, was stay their if for boy; my probable, than more is It
last at have would accident some here, still were they if all, above
presence. their betrayed

not could they lad, the observed away, go to able were they if But
castaways. been have

provisional called be might what were they least, at or, Herbert; No,
the to them driven have may storm a that possible very is It castaways.
they over, storm the that, and vessel, their destroying without island
again. away went

Captain that is it Herbert, said thing, one acknowledge must I
beings human of presence the desire than fear to rather appears Harding
island. our on

frequent who Malays only are there reporter, the responded short, In
avoid. to best is it which ruffians are fellows those and seas, these

or day some that Herbert, said Spilett, Mr. impossible, not is It
landing. their of traces find may we other

would fire, a of ashes the camp, deserted A boy. my no, say not do I
next our in for look will we what is this and track, the on us put
expedition.

the of part a in were they thus, spoke hunters the which on day The
among There, trees. beautiful its for remarkable Mercy, the near forest
of some ground, the above feet 200 nearly of height a to rose, others,
the give natives the Zealand, New in which, to coniferae, superb those
Kauris. of name

the to climb to were I If Herbert. said Spilett, Mr. idea, an have I
immense an for country the survey could I kauris, these of one of top
round. distance

the to climb you could but reporter; the replied good, is idea The
giants? those of top

Herbert. replied try, least at can I

the branches, first the on sprang then boy active and light The
few a in and easy, kauri the of ascent the made which of arrangement
plain immense the from emerged which summit, the at arrived he minutes
verdure. of

southern the all over extended gaze his situation elevated this From
End Reptile to southeast, the on Cape Claw from island, the of portion
concealed which Franklin, Mount rose northwest the To southwest. the on
horizon. the of part great a

the all examine could observatory, his of height the from Herbert, But
the to shelter given have might which island, the of portion unknown yet
suspected. they presence whose strangers

not sea, the on sight in nothing was There attentively. looked lad The
bank the as However, island. the near nor horizon the on neither sail, a
if especially vessel, a that possible was it shore, the hid trees of
invisible be thus and land the to close lie might masts, her of deprived
Herbert. to

wood The seen. be to anything was West Far the of forests the in Neither
a without miles, square several measuring screen, impenetrable an formed
the of course the follow to even impossible was It opening. an or break
source. its took it mountain the of part what in ascertain to or Mercy,
be not could they but west, the towards ran also creeks other Perhaps
seen.

sight Herberts escaped encampment an of indication all if last, at But
which of trace faintest the smoke, of glimpse a catch even not he could
atmosphere? pure the in discernible easily be would

the in smoke slight a perceive could he thought Herbert instant an For
He mistaken. was he that showed examination attentive more a but west,
No, excellent. was sight his and direction, every in eyes his strained
there. nothing was there decidedly

sportsmen two the and kauri, the of foot the to descended Herbert
lads the to listened Harding Cyrus There House. Granite to returned
that evident very was It nothing. said and head his shook account,
a after until question this on pronounced be could opinion decided no
island. the of exploration complete

for occurred, incident October--another of 28th after--the days Two
required. again was explanation an which

House, Granite from miles two about shore the along strolling While
specimen magnificent a capture to enough fortunate were Neb and Herbert
the Midas, species the of turtle a was It chelonia. of order the of
fat. and shell its of both color the from called so turtle, green edible

rocks the among crawling was it as turtle this of sight caught Herbert
sea. the reach to

cried. he help! Neb, Help,

up. ran Neb

it? catch to we are how but Neb; said animal! fine a What

the turn to only have We Herbert. replied Neb, easier, is Nothing
and spear your Take away. get possibly cannot it and back, its on turtle
do. I as do

and carapace its between retired had danger, of aware reptile, The
as motionless was it and feet, or head its saw longer no They plastron.
rock. a

by and animal, the underneath sticks their drove then Neb and Herbert
back. its on it turn to difficulty without managed efforts united their
least at weighed have would length, in feet three was which turtle, The
pounds. hundred four

friend rejoice will which something is this Neb; cried Capital!
heart. Pencrofts

rejoiced, be to fail not could Pencroft friend of heart the fact, In
extremely is wrack-grass, on feeds which turtle, the of flesh the for
was which seen, be could head creatures the moment this At savory.
hidden fossae temporal large the by behind widened but flat, small,
roof. long the under

it drag cant We Neb. said prize? our with do we shall what now, And
House! Granite to

we and Herbert, replied over, turn cannot it since here, it Leave
it. fetch to cart the with back come will

plan. best the is That

Neb which trouble, the took Herbert precaution, greater for However,
after stones; great with animal the up wedge to superfluous, deemed
beach, the following House, Granite to returned hunters two the which
surprise to wishing Herbert, uncovered. left had tide the which
which chelonian a of specimen superb the about nothing said Pencroft,
Neb and he later, hours two but, sand; the on over turned had they
superb The it. left had they where place the to cart the with returned
there! longer no was chelonian a of specimen

them. about stared they then first; other each at stared Herbert and Neb
even lad The left. been had turtle the that spot this at just was It
not of certain was he therefore and used, had he which stones the found
mistaken. being

then? over, themselves turn can beasts these Neb, said Well!

all, at it understand not could who Herbert, replied so, appears It
sand. the on scattered stones the at gazing was and

disgusted! be will Pencroft Well,

this explain to how perplexed very be perhaps will Harding Captain And
Herbert. thought disappearance,

speak wont we ill-luck, his hide to wished who Neb, said here, Look
it. about

Herbert. replied it, about speak must we Neb, contrary, the On

returned for, use no now was there which cart, the taking two, the And
House. Granite to

working were sailor the and engineer the where dockyard, the at Arrived
happened. had what recounted Herbert together,

meals fifty least at let have to sailor, the cried stupids! the Oh!
escape!

got beast the that fault our wasnt it Neb, replied Pencroft, But,
back! its on over it turned had we you, tell I as away;

sailor. obstinate the returned enough! over it turn didnt you Then

Herbert. cried enough! Not

stones. with turtle the up wedge to care taken had he how told he And

Pencroft. replied then! miracle, a is It

their on placed once turtles, that Herbert, said captain, thought, I
large a of are they when especially feet, their regain not could backs,
size?

Harding. Cyrus replied boy, my true, is That

manage? it did how Then

asked turtle? this leave you did sea the from distance what At
this on reflecting was work, his suspended having who, engineer, the
incident.

Herbert. replied most, the at feet Fifteen

time? the at low was tide the And

captain. Yes,

sand the on do not could turtle the what engineer, the replied Well,
tide the when over turned It water. the in do to able been have might it
sea. deep the to returned quietly then and it, overtook

Neb. cried were! we stupids what Oh!

returned before! you telling of honor the had I what precisely is That
sailor. the

was doubt, no which, explanation, this given had Harding Cyrus
this of accuracy the of convinced himself he was But admissible.
was. he that said be cannot It explanation?



2 Chapter

Pencroft finished. entirely was canoe bark the October of 9th the On
joined was which of shell the boat, light a and promise, his kept had
in constructed been had crejimba, the of twigs flexible the by together
preserve to middle the in seat second a stern, the in seat A days. five
a oars, two the for rowlocks bows, the in seat third a equilibrium, the
feet twelve was which craft, little the completed with, steer to scull
of operation The pounds. hundred two than more weigh not did and long,
beach the to carried was canoe The simple. extremely was it launching
floated tide rising the and House, Granite before sand the on laid and
and scull the with it maneuvered directly, in leaped who Pencroft, it.
to wished they which to purpose the for thing the just be to it declared
it. put

his thus celebrate to disdain not did who sailor, the cried Hurrah!
round-- go could we this With triumph. own

Spilett. Gideon asked world? The

the which sail, a and mast a ballast, for stones Some island. the No,
Well, splendidly! go shall we and day, some us for make will captain
Neb--arent you, and Herbert; you, and Spilett; Mr. you, captain--and
will it if see must we along! Come vessel? new our try to coming you
us! of five all carry

brought soon Pencroft made. be to ought which trial a certainly was This
was it and rocks, the among passage narrow a by shore the to canoe the
following by day that boat the of trial a make should they that agreed
south the of rocks the which at point first the as far as shore the
ended.

cried,-- Neb embarked, they As

Pencroft. rather, leaks boat your But

seasoned. get will wood the sailor; the replied Neb, nothing, Thats
more no have will boat our and leak, single a be wont there days two In
in! Jump drunkard. a of stomach the in is there than her in water

was weather The off. shoved Pencroft and seated, all soon were They
within contained were waters its if as calm as sea the magnificent,
much as with proceed could boat the Thus lake. a of limits narrow the
Mercy. the of current tranquil the ascending was it if as security

in remained Pencroft and other, the Herbert oars, the of one took Neb
scull. the use to order in stern the

southern the to close steered and channel, the crossed first sailor The
was roughness No south. the from blew breeze light A islet. the of point
the which swell, long A sea. green the or channel the in either found
the over regularly rolled laden, heavily was it as felt, scarcely canoe
the from distant mile a half about out pulled They water. the of surface
Franklin. Mount of view good a have might they that shore,

boat The river. the of mouth the towards returned afterwards Pencroft
all hid point, extreme the to extending which, shore, the skirted then
Fens. Tadorns

of irregularity the by increased was distance the which of point, This
resolved settlers The Mercy. the from miles three nearly was coast, the
necessary was as much as it beyond go only and extremity, its to go to
Cape. Claw as far as coast the of survey rapid a take to

rocks the avoiding shore, the of windings the followed canoe The
cliff The cover. to began tide rising the which and it, fringed which
was This point. the to river the of mouth the from away sloped gradually
from different very distributed, capriciously rocks, granite of formed
might It aspect. wild extremely an of and Heights, Prospect at cliff the
out emptied been had rocks of cartload immense an that said been have
projected which promontory, sharp this on vegetation no was There there.
arm giants a represented thus it and forest, the from miles two
sleeve. leafy a from out stretched

Gideon difficulty. without advanced oars, two the by impelled canoe, The
the sketched other, the in notebook and hand one in pencil Spilett,
while chatted, Pencroft and Herbert, Neb, strokes. bold in coast
in and, them, to new was which domain, their of part this examining
Mandible two the south, the towards proceeded canoe the as proportion
closely. more Bay Union surround and move, to appeared Capes

the by and gazed, simply he speak; not did he Harding, Cyrus to As
examining was he that appeared it expressed, look his which mistrust
country. strange some

the hour, an of three-quarters of voyage a after meantime, the In
to preparing was Pencroft and point, the of extremity the reached canoe
saying,-- object, black a to pointed rising, Herbert, when return,

beach? the on there down see I do What

indicated. point the towards turned eyes All

a of part like looks It something. is there reporter, the said Why,
sand. the in buried half wreck

is! it what see I Pencroft, cried Ah!

Neb. asked What?

sailor. the replied full, are perhaps which barrels, Barrels,

Cyrus. said Pencroft! shore, the to Pull

its and creek, little a into canoe the brought oar the of strokes few A
shore. on leaped passengers

the in buried half there, were barrels Two mistaken. not was Pencroft
by sustained which, chest, large a to attached firmly still but sand,
beach. the on stranded it when moment the to floated had them,

said island, the of part some in then, wreck, a been has There
Herbert.

Spilett. replied Evidently,

natural very with Pencroft, cried chest? this in whats But
it open to nothing and up, shut is It chest? this in Whats impatience.
stone-- a perhaps Well, with!

the of one in break to about was block, heavy a raising sailor, the And
hand. his arrested engineer the when chest, the of sides

hour one for impatience your restrain you can he, said Pencroft,
only?

in want we everything is there Perhaps think! just captain, But,
there!

trust but engineer; the replied Pencroft, out, that find shall We
must We us. to useful be may which chest, the break not do and me, to
without and easily, it open can we where House, Granite to it convey
floated has it since and voyage; a for prepared quite is It it. breaking
river. the of mouth the to float well as just may it here,

sailor. the replied usual, as wrong, was I and captain, right, are You

not would probably canoe the fact, In good. was advice engineers The
chest, the in enclosed possibly articles the contain to able been have
buoy to required were barrels empty two since heavy, was doubtless which
Granite at beach the to it tow to better much therefore, was, It up. it
House.

question. important the was That come? chest this had whence now, And
and them, around attentively looked companions his and Harding Cyrus
or articles other No steps. hundred several for shore the examined
rock high a climbed Neb and Herbert found. be could wreck of pieces
dismasted a sight--neither in nothing was there but sea, the survey to
sail. under ship a nor vessel

this Perhaps wreck. a been had there that doubt no was there However,
had strangers Perhaps bullet? the of that with connected was incident
there? still were they Perhaps island? the of part another on landed
these that was, settlers the to naturally came which thought the But
of evidently was chest the for pirates, Malay be not could strangers
make. European or American

large unusually an of was which chest, the to returned party the All
with covered and closed carefully very wood, oak of made was It size.
barrels, great two The nails. copper by secured was which hide, thick a
fastened were empty, and hollow sounded which but sealed, hermetically
Pencroft which skill a with knotted ropes, strong by sides its to
a in be to appeared It exhibit. could alone sailors pronounced directly
it that fact the by explained was which preservation, of state perfect
doubt no had They rocks. among not and beach, sandy a on stranded had
the in long been not had it that carefully, it examining on whatever,
did water The recent. was coast this on arrival its that and water,
it which articles the and inside, the to penetrated have to appear not
uninjured. doubt no were contained

some from overboard thrown been had chest this that evident was It
hope the in that, and island, the towards driven vessel dismasted
it, find afterwards might they where land, the reach would it that
this of means by up it buoy to precaution the taken had passengers the
apparatus. floating

we where engineer, the said House, Granite to chest this tow will We
the of any discover we if then, contents; its of inventory an make can
it whom to those to it return can we wreck, supposed the from survivors
one-- no find we If belongs.

world the in what But Pencroft. cried ourselves! for it keep will We
it? in be there can

would tide high the and chest, the approaching already was sea The
was barrels the fastened which ropes the of One it. float evidently
with apparatus floating the unite to cable a as used and unlashed partly
so oars, their with sand the away dug then Neb and Pencroft canoe. the
soon boat the which towing chest, the of moving the facilitate to as
given. was Point Flotsam of name the which to point, the double to began

keep to sufficient scarcely were barrels the and heavy, was chest The
get would it that instant every feared also sailor The water. above it
not were fears his happily But sea. the of bottom the to sink and loose
had time that out--all set they after half a and hour an and realized,
the touched boat miles--the three of distance a going in up taken been
House. Granite below beach

was tide the as and sands; the on up hauled then were chest and Canoe
home, hurrying Neb, dry. and high left soon were they out, going then
that way a such in chest the open to which with tools some back brought
its to proceeded they and possible, as little as injured be might it
excited. greatly was he that hide to try not did Pencroft inventory.

good in being which, barrels, two the detaching by began sailor The
a with forced were locks the Then use. of be course of would condition,
zinc of casing second A back. thrown lid the and hammer, and chisel cold
arranged evidently been had which chest, the of interior the lined
be circumstances any under might enclosed it which articles the that
damp. from sheltered

jam! its suppose Neb, cried Oh!

reporter. the replied not, hope I

voice. low a in sailor the said was-- there only If

him. overheard who Neb, asked What?

Nothing!

the of sides the over back thrown and off torn was zinc of covering The
were character varied very of articles numerous degrees by and chest,
Pencroft object new each At sand. the on about strewn and produced
and up danced Neb and hands, his clapped Herbert hurrahs, fresh uttered
cooking and joy, with wild Herbert made which books were There down.
kisses! with covered Neb which utensils

this for satisfied, extremely be to reason had colonists the short, In
this and books; clothes, instruments, weapons, tools, contained chest
note-book: Spiletts Gideon in stated as them of list exact the is
carpenters 2 axes, woodmens 2 blades, several with knives --Tools:--3
files, 2 chisels, 6 mattock, or twibil 1 adzes, 2 planes, 3 hatchets,
of saws 3 screws, and nails of bags 10 augers, 2 gimlets, 3 hammers, 3
needles. of boxes 2 sizes, different

breach-loader 2 caps, percussion for 2 guns, flint-lock Weapons:--2
each powder, of barrels 2 sabers, 4 cutlasses, boarding 5 carbines,
caps. percussion of boxes 12 pounds; twenty-five containing

of box 1 telescope, 1 opera-glass, double 1 sextant, Instruments:--1
thermometer, Fahrenheit 1 compass, mariners 1 instruments, mathematical
apparatus, photographic a containing box 1 barometer, aneroid 1
etc. chemicals, plates, object-glass,

but wool, resembling material peculiar a of shirts dozen Clothes:--2
material. same the of stockings dozen 3 origin; vegetable a of evidently

metal 10 dishes, iron 3 saucepans, copper 6 pot, iron Utensils:--1
table-knives. 6 stove, portable 1 kettles, 2 plates,

Polynesian different the of dictionary 1 atlas, 1 Bible, Books:--1
of reams 3 volumes; six in science, natural of dictionary 1 idioms,
pages. blank with books 2 paper, white

been had inventory the after reporter, the said allowed, be must It
weapons, Tools, man! practical a was chest this of owner the that made,
might It wanting! is books--nothing utensils, clothes, instruments,
it for prepared had and wrecked, be to expected he that said be really
beforehand.

thoughtfully. Harding Cyrus murmured indeed, wanting, is Nothing

this carried which vessel the Herbert, added certainty, a for And
pirate! Malay a not was owner its and chest

by prisoner taken been had owner the Pencroft, said Unless,
pirates--

probable more is It reporter. the replied admissible, not is That
quarter, this into driven been has vessel European or American an that
prepared least, at necessaries save to wishing passengers, her that and
overboard. it threw and chest this

Herbert. asked captain? opinion, your that Is

It case. the been have may that engineer, the replied boy, my Yes,
they wreck, a of expectation in or moment, the at that possible is
in use greatest the of articles different chest this into collected
coast-- the on again it finding of hopes

incredulously. sailor the exclaimed box! photographic the Even

of use the see quite not do I Harding, replied apparatus, that to As
ammunition abundant more or clothes of supply complete more a and it;
castaways! other any to as well as us to valuable more been have would

or tools, instruments, these on direction or mark any there isnt But
Spilett. Gideon asked them? about something us tell would which books,

examined, carefully was article Each ascertained. be might That
nor weapons the Neither weapons. and instruments books, the especially
the of name the bore custom, usual the to contrary instruments, the
to appear not did and state, perfect a in besides, were, they maker;
all utensils; and tools the marked peculiarity same The used. been have
chance by taken been not had articles the that proved which new, were
of choice the that contrary, the on but, chest, the into thrown and
also was This care. with arranged and considered well been had things
from them preserved had which metal of case second the by indicated
haste. of moment a in soldered been have not could which and damp,

both idioms, Polynesian and science natural of dictionaries the to As
the nor publisher the of name the bore neither they but English; were
publication. of date

a from remarkable quarto, in English, in printed Bible the with same The
used. often been have to appeared which and view, of point typographic

in country every of maps comprising work, magnificent a was atlas The
projection, Mercators upon arranged planispheres several and world, the
neither bore also which French--but in was nomenclature the which of and
publisher. of name nor date

which by articles different these on therefore, nothing, was There
the show to nature a of consequently nothing and traced, be could they
shores. these passed recently have must which vessel the of nationality

the to treasure a was it from, come have might chest the wherever But,
productions the of use making by then, Till Island. Lincoln on settlers
to thanks and, themselves, for everything created had they nature, of
not it did But difficulty. without managed had they intelligence, their
these them sending by them reward to wished had Providence if as appear
Heaven. to unanimously rose thanks Their industry? human of productions

It Pencroft. was it satisfied: quite not was them of one However,
evidently he which something contain not did chest the that appeared
bottom the approached they as proportion in for esteem, great in held
inventory the and, heartiness, in diminished hurrahs his box, the of
fine, very all words:--Thats these mutter to heard was he finished,
box! that in me for nothing is there that see can you but

say,-- to Neb led This

expect? you do more what Pencroft, friend Why,

nothing and seriously, Pencroft replied tobacco, of pound a Half
happiness! my complete to wanting been have would

sailors. the of speech this at laughing help could one No

more now was it that was, chest the of discovery this of result the But
therefore was It thoroughly. island the explore to necessary ever than
by out, set should they day, of break at morning next the that agreed
castaways any If shore. western the reach to as so Mercy the ascending
without were they feared be to was it coast, the on landed had
them to help carry to necessary more the therefore was it and resources,
delay. without

House, Granite to carried were articles different the day the During
day--the This hall. great the in arranged methodically were they where
bed, to going before and, Sunday, a be to October--happened of 29th
the from something them read not would he if engineer the asked Herbert
Gospel.

Harding. Cyrus replied Willingly,

Pencroft when it, open to about was and volume, sacred the took He
random at Open superstitious. am I saying,--Captain, him, stopped
it if see will We upon. falls eye your which, verse first the read and
situation. our to applies

he wish, his to yielding and, idea, sailors the at smiled Harding Cyrus
marker. a by separated were leaves the where place a at exactly opened

a with made which, cross a by attracted were eyes his Immediately
of chapter seventh the of verse eighth the against placed was pencil,
this:-- was which verse, the read He Matthew. St. of Gospel the

findeth. seeketh that he and receiveth; asketh that one every For



3 Chapter

proposed the for ready was all October, of 30th the day, next The
In necessary. so rendered had events recent which expedition, exploring
no Island Lincoln in settlers the that about come so had things fact,
to it carry to able even were but themselves, for help needed longer
others.

as far as Mercy the ascend should they that agreed therefore was It
be thus would distance the of part great A navigable. was river the
their transport could explorers the and fatigue, without traversed
island. the of west the in point advanced an to arms and provisions

take should they which things the of only not think to necessary was It
bring to chance by have might they which those of also but them, with
was as coast, the on wreck a been had there If House. Granite to back
lawfully be would which up, cast things many be would there supposed,
use more of been have would cart the this, of event the In prizes. their
therefore and drag, to clumsy and heavy was it but canoe, light the than
the that regret his express to Pencroft led this use; to difficult more
pair a tobacco, of halfpound his besides contained, not had chest
the to useful very been have would which horses, Jersey New strong of
colony!

store a of consisted up, packed already had Neb which provisions, The
sustain to enough say to is that beer, of gallons several of and meat of
expedition. the for assigned Harding which time the days, three for them
care took Neb and road, the on themselves supply to besides hoped They
stove. portable the forget to not

which axes, woodmens two the were took settlers the tools only The
the also as forests, thick the through path a cut to use could they
pocket-compass. and telescope the instruments,

likely were which guns, flint-lock two the selected they weapons For
first the fowling-pieces, percussion the than them to useful more be to
latter the and replaced, easily be could which flints requiring only
exhaust soon would which of use frequent a caps, fulminating needing
and carbines the of one also took they However, stock. limited their
pounds fifty about was there which of powder, the to As cartridges. some
engineer the but taken, be to had it of supply small a barrel, the in
to them allow would which substance explosive an manufacture to hoped
sheathed well cutlasses five the added were firearms the To it. husband
vast the into venture could settlers the supplied, thus and, leather, in
success. of chance some with forest

were armed, thus Neb, and Herbert, Pencroft, that add to useless is It
them made Harding Cyrus although happiness, their of summit the at
necessary. was it unless shot a fire to not promise

had all shore; the from off put canoe the morning the in six At
Mercy. the of mouth the to proceeded they and Top, including embarked,

hours, several For before. hour an half up come to begun had tide The
for by, profit to well was it which current, a be would there therefore,
was tide The river. the ascend to difficult it make would ebb the later
was it and full, be would moon the days three in for strong, already
floated it where current, the of center the in boat the keep to enough
necessary being its without banks high the between along swiftly
the minutes few a In oars. the of aid the by speed its increase to
the at exactly and Mercy the by formed angle the at arrived explorers
of raft first his made had Pencroft before, months seven where, place
wood.

of shade the under flowed and widened river the angle sudden this After
firs. evergreen great

his and Harding Cyrus magnificent. was banks the of aspect The
produced easily so effects lovely the admire but not could companions
element forest the advanced they As trees. and water with nature by
of specimens magnificent grew river the of bank right the On diminished.
which and builders, to valuable so elm, precious the tribe, ulmaceae the
groups numerous were there Then water. of action the well withstands
fruit the particular, in one others among family, same the to belonging
the remarked Herbert on, Further oil. useful very a produces which of
furnishes water, in bruised when which, shrub twining a lardizabala,
black, beautiful a of trees ebony three or two and cordage; excellent
veins. capricious with crossed

the easy, was landing the where places certain in time, to time From
their Pencroft, and Herbert, Spilett, Gideon when stopped, was canoe
Without shore. on jumped Top, by preceded and hands, their in guns
young the and with, met be might plant useful some game, expecting
spinach, wild of sort a discovering with delighted was naturalist
of specimens numerous and chenopodiaceae, of order the to belonging
be certainly would it which tribe, cabbage the to belonging cruciferae,
horseradish, cresses, were There transplanting. by cultivate to possible
than more scarcely stalks, hairy branching little lastly, and turnips,
grains. brownish produced which high, feet three

sailor. the of Herbert asked is? plant this what know you Do

favorite his seen never had evidently who Pencroft, cried Tobacco!
pipe. his of bowl the in except plant

mustard. is it tobacco, not is this Herbert; replied Pencroft, No,

happen you chance by if but sailor; the returned hanged! be Mustard
that! scorn dont pray boy, my tobacco-plant, a across come to

Spilett. Gideon said day! some it find shall We

what know not do I comes, day that when Pencroft, exclaimed Well!
island! our in wanting be will more

carried were up, rooted carefully been had which plants, different These
thought. in buried remained had Harding Cyrus where canoe, the to

frequently manner this in Pencroft and Herbert, reporter, The
of bank left the on sometimes bank, right the on sometimes disembarked,
Mercy. the

engineer The wooded. more former the but abrupt, less was latter The
the of direction the that pocket-compass his consulting by ascertained
and northeast, and southwest obviously was turn first the from river
be to was it But miles. three about of length a for straight nearly
the that and point, that beyond changed direction this that supposed
Franklin, Mount of spurs the towards north-west, the to continued Mercy
rose. river the which among

hold get to managed Spilett Gideon excursions, these of one During
thin long, with birds were They gallinaceae. living of couples two of
of appearance any without and wings, short necks, lengthened beaks,
it and tinamous, of name the them gave rightly Herbert tail. a
future their of tenants first the be should they that resolved was
poultry-yard.

awoke which report first the and spoken, not had guns the then till But
appearance the by provoked was West Far the of forest the of echoes the
kingfisher. the resembling bird, beautiful a of

off went gun his if as seemed it and Pencroft, cried him! recognize I
itself. by

reporter. the asked recognize? you do What

we which from and excursion, first our on us escaped which bird The
forest. the of part that to name the gave

Herbert. cried jacamar! A

metallic a with shines plumage the which of jacamar, a indeed was It
the to it carried Top and ground, the to it brought shot A luster.
lory The down. brought were lories dozen a half time same the At canoe.
of part green, with dashed plumage the pigeon, a of size the of is
boy young the To white. with bordered crest its and crimson, wings the
Lories it. of enough proud was he and shot, this of honor the belonged
tough, rather is which of flesh the jacamar, the than food better are
the killed not had he that Pencroft persuade to difficult was it but
canoe the when morning the in oclock ten was It birds. eatable of king
mouth. its from miles five nearly Mercy, the of angle second a reached
splendid some of shade the under breakfast for made was halt a Here
breadth, in feet seventy to sixty from measured still river The trees.
observed had engineer The depth. in feet six to five from bed its and
unnavigable, were they but affluents, numerous by increased was it that
Wood, Jacamar including forest, the to As streams. little simply being
eye the as far as extended it West, Far the of forests the as well as
under or forests the of depths the in either place, no In reach. could
revealed. man of presence the was Mercy, the of banks the on trees the
evident was It trace. suspicious one discover not could explorers The
pioneers the that trees, these touched never had axe woodmans the that
another to trunk one from hanging creepers the severed never had knife
had castaways If grass. long and brushwood tangled of midst the in
it and shore, the quitted yet have not could they island, the on landed
should shipwreck supposed the of survivors the that woods the in not was
sought. be

western the reach to impatience some manifested therefore engineer The
according distant miles five least at was which Island, Lincoln of coast
estimation. his to

towards not flow to appeared Mercy the as and continued, was voyage The
they that decided was it Franklin, Mount towards rather but shore, the
keel its under water enough was there as long as boat the use should
would they for gained, time and spared fatigue both was It it. float to
axes. their with wood thick the through path a cut to obliged been have
going was tide the either them, failed completely flow the soon But
this at felt be longer no could it or hour, the about was it and down,
of use make to therefore had They Mercy. the of mouth the from distance
scull. the took Pencroft and one, took each Neb and Herbert oars. the
and apart further grew trees the dense, less became soon forest The
more the other each from were they further the But isolated. quite often
air pure free, the by did, they as profiting, appeared, they magnificent
them. around circulated which

Certainly latitude! this of flora the of specimens splendid What
without name to botanist a for enough been have would presence their
Island. Lincoln traversed which parallel the hesitation

Herbert. cried Eucalypti!

the of giants the trees, splendid those fact, in were, They
Zealand New and Australian the of congeners the zone, extratropical
Island. Lincoln as latitude same the under situated both eucalyptus,
base the at trunks Their feet. hundred two of height a to rose Some
a by covered was bark their and circumference, in feet twenty measured
more is Nothing gum. sweet-smelling red, a containing farrows of network
of order the of specimens enormous those than singular more or wonderful
horizontally, not and vertically placed leaves their with myrtaceae, the
that being effect the upwards, looks surface a not and edge an that so
trees. the among freely more penetrate rays suns the

and grass, with carpeted was eucalypti the of foot the at ground The
the in glittered which birds, little of flights escaped bushes the from
rubies. winged like sunlight

for good they are but Neb; cried trees! like something are These
anything?

well as giants vegetable are there course Of Pencroft. replied Pooh!
at themselves show to except good, no are they and giants, human as
fairs!

and Spilett, Gideon replied Pencroft, mistaken, are you that think I
advantageously very be to begun has eucalyptus the of wood the that
cabinet-making. in employed

family a to belongs eucalyptus the that Herbert, said add, may I And
fruit whose from guava-tree, the members; useful many comprises which
the spice; the produces which clove-tree, the made; is jelly guava
Cauliflora, Eugeacia the pomegranates; bears which pomegranate-tree,
myrtle, Ugui the wine; tolerable a making in used is which of fruit the
myrtle, Caryophyllus the liquor; alcoholic excellent an contains which
from Pimenta, Eugenia the cinnamon; esteemed an forms bark the which of
and buds whose from myrtle, common the pepper; Jamaica comes whence
yields which manifera, Eucalyptus the made; sometimes is spice berries
is which of sap the Eucalyptus, Guinea the manna; of sort sweet a
known trees those all short, in fermentation; by beer into transformed
belong Australia, in trees iron-bark or gum-trees of name the under
and genera forty-six contains which myrtaceae, the of family this to
species! hundred thirteen

botanical little his delivered he and on, run to allowed was lad The
and smiling, listened Harding Cyrus animation. great with lecture
pride. of feeling indescribable an with Pencroft

all that swear could I but Pencroft, replied Herbert, good, Very
them of none are about us told just have you specimens useful those
these! like giants

Pencroft. true, is That

these that namely, sailor, the returned said, I what supports That
nothing! for good are giants

gigantic these engineer; the said Pencroft, wrong, are you There
something. for good are us, shelter which eucalypti,

that? is what And

what know you Do healthy. inhabit they which countries the render To
Zealand? New and Australia in called are they

captain. No,

trees. fever called are They

fevers? give they Because

them! prevent they because No,

reporter. the said that, note must I Good.

presence the that proved appears it for Spilett; dear my then, it Note
antidote natural This miasmas. neutralize to enough is eucalyptus the of
the and Europe of middle the in countries certain in tried been has
the and unhealthy, absolutely was soil the where Africa of north
No ameliorated. gradually been has inhabitants the of condition sanitary
forests with covered now regions the in prevail fevers intermittent more
happy a is it and doubt, beyond now is fact This myrtaceae. the of
Island. Lincoln in settlers us for circumstance

tell I Pencroft. cried island! blessed a What island! an what Ah!
is-- it nothing--unless wants it you,

engineer; the replied found, be will that Pencroft, come, will That
river the as far as on push and voyage our continue must we now but
boat! our carry will

the in miles two another for continued therefore was exploration The
woods the in predominated which eucalypti, with covered country of midst
as extended occupied they which space The island. the of portion this of
along wound which Mercy, the of side each on reach could eye the as far
weeds, long by obstructed often was bed The banks. green high between
difficult. very navigation the rendered which rocks, pointed by even and
push to obliged was Pencroft and prevented, was oars the of action The
shallower becoming was water the that also found They pole. a with
already was sun The stop. soon must canoe the that and shallower, and
the on shadows long threw trees the and horizon, the towards sinking
the reach to hope not could he that seeing Harding, Cyrus ground.
the at camp to resolved journey, one in island the of coast western
He water. of want by prevented was navigation further any where place
and coast, the from miles six or five still were they that calculated
the in night the during attempt to them for great too was distance this
woods. unknown of midst

became gradually which forest, the through on pushed was boat The
the if for inhabitants; more have to also appeared and again, thicker
of bands saw he thought he him, deceive not did sailor the of eyes
these of three or two even Sometimes trees. the among springing monkeys
the at gazed and canoe the from distance little a at stopped animals
first the for men seeing if, as terror, any manifesting without settlers
easy been have would It them. fear to learned yet not had they time,
was Pencroft and gunshot, a with quadramani these of one down bring to
massacre. a useless so opposed Harding but fire, to tempted greatly
very be to appearing rather, apes or monkeys, the for prudent, was This
unnecessary an provoke to useless was it active, extremely and powerful
the of power the of ignorant might, creatures the and aggression,
sailor the that true is It them. attacked have firearms, explorers
those for view, of point alimentary purely a from monkeys the considered
they since but game; excellent very make herbivorous are which animals
their waste to pity a was it provisions, of supply abundant an had
ammunition.

exceedingly became Mercy the of navigation the oclock, four Towards
rocks. and plants aquatic by obstructed was course its for difficult,
the approaching were they already and higher, and higher rose banks The
was it since off, far be not could source The Franklin. Mount of spurs
mountain. the of slopes southern the from water the by fed

to obliged be shall we sailor, the said hour, an of quarter a In
captain. stop,

for encampment our make will we and Pencroft, stop, will we well, Very
night. the

Herbert. asked House? Granite from we are distance what At

calculation, into taking engineer, the replied miles, seven About
the to us carried has which river, the of detours the however,
northwest.

reporter. the asked on? go we Shall

of break at To-morrow, Harding. Cyrus replied can, we as long as Yes,
the cross shall we hope I hours two in and canoe, the leave will we day,
the have shall we then and coast, the from us separates which distance
shore. the explore to which in day whole

Pencroft. replied ahead! Go

was which river, the of bottom stony the on grated boat the soon But
bower a like met trees The breadth. in feet twenty than more not now
a of noise the heard also They half-darkness. a caused and overhead,
a was there river the up feet hundred few a that showed which waterfall,
barrier. natural

through appeared cascade a river, the of turn sudden a after Presently,
it minutes few a in and bottom, the touched again canoe The trees. the
bank. right the near trunk a to moored was

through gleamed sun the of rays last The oclock. five nearly was It
spray the making waterfall, little the on glanced and foliage thick the
was Mercy the that, Beyond rainbow. the of colors the all with sparkle
The source. hidden some from fed was it where bushwood, the in lost
river regular a to it increased it into flowed which streams different
brook. limpid shallow, a simply was it here but down, further

colonists The charming. was place the as here, camp to agreed was It
among trees, of clump a under lighted soon was fire a and disembarked,
was it if could, companions his and Harding Cyrus which of branches the
night. the for refuge take necessary,

there then and hungry, very were they for devoured, quickly was Supper
suspicious a rather of roarings as But, of. think to sleeping only was
for up made was fire good a evening, the during heard been had nature
Neb flames. crackling its with sleepers the protect to as so night, the
thought They fuel. spare not did and turns, by watched also Pencroft and
camp the round prowling animals wild some of forms dark the saw they
next the and incident, without passed night the but bushes, the among
on were all morning, the in oclock five at October, of 31st the day,
start. a for ready foot,



4 Chapter

hasty a after settlers, the when morning the in clock o six was It
of coast western the way, shortest the by reach to out set breakfast,
Harding Cyrus this? do to take it would long how And island. the
the of nature the on depended that course of but hours, two said had
have would they that probable was it As with. meet might they obstacles
axe marched they creepers, and shrubs, grass, the through path a cut to
cries the from warning taking wisely ready, also guns with and hand, in
night. the in heard beasts wild the of

bearing the by determined be could encampment the of position exact The
distance a at north the in arose volcano the as and Franklin, Mount of
the towards straight go to only had they miles, three than less of
first having out, set They coast. western the reach to southwest
sufficient carried Neb and Pencroft canoe. the secured carefully
thus not would It days. two least at for band little the for provision
refrain to companions his advised engineer The hunt. to necessary be
near one any to betrayed be not might presence their that firing, from
the in brushwood the among given were blows hatchet first The shore. the
compass his and cascade; the above little a mastic-trees, some of midst
way. the led Harding Cyrus hand, his in

had which trees of part most the for composed was here forest The
There Heights. Prospect on and lake the near with met been already
hibiscus, eucalypti, trees, gum casuarinas, firs, Douglas deodars, were
number their for size, moderate a of generally trees, other and cedars,
growth. their prevented

which slopes the descended had settlers the departure, their Since
the but soil, dry a to on island, the of system mountain the constituted
some by either watered be to it indicated which of vegetation luxuriant
not did Harding Cyrus However, stream. some by or marsh subterranean
any crater, the to excursion his of time the at seen, having remember
Mercy. the and Creek Red the but watercourses other

of troops numerous saw they excursion, their of part first the During
whose men, of sight the at astonishment great exhibited who monkeys
whether asked jokingly Spilett Gideon them. to new so was appearance
his and him consider not did quadrupeds merry and active these
brothers. degenerate as companions

by caught bushes, by step each at hindered pedestrians, certainly, And
supple those beside shine not did trees, of trunks by barred creepers,
nothing by hindered were branch, to branch from bounding who, animals,
not did they happily but numerous, were monkeys The course. their on
disposition. hostile any manifest

two also seen, were rodents other and kangaroos, agoutis, pigs, Several
shot. a have to longed Pencroft which at koalas, three or

or one have shall we now; just play and jump may you he, said But,
back! way our on you to say to words two

unknown an by barred be to found suddenly was way the nine half-past At
dashed current rapid whose broad, feet forty to thirty from stream,
creek This course. its interrupted which rocks numerous the over foaming
unnavigable. absolutely was it but clear, and deep was

Neb. cried off! cut are We

swim easily can we and stream, a only is it Herbert, replied No,
over.

evidently creek This Harding. returned that? of use the be would What
and bank, the follow and side this on remain us Let sea. the to runs
the to quickly very us lead not does it if astonished much be shall I
Forward! coast.

Do friends? my creek, this of name The reporter. the said minute, One
incomplete. geography our leave us let not

Pencroft. said right! All

lad. the addressing engineer, the said boy, my it, Name

mouth? its to it explored have we until wait to better be not it Will
Herbert. answered

can we as fast as it follow us Let Harding. Cyrus replied well, Very
stopping. without

Pencroft. said minute! another Still

reporter. the asked matter? the Whats

the said suppose, I allowed, is fishing forbidden, is hunting Though
sailor.

engineer. the replied lose, to time no have We

to minutes five for ask only I Pencroft, replied minutes! five Oh!
breakfast! our of interest the in use

water, the into arm his plunged bank, the on down lying Pencroft, And
stones. the among from crayfish fine of dozen several up pulled soon and

aid. sailors the to going Neb, cried good! be will These

tobacco! except island, this in everything is there said, I As
sigh. a with Pencroft muttered

in swarming were crayfish the for minutes, five take not did fishing The
a of were shells whose crustaceae, the with filled was bag A creek. the
on. pushed then settlers The blue. cobalt

than river the of bank the along easily and rapidly more advanced They
of animals of traces the upon came they time to time From forest. the in
none but stream, the at thirst their quench to come had who size large a
forest the of part this in not evidently was it and seen, actually were
a Pencroft cost had which bullet the received had peccary the that
grinder.

to led was Harding current, rapid the considering meanwhile, the In
western the from farther much were companions his and he that suppose
rising the hour, this at fact, In supposed. first at had they than coast
had mouth its if creek, the of current the back turned have would tide
and produced, not was effect this Now, distant. miles few a been only
astonished much was engineer The course. natural its pursued water the
that himself assure to compass, his consulted frequently and this, at
West. Far the into again them leading not was river the of turn some

less became waters its and widened gradually creek the However,
the on as together close as were bank right the on trees The tumultuous.
them; beyond anything distinguish to impossible was it and bank, left
not did Top for uninhabited, evidently were wood of masses these but
the signal to failed have not would animal intelligent the and bark,
neighborhood. the in stranger any of presence

who Herbert, Harding, Cyrus of surprise great the to ten, half-past At
exclaimed,-- and stopped suddenly front, in little a was

sea! The

lay island the of shore western whole the more, minutes few a In
settlers. the of eyes the before extended

which upon coast, eastern the and this between contrast a what But
a even not rocks, no cliff, granite No them. thrown first had chance
bending trees tall the and shore, the reached forest The beach. sandy
is as shore a such not was It waves. the by beaten were water the over
sand, of carpet vast a extending by either nature, by formed usually
the of consisting border beautiful a but rock, of masses grouping by or
the of level the above little a raised was bank The trees. splendid most
fine the base, granite a by supported soil, luxuriant this on and sea,
the of interior the in as planted firmly as be to seemed trees forest
island.

harbor, little unimportant an of shore the on then were colonists The
It fishing-boats. three or two even contained have scarcely would which
that was thing curious the which of creek, new the to neck a as served
a from fell slope, gentle a by sea the joining of instead waters, its
was tide rising the why explained which feet, forty than more of height
at even Pacific, the of tides the fact, In stream. the up felt not
and, river, the of level the reach never could elevation, maximum their
worn have would water the before pass would years of millions doubtless,
mouth. practicable a hollowed and granite the away

this to given be should River Falls of name the that settled was It
for prolonged was border forest the north, the towards Beyond, stream.
beyond and scarcer, became trees the then miles; two nearly of space a
line, straight nearly a described heights picturesque the again that
shore the of part the all contrary, the On south. and north ran which
magnificent wood, of mass a was End Reptile and River Falls between
bathed sea-swell long the that so bent, others straight, some trees,
Serpentine the all is, that coast, this was it Now, roots. their
offered shore the of part this for explored, be to was that Peninsula,
have must side barren and wild other the which castaways, to refuge a
refused.

which on hillock a of height a from and clear, and fine was weather The
There obtained. was view wide a breakfast, arranged had Pencroft and Neb
shore the along seen be could nothing sight; in sail a not however, was,
for nothing take would engineer the But reach. could eye the as far as
the of extremity very the to coast the explored had he until granted
Peninsula. Serpentine

gave captain the eleven half-past at and despatched, soon was Breakfast
a of summit the over proceeding of Instead departure. for signal the
under remain to obliged were settlers the beach, sandy a along or cliff
shore. the on continue might they that so trees the of cover

about was End Reptile from River Falls separated which distance The
this, do to hours four settlers the taken have would It miles. twelve
they was it as but themselves; hurrying without and ground clear a on
cut to bushes round, go to trees with what for time, the double needed
these step, every at impeded were they away, chop to creepers and down,
journey. their lengthening greatly obstacles

place taken had shipwreck a that show to nothing however, was, There
of remains any observed, Spilett Gideon as that, true is It recently.
granted for it take not must they and sea, to out drifted have might it
been not had ship a it, of traces no find could they because that
coast. the on castaway

the of incident the besides, and just, was argument reporters The
within Island Lincoln in fired been have must shot a that proved bullet
months. three

the between miles two still were there and oclock, five already was It
evident was It Peninsula. Serpentine the of extremity the and settlers
would companions his and Harding End, Reptile reached having after that
source the near encampment their to dark before return to time have not
the on night the pass to necessary be therefore would It Mercy. the of
for lucky, was which provisions, of lack no had they But promontory.
contrary, the on birds, though shore, the on animals no were there
parrots, lories, grouse, tragopans, couroucous, abound--jacamars,
not was There others. hundred a and pigeons, pheasants, cockatoos,
flapping of full not was which nest a not and nest, a without tree a
wings.

Here End. Reptile at arrived explorers weary the oclock seven Towards
appearance customary the resumed shore the and ended, forest seaside the
something that possible was It sands. and reefs, rocks, with coast, a of
exploration further the and on, came darkness but here, found be might
day. next the to off put be to had

their for place suitable a find to on hastened Herbert and Pencroft
found boy the West, Far the of forest the of trees last the Among camp.
bamboos. of clumps thick several

discovery. valuable a is this he; said Good,

Pencroft. returned Valuable?

the of bark the that Pencroft, say, may I Herbert. replied Certainly,
this that baskets; making for used is laths, flexible into cut bamboo,
paper; Chinese of manufacture the for used is paste, a into mashed bark,
pipes and canes size, their to according furnish, stalks the that
excellent make bamboos large that water; conducting for used are and
attacked never being and strong, and light being building, for material
joint, the at two in bamboo the sawing by that add will I insects. by
forms which film transverse the of part the bottom the for keeping
the among use in much are which obtained, are cups useful joint, the
But-- that. for care dont you No! Chinese.

what? But

these India in that it, of ignorant are you if you, tell can I But
asparagus. like eaten are bamboos

good? they are And sailor. the exclaimed high! feet thirty Asparagus

feet thirty of stems the not is it Only Herbert. replied Excellent,
shoots. young the but eaten, are which high

Pencroft. replied perfect! boy, my Perfect,

in preserved stalks, young the of pith the that add also will I
pickle. good a makes vinegar,

Herbert! better, and Better

made be can which liquor sweet a exude bamboos the that lastly, And
drink. agreeable very a into

sailor. the asked all? that Is

all! is That

smoking? for do to happen dont they And

Pencroft. poor my No,

pass to which in place a for long look to not had sailor the and Herbert
the by beaten violently been have must which rocks, The night. the
many presented southwest, the of winds the of influence the under sea
just But air. night the against found be could shelter which in cavities
arrested roaring loud a caves these of one enter to about were they as
them.

and shot, small with loaded only are guns Our Pencroft. cried Back!
for than it for more no care would that as loud as roar can which beasts
dragged arm, the by Herbert seizing sailor, the And salt! of grains
the at itself showed animal magnificent a as just rock, a behind him
cavern. the of entrance

that congeners, Asiatic its to equal least at size a of jaguar a was It
the to head its of extremity the from feet five measured it say, to is
by relieved was hair its of color yellow The tail. its of beginning
the with contrasted which black, of spots oblong regular and streaks
of rival ferocious the as it recognized Herbert chest. its of white
largest the of rival the is which puma, the as formidable as tiger, the
wolf!

hair his eyes, blazing with him around gazed and advanced jaguar The
men. scented had he time first the not was this if as bristling

thinking Herbert, and rock, a round appeared reporter the moment this At
when him, towards rush to about was jaguar, the seen not had he that
his not was This was. he where remain to him to signed Spilett Gideon
remained he animal the of feet ten within to advancing and tiger, first
jaguar The muscle. a moving without shoulder, his to gun his motionless,
in it struck shot a moment that at but spring, a for itself collected
dead. fell it and eyes, the

ran also Harding and Neb jaguar. the towards rushed Pencroft and Herbert
it as animal the contemplating instants some for remained they and up,
be would skin magnificent its that thinking ground, the on stretched lay
House. Granite at hall the to ornament great a

of fit a in Herbert, cried you! envy and admire I how Spilett, Mr. Oh,
enthusiasm. natural very

same. the done have could you reporter, the replied boy, my Well,

coolness!-- such with I!

you and hare, a only is jaguar the that Herbert, yourself, to Imagine
possible. as quietly as fire would

a than dangerous more not is it that Pencroft, rejoined is, That
hare!

I abode, its left has jaguar the since Spilett, Gideon said now, And
the for it of possession take not should we why friends, my see, not do
night.

Pencroft. said come, may others But

said cavern, the of entrance the at fire a light to enough be will It
threshold. the cross to dare will beasts wild no and reporter, the

him after dragging sailor, the replied then! house, jaguars the Into
animal. the of body the

abundant an collected companions his jaguar, the skinned Neb While
cave. the at up heaped they which forest, the from wood dry of supply

he which quantity, a cut bamboos, of clump the seeing Harding, Cyrus
fuel. other the with mingled

with strewn was floor the which of grotto, the entered they done, This
they attack, sudden a of case in loaded, carefully were guns the bones,
wood of heap the rest, to down lay they before just then and supper, had
explosion, regular a Immediately, to. fire set was entrance the at piled
caused was noise The silence! the broke reports, of series a rather or
like exploded them, reached flames the as which, bamboos, the by
wild of boldest the even terrify to enough was noise The fireworks.
beasts.

loud causing of way this invented had who engineer the not was It
it employed have Tartars the Polo, Marco to according for, explosions,
formidable the encampments their from away drive to centuries many for
Asia. Central of beasts wild



5 Chapter

cave the in marmots innocent like slept companions his and Harding Cyrus
disposal. their at left politely so had jaguar the which

and promontory, the of extremity the at shore the on were all sunrise At
of two-thirds which of horizon, the towards directed was gaze their
could engineer the time last the For visible. were circumference the
and sea, the on was ship a of wreck the nor sail a not that ascertain
discovered. be could suspicious nothing telescope the with even

line straight the in least, at shore, the on either nothing was There
for promontory, the of side south the formed which miles three of
the from even and coast, the of rest the had ground rising that, beyond
seen. be not could Cape Claw Peninsula Serpentine the of extremity

Now explored. be to remained still island the of coast southern The
it? to day this devote and immediately, it undertake they should

was boat the when fact, In plan. first their in included not was This
after that agreed been had it Mercy, the of sources the at abandoned
to return and it, to back go should they coast, west the surveyed having
coast western the that thought then Harding Mercy. the by House Granite
vessel a to or distress, in ship a to either refuge, offered have would
no presented coast this that saw he as now, but course; regular her in
been not had they what south the on seek to wished he anchorage, good
west. the on find to able

question the that exploration, the continue to proposed Spilett Gideon
what at asked he and settled, completely be might wreck supposed the of
peninsula. the of extremity the from be might Cape Claw distance

into take we if engineer, the replied miles, thirty About
coast. the of curvings the consideration


march. days long a be would That Spilett. returned miles! Thirty
the by House Granite to return should we that think I Nevertheless,
coast. south

be must there House Granite to Cape Claw from Herbert, observed But,
miles. ten another least at

hesitate not do and engineer, the replied all, in miles forty it Make
shall we then and shore, unknown the survey should we least At it. do to
again. exploration the begin to have not

boat? the But Pencroft. said good, Very

the of sources the at day one for itself by remained has boat The
two there stay well as just may it Spilett; Gideon replied Mercy,
infested is island the that think to reason no had have we yet, As days!
thieves! by

am I turtle, the of history the remember I when sailor, the said Yet,
that. of confident from far

the that know you Dont reporter. the replied turtle! the turtle! The
over? it turned sea

engineer. the murmured knows? Who

Neb. said But,--

and speak to mouth his opened he for say, to something evidently had Neb
nothing. said yet

engineer. the asked Neb? say, to want you do What

having after Neb, replied Cape, Claw to shore the by return we If
stopped-- be shall we Cape, the doubled

neither have shall we and Herbert, replied course, of Mercy! the By
cross. to which by boat nor bridge

shall we trunks floating few a with Pencroft, added captain, But,
river. the crossing in difficulty no have

if bridge a construct to useful be will it Spilett, said mind, Never
West! Far the to access easy an have to wish we

engineer best the captain the not is Well, Pencroft. cried bridge! A
to As one. want we when bridge a us make will He profession? his in
that and Mercy, the of side other the to evening this you transporting
We that. of care take will I clothes, your of thread one wetting without
game. of plenty get can we besides and day, another for provisions have
Forward!

received sailor, the by seconded strongly so proposal, reporters The
rest, at set doubts their have to wished each for approbation, general
there But ended. be would exploration the Cape Claw by returning by and
they and march, long a was miles forty for lose, to hour an not was
night. before House Granite reach to hope not could

precaution a As out. set band little the morning the in oclock six At
received van, the led who Top, and ball, with loaded were guns the
forest. the of edge the about beat to orders

the of tail the formed which promontory the of extremity the From
which miles, five of distance a for rounded was coast the peninsula
investigations minute most the even without over, passed rapidly was
no landings; recent or old any of trace least the light to bringing
a even nor fire, a of cinders no encampment, an of mark no debris,
footprint!

their were now settlers the which on peninsula the of point the From
coast the off miles Twenty-five southwest. the along extend could gaze
morning the through dimly loomed which Cape, Claw the in terminated
if as appeared mirage, the of phenomenon the by which, and mists,
water. and land between suspended

the of side other the and colonists the by occupied place the Between
land, low of tract a of first, composed, was shore the bay, immense
more became shore the then trees; by background the in bordered
in ended finally and sea, the into points sharp projecting irregular,
Claw formed disorder, picturesque in accumulated which, rocks black the
Cape.

settlers the which island, the of part this of development the was Such
instant. an for stopping while glance, a at in took

lost. be certainly would she Pencroft, said here, in ran vessel a If
quarters! Bad everywhere! reefs and Sandbanks

the observed ship, the of left be would something least at But
reporter.

sands, the on nothing but rocks, the on wood of pieces be might There
sailor. the replied

Why?

they for rocks, the than dangerous more still are sands the Because
of hull the days few a In them. on thrown is that everything up swallow
there! in entirely disappear would tons hundred several of ship a

on wrecked been has ship a if engineer, the asked Pencroft, So,
her of trace no now is there that astonishing not it is banks, these
remaining?

be would it However, tempest. and time of aid the with captain, No,
should spars or masts the of some that case, this in even surprising,
waves. the of reach of out beach, the on thrown been have not

Harding. Cyrus returned then, search, our with on go us Let

Washington of side other the at arrived colonists the oclock one At
miles. twenty of distance a gone now having they Bay,

breakfast. for halted then They

and rocks of lines with covered coast, irregular the began Here
in rocks the over breaking seen be could sea-swell long The sandbanks.
beach the Cape Claw to point this From fringe. foamy a forming bay, the
reefs. the and forest the of edge the between narrow very was

which rocks numerous the of account on difficult, more now was Walking
in increased gradually also cliff granite The beach. the encumbered
be could it crowned which trees the of tops green the only and height,
seen.

not and journey, their resumed settlers the rest, hours an half After
rushed even Neb and Pencroft unexamined. left was rocks the among spot a
they But attention. their attracted object any whenever surf the into
deceived having rocks the of formations curious some nothing, found
there, abounded shellfish eatable that however, ascertained, They them.
easy some until them to advantage great any of be not could these but
the of banks two the between established been had communication of means
perfected. been had transport of means the until and Mercy,

be could wreck supposed the on light any threw which therefore Nothing
hull the as such importance, any of object an yet shore, this on found
spars and masts her of any or directly, seen been have would ship, a of
was which been, had chest the as just shore, on washed been have would
nothing. was there But here. from miles twenty found

snug a at arrived companions his and Harding oclock three Towards
sea, the from invisible harbor, natural a quite formed It creek. little
channel. narrow a by entered was and

the up torn had convulsion violent some creek this of back the At
upper an to access gave slope, gentle a by cutting, a and border, rocky
and Cape, Claw from miles ten least at situated be might which plateau,
Gideon Heights. Prospect from line straight a in miles four consequently
here. halt a make should they that companions his to proposed Spilett
appetites; their sharpened had walk their for readily, agreed They
to refused one no dinner-hour, usual their not was it although and
sustain would luncheon This venison. of piece a with himself strengthen
House. Granite at take to intended they which supper, their until them
sea-pines, fine of clump a under seated settlers, the minutes few a In
bag. his from produced Neb which provisions the devouring were

the of level the above feet sixty to fifty from raised was spot This
Union in ended it cape the beyond but extensive, very was view The sea.
not could and visible, was Heights Prospect nor islet the Neither Bay.
closed trees of curtain the and ground rising the for thence, from be
horizon. northern the

which sea of extent wide the notwithstanding that add to useless is It
horizon the swept engineer the though and survey, could explorers the
found. be could vessel no glass, his with

the of edge the from care same the with examined course of was shore The
of aid the with even discovered be could nothing and cliff, the to water
instrument. the

to minds our up make must we seems it Spilett, Gideon said Well,
us with dispute to come will one no that thinking with ourselves console
Island! Lincoln of possession the

suppose! I imaginary, not was That Herbert. cried bullet, the But

tooth. absent his of thinking Pencroft, exclaimed no! it, Hang

reporter. the asked drawn? be may conclusion what Then

vessel, a ago, more or months three that engineer, the replied This,
here. came not, or voluntarily either

leaving without up swallowed was she that Cyrus, admit, you then What!
reporter. the cried trace? any

human a that certain is it if that see you but Spilett; dear my No,
now has he that certain less no appears it island, the on foot set being
it. left

vessel the Herbert, said captain, right, you understand I if Then,
again? left has

Evidently.

Neb. said country? our to back get to opportunity an lost have we And

so. fear I

be cant it on; go us let lost, is opportunity the since well, Very
House. Granite for home-sickness felt who Pencroft, said helped,

dog the and barking; loudly heard was Top rising, were they as just But
mud. with soiled rag a mouth his in holding wood, the from issued

cloth! strong of piece a was It it. seized Neb

his invite to seemed coming, and going his by and barked, still Top
forest. the into him follow to master

Pencroft. exclaimed bullet! the explain to something theres Now

Herbert. replied castaway! A

Neb. said perhaps! Wounded,

reporter. the added dead! Or

forest. the of border the on pines tall the among dog, the after ran All
an of case in firearms, their ready made companions his and Harding
emergency.

disappointment, great their to but wood, the into way some advanced They
way. that passed having being human any of signs no saw yet as they
away them cut to even had they and uninjured, were creepers and Shrubs
forest. the of recesses deepest the in done had they as axe, the with
there, passed ever had creature human any that fancy to difficult was It
at searches who dog a like not forward, and backward went Top yet but
an up following is who mind, a with endowed being dog a like but random,
idea.

with surrounded glade a in stopped Top minutes eight or seven about In
neither nothing, saw but them, around gazed settlers The trees. tall
trees. the among nor bushes the under

Harding. Cyrus said Top? matter, the is What

at All pine. gigantic a of foot the at about bounding louder, barked Top
capital! splendid! shouted,--Ho, Pencroft once

Spilett. asked it? is What

land! on or sea at wreck a for looking been have We

Well?

air! the in one found weve here and Well;

the of top the in caught rag, white great a to pointed sailor the And
them. to brought had dog the which of scrap fallen a pine,

Spilett. Gideon cried wreck! a not is that But

Pencroft. returned pardon! your beg I

it--? is Why?

been has which balloon, our of boat, airy our of remains that all is It
tree! that of top the at there, aloft up caught

a in feelings his to vent gave he and mistaken, not was Pencroft
adding,-- hurrah, tremendous

for linen with us furnish will what is There cloth! good is There
Mr. ha, Ha, shirts! and handkerchiefs us make will what is There years.
trees? the on grow shirts where island an to say you do what Spilett,

Island Lincoln in settlers the for circumstance lucky a certainly was It
had air, the into bound last its made having after balloon, the that
it finding of opportunity the them given thus and island the on fallen
whether or form, present its under case the kept they whether again,
usefully they whether or it, by escape another attempt to wished they
quality. fine of was which cotton, of yards hundred several the employed
all. by shared therefore was joy Pencrofts

from balloon the of remains the down bring to necessary was it But
Neb, task. slight no was this and security, in it place to tree, the
all used tree, the of summit the to climbing sailor, the and Herbert,
balloon. reduced now the disengage to skill their

its with case, the only not then and hours, two lasted operation The
that net, the but ground, the on lay brasswork, its springs, its valve,
the and cordage, and ropes of quantity considerable a say to is
good in was fracture, the for except case, The anchor. the and circle
torn. being portion lower the only condition,

sky. the from fallen had which fortune a was It

leave to decide ever we if sailor, the said captain, same, the All
go wont airboats These it? will balloon, a in be wont it island, the
way! that in experience some had have we and go, to them want we where
can we then and tons, twenty some of craft a build will we here, Look
the to As cloth. that of out jib a and foresail, a main-sail, a make
us. dress to help will that it, of rest

see. shall we Harding; Cyrus replied Pencroft, see, shall We

Neb. said place, safe a in it put must we meantime, the In

cloth, of load this carrying of think not could certainly They
very was it of weight the for House, Granite to cordage, and ropes,
to which in vehicle suitable a for waiting while and considerable,
left be not should treasure this that importance of was it it, convey
uniting settlers, The storm. first the of mercies the to exposed longer
they where shore, the as far as it drag to managed efforts, their
not could position its to owing which cavity, rocky large a discovered
rain. or wind the by either visited be

we as but Pencroft; said one, have we now and locker, a needed We
mean dont I opening. the hide to prudent be will it up, it lock cannot
paws! four with those from but thieves, two-legged from

creek the given having after and away, stowed was all oclock, six At
their pursued settlers the Balloon, Port of name suitable very the
different the of talked engineer the and Pencroft Cape. Claw along way
briefest the with execution into put to agreed was it which projects
the over bridge a throw to all of first necessary was It delay. possible
the of south the with communication easy an establish to as so Mercy,
the for balloon, the back bring to taken be must cart the then island;
and boat, decked a build would they then it, carry not could alone canoe
undertake to able be would they and cutter, a as it rig would Pencroft
etc. island, the round circumnavigation of voyages

the when dark already was it and on, came night meanwhile the In
chest. precious the found had they where Point, Flotsam reached settlers

four another was House Granite and Point Flotsam between distance The
the to shore the followed having after when, midnight was it and miles,
by formed angle first the at arrived settlers the Mercy, the of mouth
Mercy. the

cross, to awkward was which breadth, in feet eighty was river the There
he difficulty, this conquer to himself upon taken had Pencroft as but
pretty be to reason had certainly settlers The it. do to compelled was
the down getting of task the and long, been had journey The tired.
anxious were They legs. or arms their either rested not had balloon
been had bridge the if and sleep, and eat to House Granite reach to
home. at been have would they hour an of quarter a in constructed,

by promise his keep to prepared Pencroft dark. very was night The
Mercy. the of passage the make to which on raft, of sort a constructing
began and water, the near trees two chose axes, with armed Neb, and He
base. the at them attack to

their till waited bank, the on seated Spilett, and Harding Cyrus
though about, roamed Herbert while help, their for ready were companions
by strolled had who lad, the once, at All distance. any to going without
exclaimed,-- Mercy, the up pointing and, back, running came river, the

there? floating is What

through moving object indistinct an seeing and working, stopped Pencroft
gloom,-- the

he. cried canoe! A

down floating boat a surprise, extreme their to saw and approached, All
current. the

would it perhaps that thinking without sailor, the shouted ahoy! Boat
silence. keep to best be

twelve than more not was it and onward, drifted still boat The reply. No
exclaimed,-- sailor the when off, feet

down floated and moorings, her broken has she boat! own our is it But
opportunely. very arrived has she say must I current. the

engineer. the murmured boat? Our

had rope the which of canoe, the indeed was It right. was Pencroft
the of sources the from alone come had which and broken, undoubtedly
should current rapid the before it seize to important very was It Mercy.
Pencroft and Neb but river, the of mouth the of out away it swept have
pole. long a of means by this managed cleverly

found, and first, in leaped engineer The shore. the touched canoe The
rubbing by through worn really been had it that rope, the examining on
rocks. the against

strange a is this voice, low a in him, to reporter the said Well,
thing.

Harding. Cyrus returned indeed! Strange

and Neb, reporter, the Herbert, fortunate. very was it not, or Strange
having rope the about doubt no was There turn. in embarked Pencroft,
the that was, affair the of part astonishing the but through, worn been
to there were settlers the when moment the at just arrive should boat
would it later or earlier hour an of quarter a for way, its on it seize
sea. the in lost been have

would incident this genii, of time the in living been had they If
some by haunted was island the that think to right the them given have
castaways! the of service the in power his used who being, supernatural

the of mouth the to settlers the brought oar the of strokes few A
all and Chimneys, the near beach the on up hauled was canoe The Mercy.
House. Granite of ladder the towards proceeded

the for looking was who Neb, and angrily, barked Top moment, that at But
cry. a uttered steps, first

ladder! a longer no was There



6 Chapter

companions His word. a saying without still, stood Harding Cyrus
have should wind the case in wall, the on darkness the in searched
fallen have might it that thinking ground, the on and ladder, the moved
if ascertaining to As disappeared. quite had ladder the But down....
was that up, way half landing-place, the on it blown had squall a
dark. the in impossible

come To one! stupid very a is it Pencroft, cried joke, a is it If
for nothing by--thats room your to up go to staircase no find and home
at. laugh to men weary

oh! oh! Oh! out cry but nothing do could Neb

Island! Lincoln in happen things curious very that think to begin I
Pencroft. said

be can nothing Pencroft, all, at not Spilett, Gideon replied Curious?
of possession taken absence, our during come has one Some natural. more
ladder. the up drawn and dwelling our

who? But sailor. the cried one, Some

reporter. the replied bullet? the fired who hunter the but Who

to began who Pencroft, replied there, up one any is there if Well,
answer. must they and hail, a them give will I patience, lose

which Halloo! prolonged a gave sailor the voice stentorian a in And
rocks. and cliff the from again and again echoed was

chuckling of sort a heard they thought they and listened settlers The
to replied voice no But origin. the guess not could they which of laugh,
shouts. vigorous his repeated vain in who Pencroft,

apathetic most the astonish to this in indeed something was There
their In description. that of men not were settlers the and men, of
the during certainly, and, importance, its had incident every situation
met before not had they island, the on spent had they which months seven
character. a surprising so of anything with

the of singularity the in fatigue their forgetting may, it as that Be
think, to what knowing not House, Granite below remained they event,
of hope any without other each questioning do, to what knowing not
more each supposition some starting one every reply, satisfactory a
not at disappointed much himself, bewailed Neb last. the than unlikely
they which provisions the for kitchen, his into get to able being
of means no had they and exhausted, were expedition their on had had
them. renewing

be to thing one only is there Harding, Cyrus said last at friends, My
circumstances. to according act then and day, for wait present; at done
if and shelter, under be shall we There Chimneys. the to go us let But
sleep. least at can we eat, cannot we

asked again trick? cool this us played has that it is who But
spot. the from retire to mind his up make to unable Pencroft,

engineer the as do to was practicable thing only the was, it Whoever
meanwhile the In day. for wait there and Chimneys the to go to proposed,
and House, Granite of windows the below guard mount to ordered was Top
The questioning. any without it obeyed he order an received Top when
master his while cliff the of foot the at remained therefore dog brave
rocks. the among refuge a sought companions his with

on well slept fatigue, their notwithstanding settlers, the that say To
that only not was It true. be not would Chimneys the of floor sandy the
happened, had what of cause the out find to anxious extremely were they
at discovered be would which accident an of result the was it whether
human a of work the was it contrary the on whether or day, of return the
be not could That beds. uncomfortable very had also they but being;
dwelling their moment that at other or way some in for however, helped,
it. enter possibly not could they and occupied, was

warehouse. their was it dwelling, their than more was House Granite Now
instruments, weapons, colony, the to belonging stores the all were There
be might that all that think To etc. provisions, ammunition, tools,
over do to work their all have would settlers the that and pillaged
Their matter. serious a was make, to tools and weapons fresh again,
to minutes few every out go to also them of other or one led uneasiness
his with waited alone Harding Cyrus watch. good keeping was Top if see
being at exasperated was mind strong his although patience, habitual
at provoked was he and fact, inexplicable an such with confronted
to name, a give not could he which to feeling a allowing for himself
this in feelings his shared Spilett Gideon him. over influence an gain
inexplicable the of whispers in together conversed two the and respect,
experience. and intelligence their even baffled which circumstance

us. played has one some trick a is it Pencroft; said joke, a is It
for out look better had joker the and jokes, such like dont I Well,
him. tell can I hands, my into falls he if himself,

colonists, the east, the in appeared light of gleam first the as soon As
rising The House. Granite under beach the to repaired armed, suitably
shutters the windows, the see could they and cliff the on shone now sun
foliage. of curtains the through closed, were which of

saw they when colonists the escaped cry a but order; in was here All
wide now was departure, their on closed had they which door, the that
open.

about doubt more no be could House--there Granite entered had one Some
that.

landing, the to door the from hung generally which ladder, upper The
to raised and up drawn was ladder lower the but place, its in was
guard to wished had intruders the that evident was It threshold. the
surprise. a against themselves

again. hailed Pencroft

reply. No

quietly sleeping are they There sailor. the exclaimed beggars, The
brigands, pirates, you there, Hallo house. own their in were they if as
Bull! John of sons robbers,

of son of epithet the to one any treated Yankee, a being Pencroft, When
insult. of limits last the reached had he considered he Bull, John

House Granite of facade whole the and risen, completely now had sun The
the on as well as interior the in but rays; its by illuminated became
calm. and quiet was all exterior

the yet and not, or inhabited was House Granite if asked settlers The
also was it was; it that show to sufficient was ladder the of position
able been not had be, might they whoever inhabitants, the that certain
at? got be to they were how But escape. to

the shooting and arrow, an to cord a fastening of thought then Herbert
ladder the of rounds first the between pass should it that so arrow
then would they cord the of means By threshold. the from hung which
the re-establish so and ground, the to ladder the down draw to able be
evidently was There House. Granite and beach the between communication
might method this skill, little a with and, done, be to else nothing
Chimneys, the at left been had arrows and bows fortunately Very succeed.
Pencroft cord. hibiscus light of quantity a found also they where
his to it fixing Herbert Then arrow. well-feathered a to this fastened
ladder. the of part lower the for aim careful a took bow,

see to as so back, drew Neb and Pencroft, Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus
his to gun his lifted reporter The windows. the at appeared anything if
door. the covered and shoulder

passed and it, with cord the taking flew, arrow the bent, was bow The
rounds. last two the between

succeeded. had operation The

when moment that at but, cord, the of end the seized immediately Herbert
out suddenly thrust arm, an ladder, the down bring to pull a it gave he
Granite inside it dragged and it grasped door, the and wall the between
House.

you, for anything do can ball a If sailor. the shouted rascals! The
it. for wait to long have not shall you

Neb. asked it? was who But

see? you Didnt it? was Who

No.

a gorilla, a baboon, a orangoutang, an sapajou, a monkey, a was It
the up climbed who monkeys, by invaded been has dwelling Our sagoin.
absence. our during ladder

sailors the of truth the to witness bear to if as moment, this at And,
windows, the at themselves showed quadrumana three or two words,
real the saluted and shutters, the back pushed had they which from
grimaces. hideous thousand a with place the of proprietors

jokers the of one but Pencroft; cried joke, a only was it that knew I
rest. the for penalty the pay shall

the of one at aim rapid a took piece, his raising sailor, the saying, So
wounded mortally fell who one except disappeared, All fired. and monkeys
belonged evidently size, large a of was which monkey, This beach. the on
an chimpanzee, a was this Whether quadrumana. the of order first the to
who apes, anthropoid the among rank took he gorilla, a or orangoutang,
Herbert However, race. human the to resemblance their from called so are
orangoutang. an be to it declared

Neb. cried beast! magnificent a What

see not do I still but Pencroft; replied like, you if Magnificent,
house. our into get to are we how

here. is bow his and reporter, the said marksman, good a is Herbert
again. try can He

show wont they Pencroft; returned cunning, so are apes these Why,
I when and them; kill cant we so and windows the at again themselves
storehouse-- and rooms the in do may they mischief the of think

long us keep cannot creatures these Harding; replied patience, Have
bay. at

the replied here, down them see I till that of sure be not shall I
fellows these of dozens many how know you do captain, now, And sailor.
there? up are

making boy young the for as and Pencroft, to reply to difficult was It
ladder the of part lower the for easy; not was that attempt, another
the given, was pull another when and door, the into again drawn been had
perplexing. really was case The firm. remained ladder the and broke line
did he but situation, the to side comic a was There stormed. Pencroft
by end would settlers the that certain was It all. at funny it think not
intruders, the out driving and domicile their in themselves reinstating
say. to able not were they what is this how? and when but

show to not care took apes the which during passed, hours Two
or nose a times four or three and there, still were they but themselves,
saluted immediately was and windows, or door the at out poked was paw a
gun-shot. a by

apes the Perhaps engineer. the said last at ourselves, hide us Let
Let again. themselves show will and away quite gone have we think will
on fire and rocks those behind themselves conceal Herbert and Spilett
appear. may that all

lad, the and reporter the while and obeyed, were orders engineers The
position, good a in themselves posted colony, the in marksmen best the
the climbed Cyrus and Pencroft, Neb, sight, monkeys the of out but
was it for game, some kill to order in forest the entered and plateau
remaining. provisions no had they and breakfast for time now

they which pigeons, rock few a with returned hunters the hour an half In
Spilett Gideon appeared. had ape an Not could. they as well as roasted
to Top leaving breakfast, the of share their take to went Herbert and
their to returned eaten, having then, They windows. the under watch
post.

The improved. degree no in was situation their later, hours Two
supposed been have might it and existence, of sign no gave quadrumana
that, was probable more seemed what but disappeared; had they that
the by frightened and companions, their of one of death the by terrified
house the of part back the to retreated had they firearms, the of noise
of thought they when And store-room. the into even probably or
much so patience the contained, storeroom this which valuables the
and irritation, great into changed fast engineer, the by recommended
it. for room was certainly there

is, it of worst the and reporter; the said bad, too is it Decidedly
it. to end an putting of way no is there

sailor. the cried somehow, out vagabonds these drive must we But
the of twenty are there if even them, of better the get soon could We
is now, Come hand. to hand them meet must we that, for but rascals;
them? at getting of way no there

lake, the at opening old the by House Granite enter to try us Let
engineer. the replied

that. of thought never I and sailor, the shouted Oh!

Granite into penetrate to which by way only the reality in was This
was, opening The intruders. the out drive and with fight to as so House
be would it which stones, cemented of wall a with up closed true, is it
Fortunately, rebuilt. be easily could that but sacrifice, to necessary
opening this hiding of project his effected yet as not had Harding Cyrus
have then would operation the for lake, the of waters the raising by
time. some taken

and armed well colonists, the when oclock, twelve past already was It
the beneath passed Chimneys, the left spades, and picks with provided
and post, his at remain to Top telling after House, Granite of windows
Prospect reach to as so Mercy, the of bank left the ascend to began
Heights.

the heard they when direction, this in steps fifty made not had they But
furiously. barking dog

again. bank the down rushed all And

changed. had situation the that saw they turning, the at Arrived

cause, unknown some from panic, sudden a with seized apes, the fact, In
window one from clambered and ran three or Two escape. to trying were
to trying even not were They acrobats. of agility the with another to
perhaps descend; to easy been have would it which by ladder, the replace
colonists, The escape. of way this forgotten had they terror their in
or wounded Some, fired. difficulty, without aim take to able being now
rest, The cries. piercing uttering rooms, the into back fell killed,
a in and fall, their in pieces to dashed were out, themselves throwing
in quadrumana living a not was there knew, they as far so minutes, few
House. Granite

then threshold, the over slip to seen was ladder the moment this At
ground. the to fall and unroll

queer! is this sailor, the cried Hullo!

ladder. the up first leaping engineer, the murmured strange! Very

of some still are there perhaps Pencroft, cried captain! care, Take
rascals. these

however. stopping without engineer, the replied see, soon shall We

the at arrived had they minute a in and him, followed companions his All
nor rooms the in one no was There everywhere. searched They threshold.
quadrumana. of band the by respected been had which storehouse, the in

gentleman the can who sailor; the cried ladder, the and now, Well
down? that us sent who been have

hidden had who orang, great a and heard, was cry a moment that at But
Neb. by pursued room, the into rushed passage, the in himself

Pencroft. cried robber! the Ah,

when animal, the of head the cleave to about was he hand, in hatchet And
saying,-- arm, his seized Harding Cyrus

Pencroft. him, Spare

rascal? this Pardon

ladder! the us threw who he was it Yes!

was it that voice peculiar a such in this said engineer the And
not. or seriously spoke he whether know to difficult

himself defended who orang, the on themselves threw they Nevertheless,
bound. and overpowered soon was but gallantly,

got weve now him, of make we shall what And Pencroft. said There!
him?

Herbert. replied servant! A

intelligent this how knew he for this, saying in joking not was lad The
account. to turned be could race

He attentively. it at gazed and ape the approached then settlers The
is angle facial the which of apes, anthropoid of family the to belonged
an was It Hottentots. and Australians the of that to inferior much not
nor gorilla, the of ferocity the neither had such, as and orangoutang,
apes anthropoid the of family this to is It baboon. the of stupidity the
possessed be to them prove which belong characteristics many so that
at wait can they houses, in Employed intelligence. human almost an of
fork, knife, a handle boots, clean clothes, brush rooms, sweep table,
as well as everything doing wine... drink even and properly, spoon and
one possessed Buffon legs. two upon walked ever that servant best the
zealous and faithful a as time long a for him served who apes, these of
servant.

great a was House Granite of hall the in seized been had which one The
broad a frame, poportioned admirably an with high, feet six fellow,
sixty-five reaching angle facial the size, moderate a of head chest,
glossy soft with covered skin nose, projecting skull, round degrees,
rather eyes, His anthropoids. the of specimen fine a short, in hair,
teeth white his intelligence; with sparkled eyes, human than smaller
beard. brown curly little a wore he and mustache, his under glittered

we language, his knew only we if Pencroft; said fellow! handsome A
him. to talk could

a as him take to going we Are serious? you are Neb, said master, But,
servant?

be not must you But smiling. engineer, the replied Neb, Yes,
jealous.

He Herbert. added servant, excellent an make will he hope I And
obliged be not shall we and educate, to easy be will and young, appears
He done. sometimes is as teeth, his draw nor him, subdue to force use to
him. to kind are they if masters his of fond grow soon will

rancor his all forgotten had who Pencroft, replied be, will they And
jokers. the against

orang,-- the approaching Then,

you? are how asked, he boy! old Well,

anger. any show not did which grunt little a by replied orang The

to going are You sailor. the asked again colony? the join to wish You
Harding? Cyrus Captain of service the enter

ape. the by uttered was grunt respondent Another

food? your than wages other no with satisfied be will you And

grunt. affirmative Third

Spilett. Gideon observed monotonous, slightly is conversation This

who those are servants best the Pencroft; replied better, the much So
give will We boy? my hear, you do wages, no then, And least. the talk
are we if afterwards them double will we but first, at wages no you
you. with pleased

sailor the name his to As member. new a by increased was colony the Thus
be might he known, had he which ape another of memory in that begged
short. for Jup and Jupiter, called

Granite in installed was Jup Master ceremony, more without so, And
House.



7 Chapter

without dwelling, their regained now had Island Lincoln in settlers The
therefore were and opening, old the by it reach to obliged been having
the at that lucky, certainly was It work. masons of trouble the spared
seized been had apes the so, do to out set to about were they moment
driven had which inexplicable, than sudden less no terror, that with
they that discovered animals the Had House. Granite of out them
only the was This direction? another from attacked be to about were
retreat. sudden their of explanation

where wood, the into carried were apes the of bodies the day the During
the repairing in themselves busied settlers the then buried; were they
although for damage, not but disorder intruders, the by caused disorder
broken had they yet topsy-turvy, rooms the in everything turned had they
furnished larder the in stores the and stove, his relighted Neb nothing.
justice. ample did all which to repast, substantial a

almonds stonepine some relish with ate he and forgotten, not was Jup
had Pencroft supplied. abundantly was he which with roots, rhizome and
they until tied legs his have to best it judged but arms, his unfastened
submission. his of sure more were

round seated companions his and Harding rest, to retiring before Then,
most was which of execution the plans, those discussed table, their
a of establishment the was urgent most and important most The pressing.
southern the with communication a form to as so Mercy, the over bridge
enclosure an of making the then House; Granite and island the of part
capture. to wished they which animals woolly other or musmons the for

their to as difficulty the solve to help would projects two These
the easy render would bridge The serious. now was which clothing,
and linen, with them furnish would which case, balloon the of transport
supply would which wool yield would enclosure the of inhabitants the
clothes. winter with them

at it establish to intention Hardings Cyrus was it enclosure, the to As
and fresh find would ruminants the where Creek, Red the of sources the
of sources the and Heights Prospect between road The pasture. abundant
the than cart better a with and beaten, partly already was stream the
if especially spot, the to conveyed easily be could material the first,
it. draw to animals some capture to manage could they

far so being enclosure the in inconvenience no be might there though But
to poultry-yard, the with same the be not would it House, Granite from
necessary indeed was It colonists. the of attention the called Neb which
place no and cook, the of reach within close be should birds the that
poultry-yard said the of establishment the for favorable more appeared
old the to close was which lake the of banks the of portion that than
opening.

couple the and others, as well as there prosper would Water-birds
be to first the be would excursion last their in taken tinamous of
domesticated.

the by begun were works new the November, of 3rd the day, next The
this for required were hands all and bridge, the of construction
the by shouldered were hammers and hatchets, Saws, task. important
shore. the to descended carpenters, into transformed now who, settlers,

observed,-- Pencroft There

to head his into it takes Jup Master absence, our during that Suppose,
yesterday? us to returned politely so he which ladder the up draw

Harding. Cyrus replied firmly, down end lower its tie us Let

Then sand. the in fixed securely stakes two of means by done was This
the at arrived soon Mercy, the of bank left the ascending settlers, the
river. the by formed angle

thrown be could bridge the if ascertain to order in halted, they There
suitable. appeared place The across.

on before day the discovered Balloon, Port to spot, this from fact, In
a and miles three of distance a only was there coast, southern the
good a make to easy be would it Port, the to bridge the from and half,
and House Granite between communication the render would which cart-road
easy. extremely island the of south the

completely for scheme a companions his to imparted now Harding Cyrus
of both attacks the from it shelter to as so Heights Prospect isolating
the Chimneys, the House, Granite way, this In quadrumana. and quadrupeds
used be to was which plateau the of part upper the all and poultry-yard,
animals. of depredations the against protected be would cultivation, for
how is this and project, this execute to than easier be could Nothing
work. to set to intended engineer the

either water-courses, by sides three on defended already was plateau The
Grant, Lake of shores the by northwest, the On natural. or artificial
the of banks the in made breach the to passage the of entrance the from
water. the of escape the for lake

which water-course new the by sea, the to breach this from north, the On
above shore, and plateau the across itself for bed a out hollowed had
creek this of bed the dig to enough be would it and fall, the below and
eastern the all on animals, for impracticable it make to deeper little a
the to creek aforesaid the of mouth the from itself, sea the by border
Mercy. the of mouth

the where Mercy the of turn the to mouth the from south, the on Lastly,
established. be to was bridge

the of turn the between remained now plateau the of border western The
mile, a about of distance a lake, the of angle southern the and river
a dig to than easier be could nothing But comers. all to open was which
overflow the and lake, the from filled be could which ditch, deep broad
Mercy. the of bed the into fall rapid a by itself throw would which of
fresh this by lowered somewhat be doubt, no would, lake the of level The
the that ascertained had Harding Cyrus but waters, its of discharge
the of allow to enough considerable was Creek Red the in water of volume
project. this of execution

regular a become will Heights Prospect engineer, the added then, So
communicating only and sides, all on water with surrounded being island,
throw to about are we which bridge the by domain our of rest the with
and above established already bridges little two the Mercy, the across
be must which bridges little other two lastly, and, fall; the below
across other the dig, to propose I which canal the over one constructed,
at raised be can bridges these if Now, Mercy. the of bank left the to
surprise. any from guarded be will Heights Prospect will,

down, cut selected, were Trees work. urgent most the was bridge The
The planks. and joists, beams, into cut and branches, their of stripped
be to was Mercy the of bank right the on rested which bridge the of end
it that so movable, be to was bank left the on end other the but firm,
are bridges canal some as counterpoise, a of means by raised be might
managed.

skillfully was it though and work, considerable a certainly was This
eighty was place this at Mercy the for time, some took it conducted,
of bed the in piles fix to necessary therefore was It wide. feet
a establish and bridge the of floor the sustain to as so river the
two form thus would which piles, these of tops the on act to pile-driver
loads. heavy support to bridge the allow and arches

nor wood, the shape to which with tools of want no was there Happily
a had who man a of ingenuity the of nor firm, it make to iron-work of
companions, his of zeal the lastly, nor work, the of knowledge marvelous
of use the in skill great acquired necessarily had months seven in who
Gideon was skilful least the not that said be must it and tools; their
would Who himself. sailor the equaled almost dexterity in who Spilett,
Pencroft. thought man! newspaper a from much so expected have ever

regular of weeks three lasted bridge Mercy the of construction The
the and labors, their of scene the on breakfasted even They work. hard
sleep. to House Granite to returned only they magnificent, being weather

accustomed more grew Jup Master that stated be may it period this During
very with watched always he movements whose masters, new his to
not did Pencroft measure, precautionary a as However, eyes. inquisitive
the until wait to wishing rightly liberty, complete him allow yet as
Top works. projected the by settled be should plateau the of limits
did Jup but together, willingly played and friends good were Jup and
solemnly. everything

part, movable The finished. was bridge the November of 20th the On
was effort slight a only and easily, swung counterpoise, the by balanced
which on cross-bar last the and hinge its between it; raise to needed
was which feet, twenty of space a existed there closed, when rested it
crossing. from animals any prevent to wide sufficiently

they which balloon-case, the fetching of talk to began now settlers The
be would it it, bring to but security; perfect in place to anxious were
to necessary consequently, and Balloon, Port to cart a take to necessary
take would This West. Far the of forests dense the through road a beat
state the into examine to gone having Pencroft and Neb Also, time. some
would cloth of stock the that reported and Balloon, Port at things of
that decided was it stored, was it where grotto the in damage no suffer
discontinued. be not should Heights Prospect at work the

poultry-yard our establish to us enable will Pencroft, observed That,
foxes from visits of fear no have need we since conditions, better under
beasts. other of attacks the nor

plants wild transplant and plateau, the clear can we Neb, added Then,
it. to

triumphant a with sailor the cried corn-field! second our prepare And
air.

prospered had grain single a with sown corn-field first the fact, In
ears ten the produced had It care. Pencrofts to thanks admirably,
the grains, eighty containing ear each and engineer, the by foretold
six in grains, hundred eight of possession in itself found colony
year. each harvest double a promised which months,

reserved, prudently were which fifty, except grains, hundred eight These
bestowed was than care less no with but field, new a in sown be to were
grain. single the on

and high palisade, strong a with surrounded then prepared, was field The
to As leaping. in difficulty found have would quadrupeds which pointed,
enough were brain, ingenious Pencrofts to due scarecrows, some birds,
very in deposited grains fifty and hundred seven The them. frighten to
rest. the do to nature for left then were furrows regular

was which canal the plan to began Harding Cyrus November, of 21st the On
to Grant Lake of angle south the from west, the on plateau the close to
vegetable of feet three or two there was There Mercy. the of angle the
manufacture to necessary therefore was It granite. that below and earth,
accustomed its did nitro-glycerine the and nitro-glycerine, more some
deep, six and wide feet twelve ditch, a fortnight a than less In work.
by made was trench new A plateau. the of ground hard the in out dug was
stream, small a forming lake, the of border rocky the in means same the
an thus was which and Glycerine, Creek of name the gave they which to
the of level the predicted, had engineer the As Mercy. the of affluent
the enclosure the complete To slightly. very though lowered, was lake
sand the and enlarged, considerably was beach the on stream the of bed
stakes. of means by supported

finished, were works these December of fortnight first the of end the By
pentagon, irregular of sort a say, to is Heights--that Prospect and
liquid a by surrounded miles, four nearly of perimeter a having
description. every of depredators from protected completely belt--was

it, of spite In great. very was heat the December, of month the During
to anxious were they as and work, their continued settlers the however,
it. commenced forthwith they poultry-yard a possess

been had plateau the of enclosing the since that say to useless is It
his leave not did He liberty. at set been had Jup Master completed,
though animal, gentle a was He escape. to wish no evinced and masters,
make to taught already was He active. wonderfully and powerful very
stones the away carting and wood of loads drawing by useful himself
Glycerine. Creek of bed the from extracted were which

the on yards, square hundred two of area an occupied poultry-yard The
and palisade, a by surrounded was It lake. the of bank southeastern
to were which birds the for shelters various constructed were it in
into divided and branches of built simply were These it. populate
guests. expected the for ready made compartments,

number a having in long not were which tinamous, two the were first The
to accustomed ducks, dozen a half companions for had they ones; young of
which of species, Chinese the to belonged Some lake. the of borders the
plumage their of brilliancy the by which and fan, a like open wings the
a snared Herbert afterwards, days few A pheasants. golden the rival
feathers, long of composed tails spreading with gallinaceae, of couple
pelicans, to As tame. became soon which alectors, magnificent
the of shores the to themselves of came they water-hens, kingfishers,
cooing, disputes, some after community, little this and poultry-yard,
in increased and peacefully, down settling by ended clucking, screaming,
colony. the of use future the for proportion encouraging

a established performance, his complete to wishing Harding, Cyrus
dozen a lodged he There poultry-yard. the of corner a in pigeon-house
birds These plateau. the of rocks the frequented which pigeons those of
dwelling, new their to evening every returning to accustomed became soon
their than themselves domesticate to disposition more showed and
wood-pigeons. the congeners,

by use, to balloon-case the turning for come had time the Lastly,
in it keeping to as for articles; other and shirts make to up it cutting
gas, with filled balloon a in themselves risking and form, present its
be to not was it idea, no had they which of limits the of sea a above
of. thought

colonists the and House, Granite to case the bring to necessary was It
more and lighter cart heavy their rendering in themselves employed
to yet was power moving the vehicle, a had they though But manageable.
found. be

the supply might which animal some island the in exist not there did But
question. the was That ox? or ass, horse, the of place

to useful very be would burden of beast a Pencroft, said Certainly,
some for engine, an even or cart, steam a made has captain the until us
a with Balloon, Port to House Granite from railroad a have shall we day
Franklin! Mount to line branch

and shouting heard were Top and Neb December, of 23rd the day, One
noise. most the make could who see to trying apparently each barking,
vexatious some fearing ran, Chimneys, the at busy were who settlers, The
incident.

imprudently had that size large a of animals fine Two see? they did What
said have would One open. were bridges the when plateau, the on ventured
shape, fine a of female, and male donkeys, least at or horses, were they
head the on black with striped white, tail and legs the dove-colored,
and uneasiness, any showing without quietly advanced They neck. and
future their recognize yet as not could they whom in men, the at gazed
masters.

zebra the between something animals Herbert, cried onagers! are These
quagga! the and

Neb. asked donkeys? not Why

graceful! more is shape their and ears, long not have they Because

as powers, moving are they Pencroft, interrupted horses, or Donkeys
captured! be must such as and say, would captain the

grass the through crept animals, the frightening without sailor, The
were onagers the and it, lowered Glycerine, Creek over bridge the to
prisoners.

No. force? by them master and violence with them seize they should Now,
roam to allowed be should they days few a for that decided was It
the and grass, of abundance an was there where plateau, the about freely
poultry-yard, the near stable a prepare to began immediately engineer
shelter and litter, good a with food, find might onagers the which in
night. the during

left were creatures magnificent two the of movements the done, This
to as so them approaching even avoided settlers the and free, entirely
to wish to appeared onagers the however, times, Several them. terrify
plains the to accustomed animals for confined too plateau, the leave
which water-barrier the following seen then were They forests. and
then neighs, short uttering them, before itself presented everywhere
remain would they calmer, becoming and grass, the through galloping
ever! for off cut were they which from woods, the at gazing hours entire

and manufactured, been had fiber vegetable of harness meantime the In
ready, was cart the only not onagers, the of capture the after days some
the through made been had cutting, a rather or road, straight a but
Balloon. Port to Mercy the of angle the from West, Far the of forests
December of end the towards and there, driven be then might cart The
time. first the for onagers the tried they

hand, his of out eat and come to animals the coaxed already had Pencroft
once but difficulty, any making without approach to him allowed they and
it However, in. held be difficulty with could and reared they harnessed
onager, the for service, new this to submitted they before long not was
harness in put frequently is zebra, the than refractory less being
been even has it and Africa, Southern of regions mountainous the in
coolness. relative a of zones under Europe, in acclimatized

animals the at walked who Pencroft except colony, the all day this On
Balloon. Port to road the on out set and cart, the mounted heads,

vehicle the but road, rough somewhat the over jolted were they course Of
and case the with loaded soon was and accident, any without arrived
balloon. the of rigging

Mercy the over passing after cart, the evening that oclock eight At
beach. the on stopped and river, the of bank left the descended bridge,
and stable, their to led thence were unharnessed, being onagers The
sigh deep a in feelings his to vent gave sleep to going before Pencroft
House. Granite of echoes the all awoke that satisfaction of



8 Chapter

linen the of manufacture the to devoted was January of week first The
used were box the in found needles The colony. the by required garments
sewn was what that sure be may we and fingers, delicate not if sturdy by
firmly. sewn was

of idea Hardings Cyrus to thanks thread, of lack no was There
the of covering the in used already been had which that re-employing
Spilett Gideon by unpicked all was patience admirable with This balloon.
it as up, work this give to obliged been had Pencroft for Herbert, and
part sewing the in equal no had he but measure; beyond him irritated
remarkable a have sailors that knows everybody Indeed, business. the of
tailoring. for aptitude

means by cleaned then was made was balloon-case the which of cloth The
a such in plants, of incineration the by obtained potash, and soda of
natural its resumed varnish, the of rid got having cotton, the that way
atmosphere, the of action the to exposed then, elasticity; and softness
latter sock--the and shirts dozen Some white. perfectly became soon it
What manufactured. thus cotton--were of made but course, of knitted, not
clean in again themselves clothe to settlers the to was it comfort a
troubled not were they but rough, rather doubtless was which linen,
the made which sheets, between sleep to go to then and that! about
beds! comfortable quite into House Granite at couches

which seal-leather, of boots made they that also time this about was It
America. from brought boots and shoes the replace to needed greatly were
pinched never and enough large were shoes new these that sure be may We
wearers. the of feet the

but great, very was heat the 1866 year the of beginning the With
peccaries, Agouties, still. stand not did forests the in hunting the
and there, swarmed actually sorts, all of game kangaroos, capybaras,
shot their away throw to ever marksmen good too were Herbert and Spilett
uselessly.

he and ammunition, the husband to them recommended still Harding Cyrus
in found been had which shot and powder the replace to measures took
know he did How future. the for reserve to wished he which and box, the
the in himself and companions his cast day one might chance where
the for prepare then, should, They domain? their leaving their of event
it for substituting by and ammunition their husbanding by future unknown
substance. renewable easily some

he island, the in traces no found had Harding which of lead, replace To
bullets, These manufacture. to easy was which iron, granulated employed
each and larger, made were bullets, leaden of weight the having not
this up made sportsmen the of skill the but less, contained charge
make to able been have would Harding Cyrus powder, to As deficiency.
but coal; and sulphur, saltpeter, disposal his at had he for also, that
is it tools special without and care, extreme requires preparation this
therefore, preferred, Harding quality. good a of it produce to difficult
which in substance a gun-cotton, say to is that pyroxyle, manufacture to
may vegetables of tissue elementary the as indispensable, not is cotton
cotton, in only not state, pure almost an in found is this and used, be
the of pith the paper, in flax, and hemp of fiber textile the in but
of mouth the towards island the in abounded elder the Now, etc. elder,
of berries the of coffee made already had colonists the and Creek, Red
caprifoliaceae. the of family the to belong which shrubs, these

the to as for elder-pith, was therefore, collected, be to thing only The
only was it pyroxyle, of manufacture the for necessary substance other
disposal, his at acid sulphuric having Harding Now, acid. azotic fuming
the attacking by acid azotic produce to able easily been already had
to resolved accordingly He him. supplied nature which with saltpeter
inconveniences, some has it although pyroxyle, employ and manufacture
excessive an effect, of inequality great a say, to is that
seventy and hundred one at fire takes it since inflammability,
instantaneous an lastly, and forty, and hundred two of instead degrees
the hand, other the On firearms. the damage might which deflagration
damp, by injured not is it that this, in consist pyroxyle of advantages
four is force its that and dirty, gun-barrels the make not does it that
powder. ordinary of that times

acid azotic fuming the in immersed be must cotton the pyroxyle, make To
Nothing dried. and water cold in washed then hour, an of quarter a for
simple. more be could

not and acid azotic ordinary the disposal his at only had Harding Cyrus
emits which acid say, to is that acid, azotic monohydrate or fuming the
substituting by but air; damp with contact in comes it when vapors white
from of proportion the in mixed, acid, azotic ordinary latter the for
engineer the acid, sulphuric concentrated of volumes five to three
soon therefore island the of sportsmen The result. same the obtained
produced discreetly, employed which, substance, prepared perfectly a had
results. admirable

and plateau, the of acres three cleared settlers the time this About
onagers. the of benefit the for state, wild a in preserved was rest the
of forests the and Wood Jacamar the into made were excursions Several
of collection large a thence from back brought they and West, Far the
careful which turnips, and radishes, cress, spinach, vegetables, wild
which on regimen the temper would which and improve, soon would culture
were coal and wood of Supplies subsisted. then till had settlers the
improving of means a time same the at was excursion Each carted. also
cart. the of wheels the under smoother became gradually which roads, the

House. Granite of larder the supply to continued still rabbit-warren The
Glycerine, Creek of side other the on situated was it fortunately As
newly-made the ravage nor plateau the reach not could inhabitants its
and renewed frequently was rocks the among oyster-bed The plantation.
in either fishing, the that, Besides molluscs. excellent furnished
some made had Pencroft for profitable, very was Mercy, the or lake the
fine caught frequently they which with hooks, iron with armed lines,
with speckled were sides silvery whose fish of species a and trout,
was who Neb, Master savory. extremely also were which and yellow,
of bill the agreeably vary to how knew art, culinary the in skilled
has as and settlers, the of table the at wanting was alone Bread fare.
greatly. privation this felt they said, been

of shores the frequented which turtles the too hunted settlers The
mounds, little with covered was beach the place this At Mandible. Cape
shells, hard white with eggs, turtles spherical perfectly concealing
They eggs. birds of that as coagulate not does which of albumen the
as considerable, naturally was number their and sun, the by hatched were
fifty. and hundred two annually lay can turtle each

to nothing have we and Spilett, Gideon observed egg-field, regular A
up. them pick to but do

after chase made they produce, the simply with contented being not But
back bring to able were they that was which of result the producers, the
valuable really were which chelonians, these of dozen a House Granite to
with flavored soup, turtle The view. of point alimentary an from
Neb. preparer, its for praises well-merited gained often herbs, aromatic

stores new which by circumstance fortunate another mention here must We
and Mercy, the entered salmon of Shoals in. laid were winter the for
the which at time the was It miles. several for country the ascended
the precede spawn, to which in places suitable find to going females,
of thousand A water. fresh the through noise great a make and males
up came length, in half a and feet two about measured which fish, these
across dams fixing by retained were quantity large a and river, the
and salted were which taken, thus were hundred a than More stream. the
render would streams, the up freezing winter, when time the for stored
raised was Jup intelligent the time this By impracticable. fishing
linen white jacket, a in dressed been had He valet. of duty the to
The delight. his were which of pockets the apron, an and breeches,
have would one any and Neb, by trained marvelously been had orang clever
talked they when other each understood ape the and Negro the that said
returned Neb and Neb, for affection real a besides had Jup together.
for or wood carrying for either required, not were services his When it.
his of part greatest the passed Jup tree, some of top the to climbing
he that all in Neb imitate to endeavored he where kitchen, the in time
extreme even and patience greatest the showed black The do. him saw
remarkable exhibited pupil the and pupil, his instructing in zeal
master. his from received he lessons the by profiting in intelligence

Granite of inhabitants the to gave Jup Master pleasure the of then Judge
one appeared he it, of idea any had having their without when, House
he attentive, Quick, table. at wait to ready arm, his on napkin day,
dishes, bringing plates, the changing perfectly, himself acquitted
to amusement intense gave which gravity a with all water, out pouring
Pencroft. enraptured which and settlers, the

soup! some Jup,

agouti! little a Jup,

plate! a Jup,

Jup! Honest Jup! Good Jup!

disconcerted, being ever without Jup and that, but heard was Nothing
a in head his shook he and everything, for watched one, every to replied
said day, first the of joke his to referring Pencroft, when way knowing
him,-- to

doubled. be must wages your Jup, Decidedly,

at domesticated thoroughly now was orang the that say to useless is It
forest the to masters his accompanied often he that and House, Granite
him see to amusing most was It them. leave to wish any showing without
carried he which and him, given had Pencroft which stick a with walking
from fruit some gather to wished they If gun. a like shoulder his on
the of wheel the If it. for climbed he quickly how tree, a of summit the
of heave single a with Jup did energy what with mud, the in stuck cart
again. right it put shoulder his

as was he If often. Pencroft cried is! he fellow jolly a What
him! with anything doing no be would there good, is he as mischievous

in labors their began colonists the January of end the towards was It
be should corral a that decided been had It island. the of center the
Mount of foot the at Creek, Red the of sources the near established
have would presence whose ruminants, the contain to destined Franklin,
who musmons, the for especially and House, Granite at troublesome been
garments. winter settlers the for wool the supply to were

represented often more but entire, sometimes colony, the morning, Each
the of sources the to proceeded Pencroft, and Herbert, Harding, by only
road beaten newly the by miles, five than more not of distance a Creek,
given. been had Road Corral of name the which to

the of ridge southern the of back the at chosen, was site a There
of clumps with there and here dotted land, meadow a was It mountain.
slopes the from sprung which stream, little a by watered and trees,
not was it and fresh, was grass The side. one on in it closed which
to was meadow This it. about grew which trees the by shaded much too
agile most the even prevent to enough high palisade, a by surrounded be
to enough large be would enclosure This over. leaping from animals
they ones young the all with goats, wild and musmons hundred a contain
produce. might

and engineer, the by traced then was corral the of perimeter The
the for necessary trees the fell to proceeded have then would they
had road the of up opening the as but palisade, the of construction
were those number, considerable a of sacrifice the necessitated already
the in fixed firmly were which stakes, hundred a supplied and brought
ground.

weeks, three than less take not did corral this of construction The
the which in sheds, large built Harding Cyrus palisade, the besides for
very made be to also had buildings These shelter. take could animals
be to was fury first their and animals, powerful are musmons for strong,
fire, by hardened and end upper their at sharpened stakes, The feared.
props distances regular at and cross-bars, of means by fixed been had
whole. the of solidity the assured

frequented pastures the on made be to had raid a finished, corral The
beautiful a on February, of 7th the on done was This ruminants. the by
well already onagers, The it. in part took one every and day, summers
use. great of were and Herbert, and Spilett by ridden were trained,

and goats, and musmons the surrounding in simply consisted maneuver The
Pencroft, Harding, Cyrus them. around circle the narrowing gradually
while wood, the of parts different in themselves posted Jup, and Neb,
the round mile a half of radius a in galloped Top and cavaliers two the
corral.

fine These island. the of part this in numerous very were musmons The
of those than stronger were horns their deer; as large as were animals
hair. long with mixed was fleece gray-colored their and ram, the

running and coming, and going Such fatiguing. very was day hunting This
surrounded, been had which musmons hundred a Of shouting! and riding and
and animals these of thirty last, at but escaped, two-thirds than more
open the corral, the towards back driven gradually were goats wild ten
and in rushed they escape, of means a offer to appearing which of door
prisoners. were

to reason no had settlers the and satisfactory, was result the short, In
at that and prosper, would flock the that doubt no was There complain.
abundant. be would hides but wool only not time distant no

exhausted. quite House Granite to returned hunters the evening That
day next the returned they fatigue, their notwithstanding However,
the overthrow to trying been had prisoners The corral. the visit to
becoming in long not were and succeeded, not had course of but palisade,
tranquil. more

The occurred. importance any of event no February, of month the During
the improving as well as and, methodically, pursued were labors daily
which, commenced, was third a Balloon, Port to and corral the to roads
The coast. western the towards proceeded enclosure, the from starting
wood-covered the of that was Island Lincoln of portion unknown yet
Gideon which from beasts, wild the sheltered which Peninsula, Serpentine
domain. their clear to anxious so was Spilett

given was care assiduous most the appear should season cold the Before
from transplanted been had which plants wild the of cultivation the to
excursion an from returned never Herbert Heights. Prospect to forest the
some was it day, One vegetable. useful some home bringing without
an yield pressure by which of seeds the tribe, chicory the of specimens
antiscorbutic whose sorrel, common some was it another, oil; excellent
tubers, precious those of some then, despised; be to not were qualities
of potatoes, America, South in cultivated been times all at have which
garden, kitchen The known. now are species hundred two than more which
divided was birds, the from defended carefully and stocked well now
turnips, sorrel, potatoes, kidney lettuces, grew where beds, small into
particularly was plateau the on soil The coneiferae. other and radishes,
abundant. be would harvests the that hoped was it and fertile,

did they as long so and beverages, different of variety a also had They
to reason no had have would please to hard most the wine, demand not
the from extracted liquor fermented the and tea, Oswego the To complain.
from made beer, regular a added had Harding dragonnier, the of roots
boiled been having after which, spruce-fir, the of shoots young the
Anglo-Americans the by called drink agreeable that made fermented, and
spring-beer.

of possessed was poultry-yard the summer, the of end the Towards
species, houbara the to belonged which bustards, fine of couple a
whose shovelers, dozen a mantle; feathery of sort a by characterized
appendage; membraneous a by side each on prolonged was mandible upper
cocks, Mozambique the to similar cocks, magnificent some also and
had everything far, So black. being epidermis and caruncle, comb, the
intelligent and courageous these of activity the to thanks succeeded,
great the to faithful but doubtless; them, for much did Nature men.
them. gave Providence bountiful a what of use right a made they precept,

work their when evening the in days, summer warm these of heat the After
the on sit to liked they blow, to began sea-breeze the and finished was
creepers, with covered veranda, of sort a in Heights, Prospect of edge
they talked, they There hands. own his with made had Neb which
of good-humor rough the and plans, made they other, each instructed
perfect most the which in world, little this amused always sailor the
reign. to ceased never had harmony

What America. great and dear their of country, their of spoke often They
greatly been have not could It Secession? of War the of result the was
General of hands the into fallen soon doubtless had Richmond prolonged.
the been have must Confederates the of capital the of taking The Grant.
in triumphed had North the Now struggle. terrible this of action last
in exiles the to newspaper a been have would welcome how cause, good the
the and them between communication all months eleven For Island! Lincoln
time short a in and interrupted, been had fellow-creatures their of rest
which on day the of anniversary the arrive, would March of 24th the
mere then were They coast. unknown this on them thrown had balloon the
miserable their preserve should they how knowing even not castaways,
of knowledge the to thanks now, And elements! the of fury the from lives
colonists, regular were they intelligence, own their and captain, their
turn to able been had they instruments; and tools, arms, with furnished
is that island, the of minerals and plants, animals, the profit their to
Nature. of kingdoms three the say, to

plans. more still formed and things these all of talked often they Yes;

to listened and silent, part most the for was he Harding Cyrus to As
smiled he Sometimes them. to spoke he than often more companions his
he everywhere and always but nonsense, Pencrofts or ideas Herberts at
which of enigma, strange that facts, inexplicable those over pondered
him! escaped still secret the



9 Chapter

a been had There March. of week first the during changed weather The
excessive. was heat the and month, the of commencement the at moon full
some of period a and electricity, of full be to felt was atmosphere The
feared. be to was weather tempestuous of length

the from blew wind the heard, were thunder of peals 2nd, the on Indeed,
like House Granite of facade the against rattled hail and east,
closed, immediately were windows and door The grape-shot. of volleys
these seeing On drenched. been have would rooms the in everything or
Pencrofts egg, pigeons a of size the were which of some hailstones,
danger. serious in was cornfield his that was thought first

already were heads green little where field, his to rushed directly He
his protect to managed he cloth, great a of means by and appearing,
crop.

rolled thunder the time which during week, a lasted weather bad This
sky. the of depths the in cessation without

profited doors, of out work pressing any having not colonists, The
the House, Granite of interior the at work to weather bad the by
The day. to day from complete more becoming was which of arrangement
articles several turned he which with turning-lathe, a made engineer
of want the buttons, particularly kitchen, the and toilet the for both
which firearms, the for made been had gunrack A felt. greatly was which
left were cupboards nor tables neither and care, extreme with kept were
during and turned; they filed, they planed, they sawed, They incomplete.
grinding the but heard was nothing season, bad this of whole the
the to responded which turning-lathe the of humming the or tools of
thunder. the of growling

back, the at room a occupied he and forgotten, been not had Jup Master
good of full always cot a with cabin of sort a storeroom, the near
taste. his suited perfectly which litter,

repeated often quarreling, any never is there Jup old good With
a what Neb, servant, a What reply. improper any never Pencroft,
servant!

clothes, their brushed He service. to used well now was Jup course Of
gathered he rooms, the swept he table, at waited he spit, the turned he
which service of piece admirable another performed he and wood,
tuck to coming first without sleep to went never Pencroft--he delighted
bed. his in sailor worthy the up

bimana, or bipeds colony, the of members the of health the to As
life their With desired. be to nothing left it quadrupeds, or quadrumana
zone, temperate that under soil, salubrious this on air, open the in
illness that suppose not could they hands, and head with both working
them. attack ever would

inches two grown already had Herbert well. wonderfully indeed were All
he and manly, more becoming and forming was figure His year. the in
morally. as well as physically man, accomplished an be to promised
manual which hours leisure the during himself improved he Besides
after and case; the in found books the read he him; to left occupations
their of necessity very the by taught were which lessons practical the
for reporter the and science, for engineer the in found he position,
education. his complete to delighted were who masters languages,

covered remained sky the but March, of 9th the about ended tempest The
atmosphere, The month. summer last this of whole the during clouds with
its recover not could commotions, electric the by agitated violently
for except fog, and rain invariably almost was there and purity, former
About made. were excursions several which on days fine four or three
to belonged which one young a to birth gave onager female the time this
corral, the In capitally. throve which and mother, its as sex same the
already lambs several and increased, also had musmons of flock the
had who Herbert, and Neb of delight great the to sheds, the in bleated
made also was attempt An newcomers. these among favorite their each
was sty A well. succeeded which peccaries, the of domestication the for
young several contained soon and poultry-yard, the under constructed
fat become to say, to is that civilized, become to way the in ones
their them carrying with entrusted Jup, Master care. Nebs under
himself acquitted etc., kitchen, the from leavings nourishment, daily
expense the at himself amused sometimes He task. his of conscientiously
mischief, was this but tails; their tweaking by pensioners little his of
a like him amused tails twisted little these for wickedness, not and
month this in day One child. a of that was instinct his and plaything,
a of Harding Cyrus reminded engineer, the to talking Pencroft, March, of
fulfil. to time had yet as not had latter the which promise

long the of place the take would which apparatus an of spoke once You
some it make you wont he; said captain, House, Granite at ladders
day?

thing? useful really a this is but easier; be will Nothing

us let necessaries, ourselves given have we After captain. Certainly,
but like, you if luxury, be may it us For luxury. of little a think
long a up climb to convenient very isnt It necessary. is it things for
loaded. heavily is one when ladder

Harding. Cyrus replied you, please to try will we Pencroft, Well,

disposal. your at machine no have you But

one. make will We

machine? steam A

machine. water a No,

force natural a already was there apparatus his work to indeed, And,
great without used be could which engineer the of disposal the at
little the of flow the augment to enough was it this, For difficulty.
The water. with House Granite of interior the supplied which stream
producing thus increased, then was grass and stones the among opening
which from overflow the passage, the of bottom the at fall strong a
cylinder a fixed engineer the fall this Below well. inner the by escaped
cable strong a with exterior the on joined was which paddles, with
long a of means by way, this In basket. a supporting wheel, a on rolled
motive the regulate to them enabled which ground, the to reaching rope
House. Granite of door the to basket the in rise could they power,

and time, first the for acted lift the that March of 17th the on was It
coal, wood, loads, the all Henceforward satisfaction. universal gave
this by hoisted were themselves, settlers the even and provisions,
be may as and, ladder, primitive the replaced which system, simple
was particularly Top change. the regretting of thought one no supposed,
have could never and not, had he for improvement, this with enchanted
on was it often and ladders, climbing in skill Jups Master possessed
to obliged been had he that orang the of that on even or back, Nebs
Harding Cyrus too, time, this About House. Granite to ascent the make
pottery-kiln old the put first at he and glass, manufacture to attempted
but, encountered; be to difficulties some were There use. new this to
glass a up setting in succeeded he attempts, fruitless several after
did assistants, usual his Herbert, and Spilett Gideon which manufactory,
composition the in used substances the to As days. several for leave not
or carbonate either soda, and chalk, sand, simply are they glass, of
sea-weeds chalk, supplied lime sand, supplied beach the Now sulphate.
supplied ground the and acid, sulphuric supplied pyrites soda, supplied
thus Harding Cyrus temperature. wished-for the to kiln the heat to coal
work. to setting for ready everything had soon

was difficulty, most the presented which of manufacture the tool, The
which long, feet six or five tube, iron an glass-maker, the of pipe the
of means by But fusion. of state a in material the end one on collects
Pencroft gun, a of barrel the like up rolled iron of piece thin long, a
use. for ready soon tube a making in succeeded

sand, of parts hundred A heated. was tube the March of 28th the On
three or two with mixed soda, of sulphate of forty chalk, of thirty-five
in placed was which substance, the composed coal, powdered of parts
a to it reduced had oven the of temperature high the When crucibles.
tube the with collected Harding Cyrus state, pasty a rather or liquid,
previously plate, metal a on about it turned he paste: the of quantity a
passed he then blowing, for suitable form a it give to as so arranged,
extremity. other the at blow to him telling Herbert, to tube the

the into well so and much so blew cheeks, his out swelling Herbert, And
breath his time--that same the at round it twirl to care tube-taking
state a in substance the of quantities Other mass. glassy the dilated
a was result the time short a in and first, the to added were fusion of
tube the took then Harding diameter. in foot a measured which bubble
by ended he motion, pendulous a it giving and, hands, Herberts of out
shape. cylindroconic a it give to as so bubble malleable the lengthening

two by terminated glass of cylinder a given had operation blowing The
iron sharp a of means by detached easily were which caps, hemispheric
was cylinder this proceeding, same the by then, water; cold in dipped
second a by malleable rendered been having after and lengthways, cut
roller. wooden a with out spread and plate a on extended was it heating,

this perform to only had they and manufactured, thus was pane first The
House Granite at windows The panes. fifty have to times fifty operation
still but perhaps, white, very not panes; with furnished soon were
transparent. sufficiently

with satisfied were They play. only was that tumblers, and bottles to As
had Pencroft tube. the of end the from came they as just besides, them,
for fun great was it and turn, his in blow to allowed be to asked
ridiculous most the took productions his that hard so blew he but him;
immensely. admired he which shapes,

forest the entered had day, one hunting while Herbert, and Harding Cyrus
the usual, as and, Mercy, the of bank left the on West, Far the of
them answered who engineer, the of questions thousand a asking was lad
other the on as, and sportsman, a not was Harding as Now, heartily.
of numbers philosophy, natural and chemistry talking was Herbert side,
however, which, range, within came agouties and capybaras, kangaroos,
already was day the that was consequence the gun; lads the escaped
a made having of danger in were hunters two the and advanced,
joy, of cry a uttering and stopping, Herbert, when excursion, useless
exclaimed,--

shrub, a to pointed he and tree? that see you do Harding, Captain Oh,
a with covered stem, single a of composed was it for tree, a than rather
veins. parallel little with streaked leaves bore which bark, scaly

Harding. asked palm? little a resembles which tree this is what And

dictionary our in picture a have I which of revoluta, cycas a is It
Herbert. said History! Natural of

companion. his observed shrub! this on fruit any see cant I But

with flour a contains stem its but Herbert; replied captain, No,
ground. ready all us provided has nature which

bread-tree? the then, is, It

bread-tree. the Yes,

discovery, valuable a is this engineer, the replied boy, my Well,
not are you that hope I ripe; yet not is harvest wheat our since
mistaken!

was which cycas, a of stem the broke he mistaken: not was Herbert
pith, floury of quantity a containing tissue, glandulous a of composed
substance, same the of rings by separated fiber, woody with traversed
mucilaginous a mingled was fecula this With concentrically. arranged
of rid get to easy be would it which but flavor, disagreeable of juice
superior a of flour regular was substance cellular This pressure. by
by forbidden formerly was exportation its nourishing; extremely quality,
laws. Japanese the

Far the of part that examined having after Herbert, and Harding Cyrus
Granite to returned and bearings, their took grew, cycas the where West
discovery. their known made they where House,

Granite to returned and some, collect to went settlers the day next The
a constructed engineer The stems. cycas of supply ample an with House
the with mingled juice mucilaginous the extract to which with press,
soon Neb which flour, of quantity large a obtained he and fecula,
wheaten real quite not was This puddings. and cakes into transformed
it. like very was it but bread,

furnished corral the in sheep the and goats, the onager, the too, Now,
of sort a rather or cart, The colony. the to necessary milk the daily
the to journeys frequent made it, replaced had which carriole light
him let and Jup, took he go to turn Pencrofts was it when and corral,
customary his with himself acquitted whip, his cracking Jup, and drive,
intelligence.

and House, Granite in as corral the in well as prospered, Everything
from far so were they that been not had it if settlers, the certainly
suited well so were They complain. to reason no had land, native their
they that island, the to accustomed so besides, were, and life, this to
regret! without soil hospitable its left have not could

of heart the in implanted country his of love the is deeply so yet And
the island, the of sight in come unexpectedly had ship a if that man,
attention, her attracted have would signals, made have would colonists
departed! have would and

his and Harding which Day, Easter Sunday, a April, of 1st the was It
an as such fine, was day The prayer. and rest by sanctified companions
be. might Hemisphere Northern the in day October

veranda the under seated were dinner, after evening the towards All,
the watching were they and Heights, Prospect of edge the on
of infusion the of cups Some horizon. the from up creeping darkness
Neb. by served been had coffee, of place the took which elder-berries,
the in situation isolated its of and island the of speaking were They
say,-- to Spilett Gideon led which Pacific,

in found sextant the possessed you since ever, you have Cyrus, dear My
island? our of position the taken again case, the

engineer. the replied No,

instrument, this with it do to thing good a be perhaps would it But
used. before you which that than perfect more is which

comfortable quite is island The Pencroft. said good? the is What
is! it where

be may we that but knows who reporter, the returned knows, who Well,
think? we than land inhabited nearer much

not had it if and Harding, Cyrus replied to-morrow, know shall We
known have should we leisure, no me left which occupations the for been
already. it

be to observer an good too is captain The Pencroft. said Good!
just is island the place, its from moved not has it if and, mistaken,
it. put he where

see. shall We

made engineer the sextant, the of means by therefore, day, next the On
had he which position the verify to observations necessary the
first His operation. his of result the was this and obtained, already
Island,-- Lincoln of situation the him given had observation


155deg.; to 150deg. from longitude: west In

35deg. to 30deg. from latitude: south In


exactly: gave second The


30 150deg. longitude: In

57 34deg. latitude: south In

Cyrus apparatus, his of imperfection the notwithstanding then, So
exceed not did error his that skill much so with operated had Harding
degrees. five

a as well as atlas an possess we since Spilett, Gideon said Now,
Lincoln which position exact the Cyrus, dear my see, us let sextant,
Pacific. the in occupies Island

and opened, was Pacific the of map the and atlas, the fetched Herbert
position. their determine to prepared hand, in compass engineer, the

exclaimed, he and stopped, compasses the Suddenly

already! Pacific the of part this in exists island an But

Pencroft. cried island? An

Island. Tabor

island? important An

been never has perhaps which and Pacific, the in lost islet an No,
visited.

Pencroft. said it, visit will we Well,

We?

to undertake will I and boat, decked a build will We captain. Yes,
Island? Tabor this from we are distance what At her. steer

Harding. replied northeast, the to miles fifty and hundred a About

In Pencroft. returned that? whats And miles! fifty and hundred A
it! sight should we wind, good a with hours, forty-eight

constructed be should vessel a that decided was it reply, this on And,
return the on October, next of month the towards launched be to time in
season. fine the of



10 Chapter

it till peace no had he head, his in plan a got once had Pencroft When
a of boat a as and Island, Tabor visit to wished he Now executed. was
one. build to determined he voyage, this for necessary was size certain

the in abounded which of both fir, or Elm employ? he should wood What
which but work, to easy being as fir, the for decided They island?
elm. the as well as water stands

would season fine the since that agreed was it settled, details These
work should Pencroft and Harding Cyrus months, six before return not
to continue to were Herbert and Spilett Gideon boat. the at alone
the leave to were assistant, his Jup, Master nor Neb neither and hunt,
them. upon devolved had which duties domestic

their of stripped felled, were they chosen, were trees the Directly
able been have would sawyers as well as planks into sawn and branches,
the and Chimneys the between recess the in after, week A it. do to
long, feet five-and-thirty keel a and prepared, was dockyard a cliff,
lay bows, the at stem a and stern the at stern-post a with furnished
sand. the along

as knew He trade. new this at dark the in working not was Harding Cyrus
had he and else, everything nearly about as ship-building about much
ably was he Besides, paper. on ship his of model the drawn first at
dockyard a in years several for worked having who, Pencroft, by seconded
until not was It trade. the of part practical the knew Brooklyn, in
on laid were timbers the that thought deep and calculation careful after
keel. the

new his out carry to eagerness all was believed, be may as Pencroft,
instant. an for work his leave not would and enterprise,

from only, day one for but him, drawing of honor the had thing single A
in gathered was which wheat-harvest, second the was This dockyard. his
yielded and first, the as success a much as was It April. of 15th the on
predicted. been had which grains of number the

scrupulously having after Pencroft, said captain, bushels, Five
treasure. his measured

thousand thirty and hundred a and engineer; the replied bushels, Five
grains. thousand fifty and hundred six make will bushel a grains

a except sailor, the said time, this all them sow will we Well,
reserve. in little

we yield, proportionate a gives crop next the if and Pencroft, Yes,
bushels. thousand four have shall

bread? eat we shall And

bread. eat shall We

mill. a have must we But

one. make will We

the and first, two the than larger much very was corn-field third The
done, That seed. precious the received care, extreme with prepared soil,
work. his to returned Pencroft

and neighborhood, the in hunted Herbert and Spilett time this During
their West, Far the of parts unknown still the into deep ventured they
vast a was It emergency. dangerous any for ready ball, with loaded guns
room. for pressed if as together crowded trees, magnificent of thicket
in difficult was wood of masses dense these of exploration The
the without there ventured never reporter the and extreme, the
foliage thick the through pierced scarcely sun the for pocket-compass,
way. their retrace to them for difficult very been have would it and
where situations those in rare more was game that happened naturally It
herbivorous large three or two move; to room sufficient hardly was there
These April. of fortnight last the during killed however were animals
the to seen already had settlers the which of specimens koalas, were
killed be to themselves allowed stupidly which and lake, the of north
Their refuge. took they which in trees the of branches thick the among
of help the by there, and House, Granite to back brought were skins
which process tanning of sort a to subjected were they acid, sulphuric
used. being of capable them rendered

Far the of depth the in were sportsmen two the April, of 30th the On
in arrived paces, few a Herbert preceding reporter, the when West,
had scattered sparsely more trees the which into clearing, of sort a
surprised first at was Spilett Gideon penetrate. to rays few a permitted
stalks, straight with plants certain from exhaled which odor the at
small very and flowers of clusters grape-like bearing branchy, and round
returned and stalks these of two or one off broke reporter The berries.
said,-- he whom to lad, the to

Herbert? be, this can What

secure will which treasure a is this Herbert, said Spilett, Mr. Well,
forever. gratitude Pencrofts you

tobacco? it Is

less the none is it quality, first the of be not may it though and Yes,
tobacco!

him let not must we But pleased! be he Wont Pencroft! old good Oh,
share. our us give must he all, it smoke

us let Dont Herbert. replied Spilett, Mr. me, to occurs idea an Ah!
fine one and leaves, these prepare will we yet; Pencroft to anything say
filled! already pipe a with him present will we day

have will companion worthy our day that on and Herbert, right, All
world. this in for wish to left nothing

and plant, precious the of store good a secured lad the and reporter The
much as with in it smuggled they where House, Granite to returned then
of severe and vigilant most the been had Pencroft if as precaution
officers. custom-house

sailor the and confidence, into taken were Neb and Harding Cyrus
long, somewhat necessarily time, whole the during nothing suspected
and up, them chop leaves, small the dry to order in required was which
two took This stones. hot on torrefaction certain a to them subject
unknown on carried successfully were manipulations these all but months;
only he boat, his of construction the with occupied for, Pencroft, to
rest. of hour the at House Granite to returned

miles three or two animal enormous an observed had they days some For
whale a was This Island. Lincoln around swimming sea open the in out
species, southern the to belonged apparently which size, largest the of
Whale. Cape the called

the cried it! capture could we if be would it chance lucky a What
would I harpoon, good a and boat proper a had only we if Ah! sailor.
of trouble the worth well be would he for beast, the After say
catching!

you watch to like much should I Harding, observed Pencroft, Well,
interesting. very be would It harpoon. a handling

this in whale a see to reporter, the said astonished, am I
latitude. high comparatively

of part that in exactly are We Herbert. replied Spilett? Mr. so, Why
field, whale the call whalemen American and English which Pacific the
whales the that America, South and Zealand New between here, is it and
numbers. greatest the in with met are Hemisphere Southern the of

of sigh a uttering without not work, his to returned Pencroft And
of pleasure the if and fisherman, born a is sailor every for regret,
judge can one animal, the of size the to proportion exact in is fishing
for been only had this if And whale. a of sight in feels whaler a how
prize a such valuable how feeling help not could they But pleasure!
have would bones and fat, oil, the for colony, the to been have would
uses. many to put been

the leave to wish no have to appeared whale this that happened it Now
Granite of windows the from whether Therefore, island. the of waters
they when Spilett, Gideon and Herbert Heights, Prospect from or House,
left never fires, his over presiding unless Neb, or hunting, not were
cetacean, The movements. animals the all watched but telescope, the
from it across furrows rapid made Bay, Union into far entered having
flukes, powerful enormously its by propelled Cape, Claw to Cape Mandible
water the through way its making and itself, supported it which on
it also Sometimes knots. twelve of short little rate the at
distinguished. clearly be could it that island the to near so approached
being head the black, completely is which whale, southern the was It
whale. northern the of that than depressed more

great a to air-holes its from up throwing it see also could They
appear, may it as strange for, water, of or vapor, of cloud a height
is or air it Is subject. this on agreed not are whalers and naturalists
vapor, be to admitted generally is It out? driven thus is which water it
as again falls air, cold the with contact by suddenly condensing which,
rain.

It colonists. the preoccupied mammifer this of presence the However,
while else nothing of think could he as especially, Pencroft irritated
it which thing a for child a like it, for longing by ended He work. at
certainly and sleep, his in it about talked he night At denied. been has
fit a in been had sloop the if it, attacking of means the had had he if
pursuit. in out set to hesitated have not would he sea, to put to state

them, for did chance themselves for do not could colonists the what But
the at himself stationed had who Neb, from shouts May of 3rd the on and
of beach the on stranded was whale the that announced window, kitchen
island. the

hunting, out set to about just were who Spilett, Gideon and Herbert
joining Neb and Harding and ax, his down threw Pencroft guns, their left
action. of scene the towards rushed all companions, their

miles three Point, Flotsam of beach the on place taken had stranding The
the that probable therefore was It tide. high at and House, Granite from
it rate any at easily; itself extricate to able be not would cetacean
ran They necessary. if retreat its off cut to as so hasten, to best was
the over passed hands, their in poles iron-tipped and pick-axes with
beach, the along river, the of bank right the descended bridge, Mercy
enormous the to close were settlers the minutes twenty than less in and
hovered. already birds of flocks which above animal,

Neb. cried monster! a What

eighty whale, southern a was it for natural, was exclamation the And
a than less weighing not probably species, the of giant a long, feet
pounds! thousand fifty and hundred

by attempt nor move, not did stranded thus monster the meanwhile, the In
high. still was tide the while water the regain to struggling

side. left its of out sticking was harpoon a and dead, was It

Spilett Gideon said then? quarters, these in whalers are There
directly.

Pencroft. replied anything! prove doesnt that Spilett, Mr. Oh,
in harpoon a with miles of thousands go to known been have Whales
the of north the in struck been have even might one this and side, the
be would it and Pacific, the of south the in die to come and Atlantic
astonishing. nothing

this read side, animals the from harpoon the torn having Pencroft,
it: on inscription


VINEYARD STELLA, MARIA


The cried. he country! my from ship A Vineyard! the from vessel A
my Oh, well! her know I word; my pon whaler, fine A Stella! Maria
Vineyard! the from whaler Vineyard!--a the from vessel a friends,

emotion, without not repeated, harpoon, the brandishing sailor the And
birthplace. his of name well--the so loved he which name the

to come would Stella Maria the that expected be not could it as But
it cutting begin to resolved they her, by harpooned animal the reclaim
watched had who birds, The commence. should decomposition before up
it of possession take to determined had days, several for prey rich this
firing by off them drive to necessary was it and delay, further without
repeatedly. them at

it, from taken was milk of quantity large a and female, a was whale The
pass might Duffenbach, naturalist the of opinion the to according which,
color, taste, in neither it from differs it indeed, and, milk, cows for
density. nor

could he and whaling-ship, a board on served formerly had Pencroft
sufficiently a up, cutting of operation the direct methodically
settlers the which from but days, three lasting operation disagreeable
would said, sailor the as who, Spilett, Gideon even not flinch, not did
castaway. good real a making by end

thickness, in half a and feet two of slices parallel in cut blubber, The
each, pounds thousand a about weigh might which pieces into divided then
did they for spot, the to brought pots earthen large in down melted was
it fusion this in and House, Granite of environs the taint to wish not
weight. its of third a nearly lost

six yielded alone tongue the it; of quantity immense an was there But
besides Then, thousand. four lip lower the and oil, of pounds thousand
and stearine of store a time long a for insure would which fat, the
doubtless could use a which for bones, the still were there glycerine,
at used stays nor umbrellas neither were there although found, be
indeed, was, cetacean the of mouth the of part upper The House. Granite
elastic, very blades, horny hundred eight with sides both on provided
which at combs, great like edge the at fringed and texture, fibrous a of
animalculae, of thousands the retain to served long, feet six teeth, the
fed. whale the which on molluscs, and fish, little

the operators, the of satisfaction great the to finished, operation The
every make soon would who birds, the to left were animal the of remains
resumed were occupations daily usual their and disappear, it of vestige
House. Granite of inmates the by

conceived Harding Cyrus dockyard, the to returning before However,
the excited greatly which machines, certain fabricating of idea the
cut bones, whales the of dozen a took He companions. his of curiosity
ends. their sharpened and parts, equal six into them

employed frequently is it and invention, own my not is machine This
my bones, these see You America. Russian in hunters Aleutian the by
them wet then and them, bend will I freezes, it when well, friends;
them keep will which ice, with covered entirely are they till water with
them covered previously having snow, the on them strew will I and bent,
these of one swallows animal hungry a if happen will what Now, fat. with
bone, the and ice, the melt will stomach his of heat the Why, baits?
points. sharp its with him pierce will straight, springing

Pencroft. said ingenious! that call do I Well!

Harding. Cyrus rejoined shot, and powder the spare will it And

Neb. added traps! than better be will That

of end the towards and progressed, boat-building the meanwhile the In
that seen be already could It completed. was planking the half month the
well. sail would she that and excellent, was shape her

could frame sturdy a only and ardor, unparalleled with worked Pencroft
a secret in preparing were companions his but fatigue; such borne have
of one with meet to was he May of 31st the on and labors, his for reward
life. his of joys greatest the

table, the leave to about was he as just dinner, after day, that On
shoulder. his on hand a felt Pencroft

said,-- who Spilett, Gideon of hand the was It

Youve that! like off sneak mustnt you Pencroft, Master moment, One
dessert. your forgotten

my to back going am I sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. you, Thank
work.

friend? my coffee, of cup a Well,

more. Nothing

then? pipe, A

he when pale grew face good-natured great his and up, jumped Pencroft
Herbert and pipe, ready-filled a with him presenting reporter the saw
coal. glowing a with

so, word; a out get not could but speak, to endeavored sailor The
coal, the applying then lips, his to it carried he pipe, the seizing
and arose, soon cloud blue fragrant A whiffs. great six or five drew he
excitedly,-- repeating heard was voice a depths its from

tobacco! real Tobacco!

too! tobacco good very and Harding, Cyrus returned Pencroft, Yes,

sailor. the cried things! all of Author sacred Providence; divine O,
island. our to wanting now is more Nothing

smoked. and smoked, and smoked, Pencroft And

no Herbert, You, length. at asked he discovery? this made who And
doubt?

Spilett. Mr. was it Pencroft, No,

clasping and reporter, the seizing sailor, the exclaimed Spilett! Mr.
anything felt never had he that squeeze a such with breast his to him
before. it like

for truce a last, at breath his recovering Spilett, said Pencroft, Oh
recognized who Herbert, with gratitude your share must You moment. one
great a took who Neb, with and it, prepared who Cyrus, with plant, the
secret. our keep to trouble of deal

Now sailor. the replied day, some you repay will I friends, my Well,
life. for friends are we



11 Chapter

the of December the is which June, of month the with arrived Winter
solid and warm of making the was business great the and zones, northern
clothing.

this and wool, their of stripped been had corral the in musmons The
stuff. into transformed be to now was material textile precious

carders, neither disposal his at having Harding, Cyrus course Of
self-acting nor mule-jenny, twisters, stretchers, polishers, combers,
proceed to obliged was it, weave to loom nor wool, the spin to machine
indeed And weaving. and spinning without do to as so way, simpler a in
wool of filaments the which property the of use make to proposed he
of and together, mixing of pressure powerful a to subjected when possess
felt This felt. called material the process simple this by manufacturing
diminished it if which, operation simple a by obtained be then could
in heat retaining of power its increased stuff, the of flexibility the
very of composed was musmons the by furnished wool the Now proportion.
felted. be to condition good a in was and hairs, short

once was who Pencroft, including companions, his by aided engineer, The
operations, preliminary the commenced boat, his leave to obliged more
substance oily and fat that of wool the rid to was which of subject the
cleaning This grease. called is which and impregnated, is it which with
the at maintained was which water, with filled vats in done was
for soaked was wool the which in and degrees, seventy of temperature
soda, of baths in washed thoroughly then was it hours; four-and-twenty
be to state a in was it pressure, by dried sufficiently when and,
no rough, material, solid a produce to say, to is that compressed,
of center manufacturing a in value no have would as such and doubt,
Lincoln the in esteemed highly be would which but America, or Europe
markets. Island

times, ancient most the from known been have must material of sort This
process the by manufactured were stuffs woolen first the fact, in and,
engineering Hardings Where employ. to about now was Harding which
machine the of construction the in was play into came now qualifications
profit to ingeniously turn to how knew he for wool; the pressing for
beach the on waterfall the which unused, hitherto force, mechanical the
fulling-mill. a move to possessed

and troughs, in placed was wool The rudimentary. more be could Nothing
in machine the was such mallets; wooden heavy turns in fell it upon
the when time the until centuries for been had it such and question,
was material the and compression, of cylinders by replaced were mallets
rolling. regular to but beating, to subjected longer no

success. complete a was Harding, Cyrus by directed ably operation, The
on intended soap, of solution a with impregnated previously wool, The
the and compression, the interlacing, the facilitate to hand one the
by diminution its prevent to other the on and wool, the of softening
The cloth. felt thick of shape the in mill the from issued beating, the
so were filled naturally is wool of staple the which with roughnesses
formed was material a that together interlaced and entangled thoroughly
certainly was It bedclothes. or garments for either suitable equally
nor cloth, alpaca, satin, rep, cashmere, muslin, merino, neither
yet possessed Island Lincoln and felt, Lincolnian was It flannel.
thick and garments warm now had colonists The manufacture. another
winter the of approach the await fear without could they and bedclothes,
1866-67. of

his to and, June, of 20th the about felt be to began cold severe The
which boat-building, his suspend to obliged was Pencroft regret, great
spring. next for time in finish to hoped he

Tabor to discovery of voyage a make to was idea great sailors The
for simply voyage a of approve not could Harding although Island,
this on found be to nothing evidently was there for sake, curiositys
a in miles fifty and hundred a of voyage A rock. arid almost and desert
him cause but not could seas, unknown over vessel, small comparatively
be should sea, at out once vessel, their that Suppose anxiety. some
Island, Lincoln to return not could and Island, Tabor reach to unable
of fruitful so Pacific, the of midst the in her of become would what
disasters?

him found he and Pencroft, with project this over talked often Harding
he determination which for voyage, this undertaking upon bent strangely
reason. sufficient no give could himself

friend, my observe, must I him, to day one engineer the said Now,
after Island, Lincoln of praise in much, so said having after that
obliged were you if feel would you sorrow the of often so spoken having
it. leave to wish to first the are you it, forsake to

few a for only Pencroft, replied days, few a for it leave to Only
is islet that what see and back, come and go to Time captain. days,
like!

Island. Lincoln as good as nearly not is it But

beforehand. that know I

there? venture why Then

Island. Tabor in on going is what know To

there. happen could nothing there; on going is nothing But

knows? Who

hurricane? a in caught are you if And

Pencroft. replied season, fine the in that of fear no is There
your ask shall I everything, against provide must we as captain, But,
voyage. this on me with only Herbert take to permission

sailors the on hand his placing engineer, the replied Pencroft,
whom lad, this to or you, to happens misfortune any if shoulder,
blame to cease ever could we think you do child, our made has chance
ourselves?

we confidence, unshaken with Pencroft, replied Harding, Captain
this of further speak will we Besides, sorrow. that you cause not shall
seen have you when fancy, I And it. make to comes time the when voyage,
at behaves she how observed have you when craft, little tight-rigged our
fancy, together--I so do will we for island, our round sail we when sea,
conceal dont I go. me let to hesitate longer no will you that say, I
masterpiece. a be will boat your that you from

for disarmed engineer, the replied Pencroft, least, at boat, our Say
without on, later resumed be to thus, ended conversation The moment. the
engineer. the or sailor the either convincing

had corral The June. of month the of end the towards fell snow first The
to visits daily that so stores, with supplied largely been previously
should week a than more that decided was it but requisite; not were it
it. to going someone without pass to allowed be never

were Harding by manufactured machines the and set, again were Traps
covered and ice, of case a in imprisoned whalebones, bent The tried.
forest the of border the on placed were fat, of layer outer thick a with
lake. the to way their on passed usually animals where spot a at

the from copied invention, this satisfaction, great engineers the To
wild few a foxes, dozen A perfectly. succeeded fishermen, Aleutian
being animals the way, this in taken were jaguar, a even and boars,
bones. unbent the by pierced stomachs their dead, found

but itself, in interesting as only not related, be here must incident An
communicate to colonists the by made attempt first the was it because
mankind. of rest the with

into throw to whether pondered times several already had Spilett Gideon
perhaps might currents which bottle, a in enclosed letter a sea the
pigeons. to it confide to or coast, inhabited an to carry

could bottles or pigeons either that hoped seriously be it could how But
island the separated which miles hundred twelve of distance the cross
folly. pure been have would It land? inhabited any from

without not effected, was capture the June of 30th the on But
had gun Herberts from shot a which albatross, an of difficulty,
ten measuring bird, magnificent a was It foot. the in wounded slightly
the as wide as seas traverse could which and wing, to wing from feet
Pacific.

would wound its as bird, superb this keep to liked have would Herbert
to explained Spilett but it; tame could he thought he and heal, soon
to attempting of opportunity this neglect not should they that him
the if for Pacific; the of lands the with messenger this by communicate
but doubt no was there region, inhabited some from come had albatross
free. set was it as soon so there return would it that

sometimes journalist the whom in Spilett, Gideon heart his in Perhaps
sending of opportunity the have to sorry not was surface, the to came
adventures the relating article exciting an chance its take to forth
authorized the for success a What Island. Lincoln in settlers the of
contain should which number the for and Herald, York New the of reporter
the editor, its of address the reach ever should it if article, the
Bennett! James Honorable

a in placed was which account, concise a out wrote then Spilett Gideon
it find might whoever to request earnest an with bag, waterproof strong
was bag little This Herald. York New the of office the to it forward to
these for foot, its to not and albatross, the of neck the to fastened
then sea; the of surface the on resting of habit the in are birds
not was it and air, the of courier swift this to given was liberty
the in disappear it watched colonists the that emotion some without
west. misty

Pencroft. asked to? going he is Where

Herbert. replied Zealand, New Towards

expect not did himself who sailor, the shouted you, to voyage good A
correspondence. of mode this from result great any

House, Granite of interior the in resumed been had work winter, the With
sails the making others among occupations, different and clothes mending
balloon-case. inexhaustible the from cut were which vessel, their for

of lack no was there but intense, was cold the July of month the During
in fireplace second a established had Harding Cyrus coal. or wood either
Talking spent. were evenings winter long the there and dining-room, the
passed time the idle, remained hands the when reading worked, they while
all. to profit with

lighted well room, their in when settlers the to enjoyment real was It
elderberry dinner, good a after coal, with warmed well candles, with
smoke, odoriferous an forth giving pipes the cups, the in smoking coffee
been have would comfort Their without. howling storm the hear could they
far are who those for exist ever could comfort complete if complete,
with communication of means any without and fellow-creatures, their from
had they whom friends the of country, their of talked often They them.
could influence whose Republic, American the of grandeur the of left,
the with up mixed much been had who Harding, Cyrus and increase; but not
recitals, his by auditors his interested greatly Union, the of affairs
prognostics. his and views, his

say-- to led was Spilett that day one chanced It

movement commercial and industrial this all Cyrus, dear my now, But
of danger the run not it does advance, continual a predict you which to
stopped? completely later or sooner being

what? by And Stopped!

of precious most the called be justly may which coal, of want the By
minerals.

would it and engineer; the replied indeed, precious most the Yes,
diamond, the making by so was it that prove to wished nature that seem
crystallized. carbon pure simply is which

burn we that Pencroft, interrupted captain, say, to mean dont You
coal? of shape the in stoves our in diamonds

Harding. replied friend, my No,

the day some that deny not do you Spilett, Gideon resumed However,
consumed? entirely be will coal

hundred the and considerable, still are coal of veins the Oh!
of millions hundred a them from extract annually who miners thousand
them. exhausted nearly not have hundredweights

it Spilett, Gideon replied coal, of consumption increasing the With
two become soon will workmen thousand hundred the that foreseen be can
doubled. be will extraction of rate the that and thousand, hundred

more worked soon be will which mines, European the after but Doubtless;
for will mines Australian and American the machines, new with thoroughly
trade. in consumption the for provide yet time long a

reporter. the asked time? a long how For

years. hundred three or fifty and hundred two least at For

our for look-out bad a but us, for reassuring is That
Pencroft. observed great-grandchildren!

Herbert. said else, something discover will They

would there coal without for Spilett, answered so, hoped be to is It
no railways, no be would there machinery without and machinery, no be
to indispensable is which that of nothing manufactories, no steamers,
civilization! modern

captain? guess, you Can Pencroft. asked find? they will what But

friend. my Nearly,

coal? of instead burn they will what And

Harding. replied Water,

water engines! and steamers for fuel as water Pencroft, cried Water!
water! heat to

Cyrus replied elements, primitive its into decomposed water but Yes,
have then will which electricity, by doubtless, decomposed and Harding,
by discoveries, great all for force, manageable and powerful a become
same the at complete become and agree to appear laws, inexplicable some
employed be day one will water that believe I friends, my Yes, time.
or singly used it, constitute which oxygen and hydrogen that fuel, as
of light, and heat of source inexhaustible an furnish will together,
of coalrooms the day Some capable. not is coal which of intensity an
stored be coal, of instead will, locomotives of tenders the and steamers
with furnaces the in burn will which gases, condensed two these with
long As fear. to nothing therefore, is, There power. calorific enormous
inhabitants, its of wants the supply will it inhabited is earth the as
the as long as heat or light either of want no be will there and
us. fail not do kingdoms animal or mineral vegetable, the of productions
shall we exhausted are coal of deposits the when that then, believe, I
the of coal the be will Water water. with ourselves warm and heat
future.

sailor. the observed that, see to like should I

in part took only who Neb, returned Pencroft, soon, too born were You
words. these by discussion the

but conversation, the interrupted which speech Nebs not was it However,
which intonation strange that with again out broke which barking, Tops
run to began Top time same the At engineer. the perplexed before had
the of extremity the at opened which well, the of mouth the round
passage. interior

Pencroft. asked for? way that in barking be Top can What

Herbert. added that? like growling be Jup And

agitation, of signs unequivocal gave dog, the joining orang, the fact In
angry. than uneasy more appeared animals two the say, to singular and,

direct in is well this that Spilett, Gideon said evident, is It
time from comes animal marine some that and sea, the with communication
bottom. the at breathe to time to

other no be can there and sailor, the replied evident, Thats
the to turning Pencroft, added Top! there, Quiet give. to explanation
room! your to off be Jup, you, and dog,

remained Top but bed, to off went Jup silent. were dog the and ape The
the during intervals at growls low utter to continued and room, the in
the but subject, the on talk further no was There evening. the of rest
engineer. the of brow the clouded however, incident,

and rain alternate was there July of month the of remainder the During
winter, preceding the during as low so not was temperature The frost.
although But Fahrenheit. degrees eight exceed not did maximum its and
squalls; and storms by troubled more was it cold, less was winter this
times At Chimneys. the of safety the endangered often besides sea the
billows monstrous these raised under-current an if as seemed almost it
House. Granite of wall the against thundered which

watery huge the on gazed windows, their from leaning settlers, the When
the admire but not could they eyes, their beneath breaking masses
waves The fury. impotent its in ocean the of spectacle magnificent
the under disapppearing entirely beach the foam, dazzling in rebounded
the itself, sea the from emerge to appearing cliff the and flood, raging
feet. hundred a than more of height a to rising spray

out, venture to dangerous even and difficult was it storms these During
never colonists the however, trees; falling frequently the to owing
corral. the to visit a paid having without pass to week a allowed
Mount of spur southeastern the by sheltered enclosure, this Happily,
hurricanes, the of violence the from suffer greatly not did Franklin,
on poultry-yard the but palisades; and sheds, trees, its spared which
the from wind of gusts the to exposed directly being Heights, Prospect
unroofed twice was pigeon-house The damage. considerable suffered east,
solidly more remade be to required this All down. blown paling the and
in situated was Island Lincoln seen, clearly be may as for, before, than
if as appeared really It Pacific. the of parts dangerous most the of one
perpetually it beat which cyclones, vast of point central the formed it
motionless was which top the was it here only top, the does whip the as
August of month the of week first the During moved. which whip the and
calm the recovered atmosphere the and moderate, more became weather the
again cold the calm the With forever. lost have to appeared it which
Fahrenheit, degrees eight to fell thermometer the and intense, became
zero. below

several for of talked been had which excursion an August of 3rd the On
Tadorn towards island, the of part southeastern the into made was days
their up took which game aquatic the by tempted were hunters The Marsh.
there, abounded grebe and teal snipe, duck, Wild there. quarters winter
against expedition an to devoted be should day a that agreed was it and
birds. these

part took also Neb and Pencroft but Herbert, and Spilett Gideon only Not
excuse, an as work some alleging alone, Harding Cyrus excursion. this in
House. Granite at remained but them, join not did

to order in Balloon, Port of direction the in proceeded hunters The
Top evening. the by back be to promised having after marsh, the reach
Mercy the over passed had they as soon As them. accompanied Jup and
into put to intending returned, and it raised engineer the Bridge,
alone. be to wished he which of performance the for project a execution

mouth the well, interior the explore minutely to was project this Now
which and House, Granite of passage the with level a on was which of
the to way a supplied formerly it since sea, the with communicated
lake. the of waters

such utter he did Why opening? this round run often so Top did Why
this towards him draw to seemed uneasiness of sort a when barks strange
well this Had anxiety? common of sort a in Top join Jup did Why well?
towards spread it Did sea? the with communication the besides branches
He know. to wished Harding Cyrus what is This island? the of parts other
during well the of exploration the attempt to therefore, resolved, had
now had so doing for opportunity an and companions, his of absence the
itself. presented

rope the employing by well the of bottom the to descend to easy was It
The lift. the of establishment the since used been not had which ladder
measured which of diameter the hole, the to ladder the drew engineer
securely having after itself unroll to it allowed and feet, six nearly
a taken lantern, a lighted having Then, extremity. upper its fastened
descent. the began he belt, his in cutlass a placed and revolver,

and here out jutted rock of points but entire; everywhere were sides The
possible quite been have would it points these of means by and there,
well. the of mouth the to climb to creature active an for

these examined carefully he although but this; remarked engineer The
no impression, no find could he lantern, his of light the by points
either had they that suppose to reason any give could which fracture
Harding Cyrus staircase. a as used been time former any at or recently
sides. all on lantern his of light the throwing deeper, descended

suspicious. nothing saw He

water, the upon came he rounds last the reached had engineer the When
other any in nor level its at Neither calm. perfectly then was which
interior the to lead could which open, passage any did well, the of part
cutlass his of hilt the with struck Harding which wall The cliff. the of
being living no which through granite, compact was It solid. sounded
climb then and well the of bottom the at arrive To way. a force could
the under channel the through pass to necessary was it mouth its to up
the with communication in it placed which beach, the of subsoil rocky
question the to As animals. marine for possible only was this and sea,
at and shore, the of point what at ended, channel this where knowing of
answered. be not could it water, the beneath depth what

the up drew re-ascended, survey, his ended having Harding, Cyrus Then
the to thoughtfully returned and well, the of mouth the covered ladder,
himself,-- to saying diningroom,

there! something is there yet and nothing, seen have I



12 Chapter

and sport, good enjoyed having returned, hunters the evening the In
men four as much as had they indeed, game; with loaded literally being
of wreaths Jup and teal of necklace a wore Top carry. possibly could
body. his round snipe

time! our employ to something heres Neb; cried master, Here,
must I But store! welcome a have shall we pies into made and Preserved
Pencroft. you, on count I me. help to one some have

to vessel the of rigging the have I sailor; the replied Neb, No,
me. without do to have will you and after, look to and finish

Herbert? Mr. you, And

lad. the replied Neb, to-morrow, corral the to go must I

me? help will who Spilett, Mr. then, you be will It

that you warn I but reporter; the replied will, I Neb, you, oblige To
them. publish shall I me, to recipes your disclose you if

like. you whenever Neb; replied Spilett, Mr. like, you Whenever

was and assistant Nebs became Spilett Gideon day next the so And
made previously had engineer The laboratory. culinary his in installed
day the made had he which exploration the of result the him to known
that opinion, Hardings shared reporter the point this on and before,
discovered! be to remained still secret a nothing, found had he although

leave not did settlers the and week, another for continued frost The
dwelling The poultry-yard. the after look to unless House Granite
learned the from emitted were which odors, appetizing with filled was
chase the of results the all But reporter. the and Neb of manipulation
perfectly kept game the as and provisions; preserved into made not were
and fresh, eaten were fowl other and duck wild cold, intense the in
world. known the in birds aquatic other all to superior declared

the handled who Herbert, by aided Pencroft, week, this During
the that energy such with worked skill, much with needle sailmakers
Thanks cordage. of want no was There finished. were vessel the of sails
balloon, the of case the with discovered been had which rigging the to
the and quality, good of all were net the from cables and ropes the
strong attached were sails the To account. to all them turned sailor
the make to which from enough remained still there and ropes, bolt
by manufactured were blocks The etc. sheets, and shrouds, halyards,
lathe. turning the of means by directions Pencrofts under Harding Cyrus
the before prepared entirely was rigging the that happened therefore It
so flag that flag, a manufactured also Pencroft finished. was vessel
their of stripes and stars the containing American, true every to dear
plants certain from supplied were it for colors The Union. glorious
the to only island; the in abundant very were which and dyeing, in used
Union, the of States thirty-seven the representing stars, thirty-seven
the thirty-eighth, a added sailor the flag, American the on shine which
already as island his considered he for Lincoln, of State the of star
in already so is it he, said And, republic. great the to united
deed! in not if heart,

Granite of window central the at hoisted was flag the meantime, the In
cheers. three with it saluted settlers the and House,

this if as appeared it and end, an at almost now was season cold The
the on when occurrence, unusual any without pass to was winter second
menaced was Heights Prospect of plateau the August, of 11th the of night
destruction. complete with

four towards when soundly, sleeping were colonists the day busy a After
barking. Tops by awakened suddenly were they morning the in oclock

at but well, the of mouth the near barking time this not was dog The
to wished he if as scratching was he which at door, the of threshold the
cries. piercing uttering also was Jup open. it burst

continued dog the But awake. first the was who Neb, cried Top! Hello,
ever. than furiously more bark to

Harding. asked now? matter the Whats

opened. they which windows, the to rushed haste in dressing all And

the in gray looked which snow of sheet a spread was eyes their Beneath
singular a heard they but nothing, see could settlers The light. dim
had beach the that evident was It darkness. the in away noise yelping
seen. be not could which animals of number a by invaded been

Pencroft. cried they? are What

Neb. replied apes? or jaguars, Wolves,

reporter. the said plateau, the reached nearly have They

garden! our and Herbert, exclaimed poultry-yard, our And

Pencroft. asked crossed? have they can Where

engineer, the replied shore, the on bridge the crossed have must They
close. to forgotten have must us of one which

open. it left having remember I Spilett, said True,

sailor. the cried Spilett, Mr. it, of made have you job fine A

consult must We Harding. Cyrus replied undone, be cannot done is What
do. to best be now will it what

between exchanged rapidly were which answers and questions the were Such
been had bridge the that certain was It companions. his and Harding
whatever that and animals, by invaded been had shore the that crossed,
reach Mercy the of bank left the ascending by could they be might they
and quickly against advanced be therefore must They Heights. Prospect
necessary. if with fought

yelpings the as time, second a asked was beasts? these are what But
Herbert made yelps These before. than loudly more heard again were
visit first his during before them heard having remembered he and start,
Creek. Red the of sources the to

exclaimed. he foxes! colpeo are They

sailor. the shouted Forward!

threw revolvers, and carbines, hatchets, with themselves arming all And
shore. the on foot set soon and lift the into themselves

by irritated and numbers great in when animals dangerous are Colpeos
themselves throw to hesitate not did colonists the nevertheless hunger,
up lighting vividly shots first their and troop, the of midst the into
back. draw assailants their made darkness the

the reaching from plunderers these hinder to was thing chief The
at been have then would poultry-yard the and garden the for plateau,
inevitably would mischief, irreparable perhaps immense, and mercy, their
the as But corn-field. the to regard with especially result, the be
the of bank left the by made be only could plateau the of invasion
bank narrow the on colpeos the oppose to sufficient was it Mercy,
granite. of cliff the and river the between

the reached they orders, Hardings Cyrus by and, all, to plain was This
through fiercely rushed colpeos the while him, by indicated spot
posted Neb and Pencroft Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Harding, gloom. the
preceded open, jaws formidable his Top, line. impregnable in themselves
cudgel, knotty a with armed Jup, by followed was he and colonists, the
club. a like brandished he which

the from flashes the by only was it dark, extremely was night The
who assailants, their see could they that fired person each as revolvers
hot like glowing were eyes whose and number, in hundred a least at were
coals.

Pencroft. shouted pass! not must They

engineer. the returned pass! not shall They

it. attempted having of want for not was it pass not did they if But
an was it and assailants, foremost the on pushed rear the in Those
already colpeos Several hatchets. and revolvers with struggle incessant
diminish, to appear not did number their but ground, the on dead lay
continually were reinforcements that supposed been have might it and
bridge. the over arriving

without not quarters, close at fight to obliged soon were colonists The
had, Herbert ones. slight very happily though wounds, some receiving
had colpeo a back whose on Neb, rescued revolver, his from shot a with
the at flying fury, actual with fought Top cat. tiger a like sprung
wielded Jup instantaneously. them strangling and foxes the of throats
keep to endeavored they that vain in was it and valiantly, weapon his
to him enabled which sight with doubtless Endowed rear. the in him
uttering fight the of thick the in always was he obscurity, the pierce
of sign the him with was which sound, hissing sharp time--a to time from
rejoicing. great

revolver a from light the by that far, so advanced he moment one At
was he whom with colpeos, large six or five by surrounded seen was he
coolness. great with coping

side the on was victory and last, at ended was struggle the However,
The hours! long two for fought had they until not but settlers, the of
of retreat the determined doubtless day of approach the of signs first
the over passing North, the towards away scampered who assailants, their
sufficiently had day When raise. to immediately ran Neb which bridge,
fifty as many as counted settlers the battle, of field the up lighted
shore. the on about scattered bodies dead

His disappeared. had Jup Jup? is where Pencroft; cried Jup! And
his to reply not did Jup time first the for and him, called Neb friend
call. friends

found be should he lest trembling Jup, of search in out set Everyone
the stained which bodies the of place the cleared they slain; the among
colpeos of heap a of midst the in found was Jup blood. their with snow
the with do to had they that showed bodies crushed and jaws broken whose
animal. intrepid the of club terrible

but cudgel, broken his of stump the hand his in held still Jup Poor
chest his and numbers, by overpowered been had he weapon his of deprived
wounds. severe with covered was

him. over bending was who Neb, cried living, is He

he if as him nurse will We sailor. the replied him, save will we And
ourselves. of one was

Pencrofts on head his leaned he for understood, Jup if as appeared It
his but himself, wounded was sailor The him. thank to if as shoulder
to thanks for companions; his of those were as insignificant, was wound
assailants their keep to able always almost been had they firearms their
was condition whose orang the only therefore was It distance. a at
serious.

a only and lift, the in placed was Pencroft, and Neb by carried Jup,
to up drawn gently was He lips. his escaped then and now moan slight
the of one from taken mattress a on laid was he There House. Granite
not did It care. greatest the with bathed were wounds his and beds,
from weak very was Jup but reached, been had part vital any that appear
been had wounds his after in set soon fever high a and blood, of loss
real a like just imposed, was diet strict down, laid was He dressed.
of cups several swallow him made they and said, Neb as person,
the from supplied were ingredients the which for drink, cooling a
restless, first at was Jup House. Granite of chest medicine vegetable
left was he and regular, more became gradually breathing his but
one as tip-toe, on walking Top, time to time From quietly. sleeping
the all of approve to seemed and friend, his visit to came say, might
side the over hung hands Jups of One him. of taken been had that care
air. sympathizing a with it licked Top and bed, his of

the to dragged were who dead, the interring in day the employed They
deep. buried there and West, Far the of forest

a was consequences, serious such had have might which attack, This
one until bed to went never time this from who settlers, the to lesson
that and raised, were bridges the all that sure made had number their of
possible. was invasion no

several for anxiety serious them given having after Jup, However,
fever the through, him brought constitution His recover. to began days,
doctor, a of bit a was who Spilett, Gideon and subsided, gradually
to began Jup August, of 16th the On danger. of out quite him pronounced
devoured invalid the which dishes, sweet little nice him made Neb eat.
being of that was it failing pet a had he if for relish, great with
of him cure to anything done never had Neb and gourmand, a of somewhat
fault. this

sometimes who Spilett, Gideon to he said have? you would What
other no has Jup Poor ape. the spoiling for him with expostulated
to able be to glad too only am I and palate, the of that than pleasure
way! this in services his reward

Jup Master August, of 21st the on bed, his to taking after days Ten
not would he that evident was it and healed, were wounds His arose.
all Like agility. and strength usual his regaining in long be
him allowed reporter the and hungry, tremendously was he convalescents,
which instinct, that to trusted he for liked, he as much as eat to
any from orang the keep to beings, reasoning in wanting often too is
returning. appetite pupils his see to delighted was Neb excess.

shed have you anything; spare dont and he, said Jup, my away, Eat
strong you make to do can I least the is it and us, for blood your
again!

companions. his to calling heard was voice Nebs August of 25th the On

come! come! Pencroft, Herbert, Mr. Spilett, Mr. Captain,

call, Nebs at rose dining-room, the in together were who colonists, The
room. Jups in then was who

reporter. the asked matter? the Whats

see? they did what And laughter. of shout a with Neb, replied Look,
Turk a like crosslegged sitting seriously, and calmly smoking Jup Master
House! Granite to entrance the at

Jup, honest my Hello, pipe! my taken has He Pencroft. cried pipe, My
away! smoke boy, old away, Smoke it! of present a you make I

him give to seemed which smoke of clouds out puffed gravely Jup And
this at astonished much be to appear not did Harding satisfaction. great
of use the whom to apes, tame of examples several cited he and incident,
familiar. quite become had tobacco

sailors the own, his of pipe a had Jup Master day this from But
filled He tobacco. of store his near room his in hung was which ex-pipe,
be to appeared and coal, glowing a with it lighted himself, it
this that understood be readily may It quadrumana. of happiest the
of bonds the tighten to served Pencroft and Jup of tastes of similarity
worthy the and ape honest the between existed already which friendship
sailor.

Should Neb. to sometimes Pencroft said man, a really is he Perhaps
day? some us to speak to beginning him hear to surprised be you

spoken hasnt he that is me astonishes What Neb. replied no, word, My
speech! but nothing wants he now for before, us to

day fine some if sailor, the resumed same, the all me amuse would It
Pencroft. pipes, change we Suppose me, to said he

dumb! born was he pity a what Neb, replied Yes,

again were works the and ended, winter the September of month the With
was she rapidly, advanced vessel the of building The commenced. eagerly
hull the of parts inside the all and over, decked completely already
all answered which steam, of means by bent ribs with united firmly were
mold. a of purposes the

give to engineer the to proposed Pencroft wood, of want no was there As
vessel. the of strength the insure to hull, the to lining double a

them, for store in have might future the what knowing not Harding,
possible. as strong as craft the making of idea sailors the approved
the towards finished entirely was vessel the of deck and interior The
seaweed, dry of oakum made they seams the calking For September. of 15th
covered were seams these then planks; the between in hammered was which
pines the from abundance great in obtained was which tar, boiling with
forest. the in

first the from had She simple. very was vessel the of management The
lime, of bed a in up, walled granite of blocks heavy with ballasted been
away. stowed they which of pounds thousand twelve

into divided was interior the and ballast, this over placed was deck A
lockers. as also served and them along extended benches two cabins; two
two the separated which partition the supported mast the of foot The
deck. the into let hatchways two by reached were which cabins,

He mast. the for suitable tree a finding in trouble no had Pencroft
to only had he which and knots, no with fir, young straight a chose
mast, the of ironwork The top. the at off round and step, the at square
the at forged strongly but roughly been had hull the and rudder the
all were etc., oars, spars, boom, masts, yards, Lastly, Chimneys.
trial a that agreed was it and October, in week first the by furnished
vessel the how ascertain to as so island, the round taken be should trip
her. upon depend might they far how and sea, at behave would

neglected. been not had works necessary the time this all During
been had goats and musmons of flock the for enlarged, was corral The
The fed. and housed be to had who ones, young of number a by increased
coal the warren, the bed, oyster the to also visits paid had colonists
Far the of districts unexplored then till the to and mines, iron and
were plants indigenous Certain game. in abounded which forest, West
the vary to contributed use immediate for fit those and discovered,
House. Granite of stores vegetable

with Cape, the of those to similar some ficoide, of species a were They
flour. of sort a containing seeds bearing others leaves, fleshy eatable

radiant was Pencroft launched. was vessel the October of 10th the On
completely boat the successful; perfectly was operation the joy, with
floated was edge, waters the to rollers on pushed been having rigged,
of particularly colonists, the of cheers the amid tide, rising the by
importance his Besides occasion. this on modesty no showed who Pencroft,
having after since, vessel, the of finishing the beyond last to was
upon bestowed was captain of grade The her. command to was he her, built
now was it Pencroft, Captain satisfy To all. of approbation the with him
had propositions many after and, vessel, the to name a give to necessary
As Bonadventure. the of favor in all were votes the discussed, been
was it tide, rising the by lifted been had Bonadventure the as soon
navigated. easily be would and water, the in evenly lay she that seen
excursion an by day, very that made be to was trip trial the However,
sea the and fresh, breeze the fine, was weather The coast. the off
blowing was wind the for coast, south the towards especially smooth,
northwest. the from

first was breakfast but Pencroft; shouted board, on hands All
the in board, on provisions take to best thought was it and necessary,
evening. the until prolonged being excursion their of event

which of model the vessel, the try to anxious equally was Harding Cyrus
altered had he advice sailors the on although him, with originated had
her, in confidence Pencrofts share not did he but it, of parts some
Island, Tabor to voyage the of spoken again not had latter the as and
reluctance great indeed have would He up. it given had he hoped Harding
a small so in far so venture companions his of three or two letting in
burden. tons fifteen than more of not was which boat,

Herbert and Jup, and Top even board, on was everybody ten half-past At
the of mouth the near sand the in fast was which anchor, the weighed
the from floated flag Lincolnian the hoisted, was sail The Mercy.
sea. to out stood Pencroft, by steered Bonadventure, the and masthead,

her showed thus and it, before ran she Bay Union of out blowing wind The
fast remarkably a possessed she that satisfaction, their to much owners,
having After speaking. of mode Pencrofts to according heels, of pair
hauled, close her kept captain the Cape, Claw and Point Flotsam doubled
found was it when island, the of coast southern the along sail to as so
were hands All wind. the of points five within admirably sailed she
be would need, of case in which, vessel, good a had they enchanted,
the breeze fresh a and weather fine with and them, to service great of
charming. be to promised voyage

Port from across miles four or three shore, the off stood now Pencroft
new a under and extent its all in appeared then island The Balloon.
Reptile to Cape Claw from shore its of panorama varied the with aspect,
foliage young the with contrasted firs dark which in forests the End,
lofty whose Franklin Mount and whole, the overlooked and trees other of
snow. with whitened still was head

Herbert. cried is! it beautiful How

as it love I Pencroft. replied good, and beautiful is island our Yes,
what now and destitute, and poor us received It mother. poor my loved I
sky? the from it on fell who fellows five us to wanting is

captain. nothing, Neb; replied Nothing,

their of honor in cheers tremendous three gave men brave two the And
island!

sketched mast, the against leaning Spilett, Gideon time this all During
eyes. his before developed was which panorama the

silence. in it on gazed Harding Cyrus

our of think you do what Pencroft, asked Harding, Captain Well,
vessel?

engineer. the replied well, behave to appears She

some of voyage a undertake could she that now think you do And Good!
extent?

Pencroft? voyage, What

instance. for Island, Tabor to One

emergency pressing any in that think I Harding, replied friend, My
for even Bonadventure the to ourselves trust to hesitate not need we
Island Tabor to off set you see should I know you but voyage; longer a
there. go to you obliges nothing since uneasiness, great with

was who sailor, the returned neighbors, ones know to likes One
one! only the and neighbor, our is Island Tabor idea. his in obstinate
visit. a pay to least at go to us requires Politeness

particular very become has Pencroft friend our Spilett, said Jove, By
once! at all proprieties the about

who sailor, the retorted all, at anything about particular not am I
to wish not did who but opposition, engineers the by vexed rather was
anxiety. him cause

Tabor to alone go cannot you Harding, resumed Pencroft, Consider,
Island.

me. for enough be will companion One

of colony the depriving risk will you engineer, the replied so, Even
five. of out settlers two of Island Lincoln

Jup. forget you Pencroft; answered six, of Out

another. worth quite is Top Neb; added seven, of Out

Pencroft. replied captain, it, in all at risk no is There

ourselves expose to is it repeat I but Pencroft; possible, is That
uselessly.

quite drop, conversation the let and reply, not did sailor obstinate The
incident an that suspect not did he But again. it resume to determined
was which that humanity of act an into change and aid his to come would
whim. doubtful a only first at

it approached again Bonadventure the shore the off standing After
the ascertain to important was It Balloon. Port of direction the in
down laid be might buoys that reefs, and sandbanks the between channels
harbor. the be to was creek little this since

necessary was it and coast, the from mile a half than more not were They
a at going then was Bonadventure The wind. the against beat to tack to
land, high the by intercepted partly breeze, the as rate, moderate very
only was glass, as smooth sea, the and sails, her swelled scarcely
gusts. passing by then and now rippled

the indicate might he that bows the in himself stationed had Herbert
shouted,-- he once at all when channels, the among followed be to course

luff! Pencroft, Luff,

rock? a sailor; the replied matter, the Whats

again--right--now. Luff see. quite dont I Herbert; said No--wait,

the into arm his plunged side, the over leaning Herbert, saying, So
exclaiming,-- out, it pulled and water,

bottle! A

few a seized just had he which bottle corked a hand his in held He
shore. the from length cables

drew he word single a uttering Without bottle. the took Harding Cyrus
these written were which on paper, damp a it from took and cork, the
words:--

lat. S. 11 37deg long., W. 153deg island: Tabor Castaway....



13 Chapter

two not Island Tabor this on left Pencroft; exclaimed castaway! A
my oppose now wont you Harding, Captain Ah, us! from miles hundred
going.

as soon as out set shall you and Harding; Cyrus replied Pencroft, No,
possible.

To-morrow?

To-morrow!

from taken had he which paper the hand his in held still engineer The
resumed, then instants, some for it contemplated He bottle. the

worded, is it which in way the from friends, my document, this From
man a is Island Tabor on castaway the that first, this: conclude may we
the gives he since navigation, of knowledge considerable a possessing
it, found ourselves we as exactly island the of longitude and latitude
or English either is he that secondly, approximation; of second a to and
language. English the in written is document the as American,

this of presence the and Spilett; answered logical, perfectly is That
island. our of shores the on case the of arrival the explains castaway
the to As castaway. a is there since wreck, a been have must There
of thought Pencroft that him for lucky is it be, may he whoever latter,
and later day a for day, very this her trying of and boat this building
rocks. the on broken been have might bottle this

the that chance fortunate a is it Herbert, said Indeed,
floating! still was bottle the where exactly passed Bonadventure

Pencroft. of Harding asked you? to strange appear this not Does

see you Do sailor. the answered all, thats fortunate, appears It
and somewhere, go must bottle The captain? it, in extraordinary anything
else? anywhere as well as here not why

yet-- and engineer; the replied Pencroft, right, are you Perhaps

has bottle this that prove to nothing theres Herbert, observed But,
sea. the in long floating been

to even appears document the and Spilett, Gideon replied Nothing,
Cyrus? it, about think you do What written. recently been have

put had He inactive. remained not had Pencroft conversation this During
running was set, sails all Bonadventure, the and about, vessel the
Cape. Claw towards rapidly

they Should Island. Tabor on castaway the of thinking was one Every
the of life the in event great a was This him? save to time in be
feared be to was it but castaways, but were themselves They colonists!
go to was duty their and fortunate, so been have not might another that
succor. his to

dropped Bonadventure the oclock four about and doubled, was Cape Claw
Mercy. the of mouth the at anchor her

made. were expedition new the for arrangements the evening same That
the work to how knew who Herbert, and Pencroft that best appeared It
day, next the out setting By alone. voyage the undertake should vessel,
present the with for 13th, the on arrive would they October, of 10th the
passage this make to hours forty-eight than more take not would it wind
to four or three island, the in day One miles. fifty and hundred a of
again would they 17th the on that therefore hope might they return,
rising, was barometer the fine, was weather The Island. Lincoln reach
brave these of favor in was then everything settled, appeared wind the
island. their from far taking was humanity of act an whom men

Spilett Gideon and Neb, Harding, Cyrus that agreed been had it Thus
and raised, was objection an but House, Granite at remain should
York New the to reporter as business his forgotten not had who Spilett,
lose than rather swimming by go would he that declared having Herald,
voyage. the in part a take to admitted was he opportunity, an such

Bonadventure, the board on transporting in occupied was evening The
provisions compass, a ammunition, arms, utensils, bedding, of articles
Granite to ascended colonists the done, rapidly being this week; a for
House.

said, were farewells the morning, the in oclock five at day, next The
made sail setting Pencroft and sides, both on emotion some without not
the to proceed to order in doubled be to had which Cape, Claw towards
southwest.

when coast the from mile a of quarter a already was Bonadventure The
waving men two House Granite of heights the on perceived passengers the
Neb. and Harding Cyrus were they farewells; their

in separation first our is this Spilett, exclaimed friends, Our
months. fifteen

House Granite and return, in waved Herbert and reporter the Pencroft,
Cape. the of rocks high the behind disappeared soon

sight in still was Bonadventure the day the of part first the During
like just appeared soon which Island, Lincoln of coast southern the of
heights, The center. the from rising Franklin Mount with basket, green a
tempt to likely appearance an present not did distance, by diminished
though hour, an about in passed was End Reptile there. touch to vessels
miles. ten about of distance a at

of anything distinguish to possible longer no was it distance this At
Franklin, Mount of ridges the to away stretched which Coast, Western the
horizon. the below sank Island Lincoln of last the after hours three and

she waves the over Bounding capitally. behaved Bonadventure The
and foresail, the hoisted had Pencroft course. her on rapidly proceeded
to time From direction. rectilinear a followed compass the by steering
firm so was hand lads the and helm, the at him relieved Herbert time
with. fault find to point a not had sailor the that

if other, the with sometimes one, with sometimes chatted Spilett Gideon
perfectly was Pencroft Captain and ropes, the with hand a lent he wanted
crew. his with satisfied

first its in be not would which moon, crescent the evening the In
The again. set soon and twilight the in appeared 16th, the until quarter
fine. be to promised again day next the and starry, but dark was night

by caught be to wishing not foresail, the lowered prudently Pencroft
an perhaps was it canvas; much too carrying while gust sudden a
prudent a was Pencroft but night, calm a such on precaution unnecessary
it. for blamed be cannot and sailor

turns took Herbert and Pencroft night. the of part slept reporter The
as Herbert trusted sailor The helm. the at each hours two of spell a for
and coolness the by justified was confidence his and himself, would he
to commander a as directions his him gave Pencroft lad. the of judgment
swerve to Bonadventure the allowed never Herbert and steersman, his
of 12th the of day the did as quickly, passed night The point. a even
the Unless maintained. strictly was direction south-easterly A October.
exactly come would she current unknown some with in fell Bonadventure
Island. Tabor of sight within

absolutely was it sailing, then was vessel the which over sea the to As
within passed bird frigate or albatross great a then and Now deserted.
he that them of one to was it if wondered Spilett Gideon and gunshot,
These Herald. York New the to addressed letter last his confided had
the of part this frequent to appeared that beings only the were birds
Islands. Lincoln and Tabor between ocean

usually whalers that time the is this Herbert, observed yet, And
think not do I Indeed Pacific. the of part southern the towards proceed
this. than sea deserted more a be could there

Pencroft. replied that, all as deserted so quite not is It

reporter. the asked mean? you do What

porpoises? for us and wreck a for vessel our take you Do it. on are We

joke. his at laughed Pencroft And

the that thought was it calculation, to according evening, the By
miles twenty and hundred a of distance a accomplished had Bonadventure
thirty-six in say to is that Island, Lincoln from departure her since
knots. four and three between of speed a her give would which hours,
altogether. drop soon might and slight very was breeze The
the if day, of break by morning next the that hoped was it However,
Tabor sight would they true, course the and correct been had calculation
Island.

the In night. that slept Pencroft nor Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Neither
emotion. some feel but not could they day next the of expectation
Tabor near they Were enterprise! their in uncertainty much so was There
succor whose to castaway the by inhabited still island the Was Island?
the disturb presence his not Would man? this was Who come? had they
to content be he would Besides, united? so then till colony little
no would which questions, these All another? for prison his exchange
dawn the at and suspense, in them kept day, next the answered be doubt
horizon. western the on gaze their fixed all they day of

morning. the in oclock six about at Pencroft shouted Land!

was it mistaken, be should Pencroft that impossible was it And
of crew little the of joy the Imagine there. was land that evident
the of beach the on land would they hours few a In Bonadventure. the
island!

not was sea, the from emerging scarcely Island, Tabor of coast low The
distant. miles fifteen than more

the of south the to little a was which Bonadventure, the of head The
east, the in mounted sun the as and it, towards directly set was island,
headlands. two or one upon fell rays its

observed Island, Lincoln than isle important less much a is This
convulsion. submarine some to ours like due probably is and Herbert,

off, miles two than more not was Bonadventure the oclock eleven At
land, to which at place suitable a for looking while Pencroft, and
the of whole The waters. unknown the through cautiously very proceeded
gum of groups seen be could it on and surveyed, be now could island
Lincoln on growing those as species same the of trees, large other and
that show to arose smoke no that was thing astonishing the But Island.
shore! the on appeared whatever signal no inhabited, was island the

this and castaway, a was there enough; clear was document the yet And
watch. the on been have should castaway

among channels winding the entered Bonadventure the meanwhile the In
had He care. extreme with turn every observed Pencroft and reefs, the
the inspecting bows, the in himself posting helm, the at Herbert put
sail the lower to ready hand, his in halliard the held he while water,
the scanned eagerly glass his with Spilett Gideon notice. moments a at
anything. perceiving without though shore,

grated Bonadventure the of keel the oclock twelve about at However,
of crew the and furled, sails the go, let was anchor The bottom. the on
landed. vessel little the

since Island, Tabor was this that doubt to reason no was there And
of part this in island no was there charts recent most the to according
Coast. American the and Zealand New between Pacific the

of danger no be should there that so moored, securely was vessel The
his and Pencroft then tide; receding the by away carried being her
elevation an gain to as so shore, the ascended armed, well companions,
a at rose which feet hundred three or fifty and hundred two about of
mile. a half of distance

a obtain doubt no can we Spilett, said hill, that of summit the From
search. our facilitate greatly will which island, the of view complete

the did Harding Captain which that Herbert, replied here, do to as So
Franklin. Mount climbing by Island, Lincoln on thing first very

plan. best the is it and reporter, the answered so, Exactly

clearing a along advanced had explorers the talking thus While
and rock-pigeons of Flocks hill. the of foot the at terminated which
them. around fluttered Island, Lincoln of those to similar sea-swallows,
the hear could they left the on glade the skirted which woods the Under
presence the indicated which waving, grass the see and rustling bushes
was island the that show to nothing still but animals, timid of
inhabited.

climbed Herbert and Spilett, Pencroft, hill, the of foot the at Arrived
horizon. the round anxiously gazed and minutes, few a in it

in miles six than more measure not did which islet, an on were They
promontories, or capes by bordered much not shape its circumference,
sea lonely the around, All oval. lengthened a being creeks, or bays
in was sail a even nor land No horizon. the of limits the to extended
sight.

Island, Lincoln of aspects varied the offer not did islet woody This
the On other. the in rich and fertile but part, one in wild and arid
or two rose which of out verdure, of mass uniform a was this contrary
ran island the of oval the to Obliquely height. great no of hills three
a by west the on sea the into falling meadow wide a through stream a
mouth. narrow

Herbert. said limited, is domain The

us. for small too been have would It Pencroft: rejoined Yes,

uninhabited. be to appears it reporter, the said moreover, And

man. of presence the betrays here nothing Herbert, answered Indeed,

search. and Pencroft, said down, go us Let

place the to shore, the to returned companions two his and sailor The
Bonadventure. the left had they where

before foot, on island the of tour the make to decided had They
their escape should spot a not that so interior; the exploring
places some in only and follow, to easy was beach The investigations.
passed easily they however, which, rocks, large by barred way their was
numerous disturbing south, the towards proceeded explorers The round.
the into themselves threw which seals, of herds and sea-birds of flocks
distance. a at strangers the saw they as soon as sea

the for men see not do reporter, the observed yonder, beasts Those
them. know must they therefore them, fear They time. first

the of point southern the on arrived they departure their after hour An
along north the towards proceeded and cape, sharp a by terminated islet,
background the rocks, and sand by formed equally coast, western the
woods. thick with bordered

a of print the not part, any in habitation a of trace a not was There
walking hours four after which island, the of shore the on foot human
round. completely gone been had

to compelled were they and extraordinary, very least the say to was It
Perhaps, inhabited. longer no was or not was Island Tabor that believe
old, years several or months several already was document the all after
been had castaway the that either case, this in possible was it and
misery. of died had he that or country, his to return to enabled

probable less or more forming Herbert, and Spilett, Pencroft,
be to as so Bonadventure the board on rapidly dined conjectures,
five at done was This nightfall. until excursion their continue to able
wood. the entered they hour which at evening, the in oclock

might one principally, being approach, their at fled animals Numerous
species. European obviously were which pigs, and goats only say,

had they where island, the on them landed had whaler some Doubtless
take and living, two or one catch to resolved Herbert increased. rapidly
Island. Lincoln to back them

visited had other or period some at men that doubtful longer no was It
appeared paths when evident more still became this and islet, this
the of traces everywhere and trees, felled forest, the through trodden
felled been had and rotten, becoming were trees the but man; of hand
the and moss, with velveted were axe the of marks the ago; years many
find to difficult was it that so paths, the on thick and long grew grass
them.

have men that proves only not this Spilett, Gideon observed But,
Now, time. some for it on lived they that also but island, the on landed
remain? them of many How men? these were who

castaway. one of spoke only Herbert, said document, The

is it Pencroft, replied island, the on still is he if Well,
him. find shall we that but impossible

naturally companions his and sailor The continued. was exploration The
were they and island, the across diagonally cut which route the followed
sea. the towards flowed which stream the follow to obliged thus

showed hand, human a to due works if origin, European of animals the If
specimens several island, the visited already had men that incontestably
the in places, some In less. it prove not did kingdom vegetable the of
with planted been had soil the that evident was it clearings, of midst
period. distant same the probably at plants, culinary

chicory, potatoes, recognized he when joy, Herberts was then, What,
to sufficient was it which of turnips, and cabbages, carrots, sorrel,
Island. Lincoln of soil the enrich to seed the collect

us. as well as Neb suit will That Pencroft. exclaimed jolly! Capital,
have not will voyage our least at castaway, the find not do we if Even
us. rewarded have will God and useless, been

we which in state the see to but Spilett, Gideon replied Doubtless,
been not has island the that feared be to is it plantations, these find
time. some for inhabited

not could was, he whoever inhabitant, an Herbert, answered Indeed,
culture! important an such neglected have

gone. has castaway the Pencroft, said Yes,

so. suppose must We

date? distant a already has document the that admitted be then must It

Evidently.

floated having after Island Lincoln at arrived only bottle the that And
time. long a sea the in

I and he, added on, coming is night But Pencroft. returned not? Why
present. the for search the up give to best be will it that think

the said again, begin will we to-morrow and board, on go us Let
reporter.

when followed be to about was it and course, wisest the was This
exclaimed,-- trees, the among mass confused a to pointing Herbert,

hut! A

was it twilight the In dwelling. the towards ran immediately three All
a with covered and planks of built was it that see to possible just
tarpaulin. thick

a with entered who Pencroft, by open pushed was door half-closed The
step. rapid

empty! was hut The



14 Chapter

of midst the in silent remained Spilett Gideon and Herbert, Pencroft,
darkness. the

loudly. shouted Pencroft

made. was reply No

for lighted This twig. a to fire set and light a struck then sailor The
was back the At empty. perfectly appeared which room, small a minute a
dry of armful an supporting cinders, cold few a with fireplace, rude a
gave and crackled wood the it, on twig blazing the threw Pencroft wood.
light. bright a forth

of bed, disordered a perceived then companions two his and sailor The
for used been not had it that proved coverlets yellow and damp the which
covered kettles, two were fireplace the of corner the In time. long a
sailors moldy few a with cupboard, A pot. overthrown an and rust, with
a in damp; by away eaten Bible, a and plate tin a table the on clothes;
which of one fowling-pieces, two pickaxe, spade, a tools, few a corner
still powder, of barrel a stood shelf, a forming plank, a on broken; was
thickly all caps, of boxes several and shot, of barrel a untouched,
years. long many by perhaps, accumulated, dust, with covered

reporter. the said here, one no is There

Pencroft. replied one, No

observed inhabited, been has room this since time long a is It
Herbert.

reporter. the answered time! long very a Yes,

I board, on returning of instead Pencroft, said then Spilett, Mr.
hut. this in night the pass to well be would it that think

owner its if and Spilett, Gideon answered Pencroft, right, are You
taken place the find to sorry be not will he perhaps well! returns,
of. possession

head. his shaking sailor, the said return, not will He

reporter. the asked island? the quitted has he that think You

and weapons his away taken have would he island the quitted had he If
set castaways which value the know You Pencroft. replied tools, his
repeated no! No! wreck. a of remains last the these as articles such on
If island! the left not has he no, conviction; of tone a in sailor, the
left have less still would he himself, by made boat a in escaped had he
island! the on is he No! articles. necessary and indispensable these

Herbert. asked Living?

himself, buried not has he suppose I dead, is he if But dead. or Living
remains! his find least at shall we so and

deserted the in passed be should night the that agreed then was It
warm to sufficient was corner a in found wood of store a and dwelling,
there, remained Spilett and Herbert Pencroft, closed, door The it.
a in were They much. wondering but little talking bench, a on seated
listened They anything. expect or anything imagine to mind of frame
and suddenly, opened have might door The outside. sounds for eagerly
least the in being their without them to himself presented man a
abandonment, of revealed hut the that all notwithstanding surprised,
this man, this of hands the press to ready hands their had they and
waiting. were friends whom for friend, unknown this castaway,

passed thus hours The open. not did door the heard, was voice no But
away.

Herbert companions! his and sailor the to appeared night the long How
They necessity. a is sleep age his at for hours, two for slept alone
before, day the of exploration their continue to anxious three all were
inferences The islet! the of recesses secret most the search to and
certain nearly was it and reasonable, perfectly were Pencroft by deduced
were weapons and utensils, tools, the and deserted, was hut the as that,
that therefore, agreed, was It succumbed. had owner the there, still
Christian least at them give and remains, his for search should they
burial.

survey to proceeded immediately companions his and Pencroft dawned; Day
situation, favorable a in built been certainly had It dwelling. the
magnificent six or five by sheltered hill, little a of back the at
prepared had axe the trees the through and front its Before gum-trees.
a Beyond sea. the to extend to view the allowed which clearing, wide a
on shore, the was pieces, to falling fence wooden a by surrounded lawn,
stream. the of mouth the was which of left the

these that see to easy was it and planks, of built been had hut The
was It ship. a of deck or hull the from obtained been had planks
the of coast the on cast been had vessel disabled a that probable
means by that and saved, been had crew the of least at one that island,
the built had disposal, his at tools having man, this wreck the of
dwelling.

having after Spilett, Gideon when evident more still became this And
which those of one probably plank, a on saw hut, the around walked
half already letters these vessel, wrecked the of armor the formed had
effaced:


BR--TAN--A


is it called; had reporter the whom Pencroft, exclaimed Britannia,
or English was she if say not could I and ships, for name common a
American!

Pencroft! little, very matters It

the save will we and sailor, the answered indeed, little Very
may he country whatever to living, still is he if crew her of survivor
the board on go us let again search our beginning before But belong.
Bonadventure.

vessel. his of subject the upon Pencroft seized had uneasiness of sort A
taken have one some should and all, after inhabited be island the Should
unreasonable an such at shoulders his shrugged he But her? of possession
on breakfast to go to sorry not was sailor the rate any At supposition.
set They mile. a scarcely long, not was trodden already road The board.
goats which through thickets and wood the into gazing walk, their on out
hundreds. in fled pigs and

reached companions his and Pencroft hut the leaving after minutes Twenty
by fast held Bonadventure the saw and island, the of coast western the
sand. the in deep buried was which anchor, her

this all After satisfaction. of sigh a restrain not could Pencroft
uneasy often be to fathers of right the is it and child, his was vessel
it. for occasion no is there when

necessary be not should it that so breakfasted, board, on returned They
exploration the ended, being repast the then late; very until dine to
was it Indeed, care. minute most the with conducted and continued was
It perished. had island the of inhabitant only the that probable very
that man living a of than dead a of traces the for more therefore was
and vain, were searches their But searched. companions his and Pencroft
thickets the among purpose no to sought they day that of half the during
doubt any scarcely then was There islet. the covered which trees of
but remained, now body his of trace no dead, was castaway the if that,
bone. last the to it devoured probably had beast wild some that

two his to Pencroft said daybreak, at to-morrow off set will We
minutes few a for resting were they oclock two about as companions,
firs. of clump a of shade the under

which utensils the take scruple without might we that think should I
Herbert. added castaway, the to belonged

tools and arms these and Spilett, Gideon returned too, so, think I
shot and powder of supply The House. Granite of stores the up make will
important. most also is

or couple a capture to forget not must we but Pencroft, replied Yes,
destitute. is Island Lincoln which of pigs, those of two

the all us give will which Herbert, added seeds, those gather to Nor
Worlds. New the and Old the of vegetables

day a remain to reporter, the said best, be would it perhaps Then
us. to useful be may that all collect to as so Island, Tabor on longer

off set to you ask will I Pencroft, answered Spilett, Mr. No,
the to shift to likely be to me to seems wind The daybreak. at to-morrow
fair a have shall we coming for wind fair a had having after and west,
back. going for wind

rising. Herbert, said time, lose us let not do Then

gather and go Herbert, You, Pencroft. returned time, waste wont We
Mr. that, do you While do. we than better know you which seeds, the
hope I Top without even and hunt, pig a have and go will I and Spilett
few! a catch to manage shall we

part cultivated the towards led which path the took accordingly Herbert
forest. the entered reporter the and sailor the while islet, the of

animals, these and them, before fled race porcine the of specimens Many
allow to humor a in be to appear not did active, singularly were which
approached. be to themselves

hold get to managed just had hunters the chase, hours an after However,
from resounding heard were cries when thicket, a in lying couple a of
terrible mingled were cries the With island, the of part north the
human. nothing was there which in yells,

pigs the and feet, their on once at were Spilett Gideon and Pencroft
was sailor the when moment the at away, run to began movement this by
them. bind to rope the ready getting

reporter. the said voice, Herberts Thats

Pencroft. exclaimed Run!

the towards speed full at ran immediately Spilett and sailor the And
proceeded. cries the whence from spot

they clearing a near path the of turn a at for hasten, to well did They
being, savage a of grasp the in and ground the on thrown lad the saw
harm. great some him do to about was who ape, gigantic a apparently

snatch turn, his in ground the on him throw monster, this on rush To
for minute a of work the was securely, him bind then him, from Herbert
the strength, Herculean of was sailor The Spilett. Gideon and Pencroft
he resistance monsters the of spite in and powerful, very also reporter
move. even not could he that so tied firmly was

Spilett. asked Herbert? hurt, not are You

no! No,

Pencroft. exclaimed him! wounded had ape this if Oh,

Herbert. answered ape, an not is he But

being singular the at looked Spilett Gideon and Pencroft words these At
being, human a was it ape; an not was it Indeed ground. the on lay who
the of acceptation horrible the all in savage A man! a what But man. a
lowest the to fallen seemed he that frightful more the much so and word,
brutishness! of degree

almost body the chest, the to descending beard untrimmed hair, Shaggy
with hands enormous eyes, wild waist, the round rag a except naked
if as hard as feet mahogany, of color the skin nails, long immensely
be to claim a had yet who creature miserable the was such horn, of made
in soul a yet were there if asked be justly might it But man. a called
it! in survived alone instinct brute the if or body, this

one? been ever has he that or man, a is this that sure quite you Are
reporter. the to Pencroft said

Spilett. replied it, about doubt no is there Alas!

Herbert. asked castaway? the be must this Then

longer no has man unfortunate the but Spilett, Gideon replied Yes,
him! about human anything

had castaway the if that evident was It truth. the spoke reporter The
worse, or savage, a him made had solitude being, civilized a been ever
throat his from issued sounds Hoarse woods. the of man regular a perhaps
to made beast wild a of teeth the as sharp were which teeth, his between
flesh. raw tear

he also time long a for and before, long him deserted have must Memory
to how knew longer no he and tools, and gun his use to how forgotten had
the but powerful, and active was he that seen be could It fire! a make
moral the of injury the to him in developed been had qualities physical
understand to appear not did He him. to spoke Spilett Gideon qualities.
thought reporter the eyes, his into looking on yet And hear. to even or
the However, him. in extinguished not was reason all that see could he
he Was bonds. his break to attempt even nor struggle, not did prisoner
he Had been? once had he fellow whose men of presence the by overwhelmed
recalled which remembrance fleeting a brain his of corner some in found
remain? he would or fly, to attempt he would free, If humanity? to him
after and experiment; the make not did they but tell, not could They
creature,-- miserable the at attentively gazing

have may he whoever Spilett, Gideon remarked be, may he Whoever
to us with him take to duty our is it become, may he whatever and been,
Island. Lincoln

him in arouse may we care with perhaps and Herbert, replied yes! Yes,
intelligence. of gleam some

great a be would it and reporter, the said die, not does soul The
brutishness. from creatures Gods of one rescue to satisfaction

doubtfully. head his shook Pencroft

commands humanity reporter; the returned rate, any at try must We
us.

three All beings. civilized and Christians as duty their indeed was It
their of approve would Harding Cyrus that knew well they and this, felt
thus. acting

sailor. the asked bound? him leave we Shall

Herbert. said unfastened, were feet his if walk would he Perhaps

Pencroft. replied try, us Let

arms his but off, cut were feet prisoners the shackled which cords The
manifest not did and himself by up got He fastened. securely remained
the at glance piercing a darted eyes hard His away. run to desire any
recollected he that denoted nothing but him, near walked who men, three
hissing continual A so. been having least at or fellow, their being
attempt not did he but wild, was aspect his lips, his from issued sound
resist. to

hut. the to taken was man unfortunate the advice reporters the By
some make would him to belonged that things the of sight the Perhaps
his revive to sufficient be would spark a Perhaps him! on impression
was dwelling The soul. dulled his rekindle to intellect, obscured
prisoner the but there, arrived they minutes few a In off. far not
of consciousness lost had he that appeared it and nothing, remembered
everything.

this which into brutishness of degree the of think they could What
islet the on imprisonment his that unless fallen, had being miserable
a there arrived having after and period distant very a from dated
condition. this to him reduced had solitude being rational

have would fire of sight the perhaps that thought then reporter The
that flames, beautiful those of one moment a in and him, on effect some
flame the of sight The hearth. the on up blazed animals, even attract
soon but object, unhappy the of attention the fix to first at seemed
was there Evidently faded. intelligence of look the and away turned he
board on him take to but least, at time the for done, be to nothing
Pencrofts in there remained he and done, was This Bonadventure. the
charge.

after hours some and work; their finish to returned Spilett and Herbert
of store a guns, and utensils the carrying shore, the to back came they
pigs. of couple two and game, some seeds, of vegetables,

and anchor weigh to ready was Bonadventure the and embarked, was All
tide. morning the with sail

quiet, remained he where fore-cabin, the in placed been had prisoner The
dumb. and deaf apparently silent,

cooked the away pushed he but eat, to something him offered Pencroft
But him. suit not did doubtless which and him to presented was that meat
he killed, had Herbert which ducks the of one him showing sailor the on
greedily. it devoured and beast, wild a like it on pounced

is It Pencroft. asked senses? his recover will he that think You
is it for him, upon effect an have will care our that impossible not
he forward time this from and is, he what him made has that solitude
alone. longer no be will

time, long a for state this in been have doubt no must man poor The
Herbert. said

Spilett. Gideon answered Perhaps,

lad. the asked he? is age what About

to impossible is it for reporter, the replied say, to difficult is It
is he but face, his covers which beard thick the under features his see
fifty. about be might he suppose I and young, longer no

asked are? eyes his sunk deeply how Spilett, Mr. noticed, you Have
Herbert.

could one than human more are they that add must I but Herbert, Yes,
appearance. his from expect

know to anxious am I and Pencroft, replied see, shall we However,
look to went We savage. our of have will Harding Captain opinion what
we all, After monster! a back bringing are we and creature, human a for
could. we what did

be not could not or slept prisoner the whether and passed, night The
not did he unbound, been had he although rate, any at but known,
its by first at stunned appears which animal, wild a like was He move.
afterwards. again wild becomes and capture,


weather of change the October, of 15th the morning, next the daybreak At
northwest the to shifted having wind The occurred. Pencroft by predicted
it time same the at but Bonadventure, the of return the favored
difficult. more navigation render might which freshened,

a took Pencroft weighed. was anchor the morning the in oclock five At
sail to as so north-east, the towards steered and mainsail, the in reef
Island. Lincoln for straight

prisoner The incident. any by marked not was voyage the of day first The
it sailor a been had he as and fore-cabin, the in quiet remained
salutary a him on produce might vessel the of motion the that appeared
him? to return calling former his of recollection some Did reaction.
than rather astonished tranquil, remained he be, might that However
depressed.

north, the from more blowing increased, wind the day next The
Bonadventure. the for direction favorable less a in consequently
saying without and close-hauled, sail to obliged soon was Pencroft
which sea, the of state the at uneasy be to began he it about anything
moderate, not did wind the if Certainly, bows. the over broke frequently
to taken had it than Island Lincoln reach to time longer a take would it
Island. Tabor make

been had Bonadventure the 17th, the of morning the on Indeed,
the near was she that showed nothing and sea, at hours forty-eight
traversed, distance the estimate to besides, impossible, was It island.
been had speed the as direction, the for reckoning the to trust to or
irregular. very

was wind The sight. in land no yet was there after hours Twenty-four
and close-reefed, were sails The heavy. very sea the and ahead right
the over completely swept wave a 18th, the On frequently. tacked they
lashing of precaution the taken not had crew the if and Bonadventure;
away. carried been have would they deck, the to themselves

with occupied were who companions, his and Pencroft occasion this On
who prisoner, the from aid unexpected received themselves, loosing
suddenly had instinct sailors his if as hatchway the from emerged
let to as so spar a with bulwarks the of out piece a broke returned,
he clear, being vessel the Then escape. deck the filled which water the
Gideon Pencroft, word. a uttered having without cabin his to descended
proceed. him let astonished, greatly Herbert, and Spilett,

fear to reason had sailor the and serious, truly was situation Their
recovering of possibility any without sea wide the on lost was he that
course. his

wind the oclock, eleven about However, cold. and dark was night The
labored she as vessel, the of speed the and down, went sea the fell,
increased. greatly less,

hours an taking of thought Herbert nor Spilett, Pencroft, Neither
not could Island Lincoln either for look-out, sharp a kept They sleep.
Bonadventure, the or daybreak, at sighted be would and distant far be
be would it that much so drifted had currents, by away carried
degree, last the to uneasy Pencroft, course. her rectify to impossible
tiller the grasping and heart, gallant a had he for despair, not did yet
them. surrounded which darkness the pierce to endeavored anxiously he

forward,-- started he morning the in oclock two About

shouted. he light! a light! A

Lincoln northeast. the to miles twenty appeared light bright a Indeed,
Harding, Cyrus by lighted evidently fire, this and there, was Island
too bearing was who Pencroft, followed. be to course the them showed
fire, the towards steered and course his altered north, the to much
first the of star a like horizon the above brightly burned which
magnitude.



15 Chapter

morning, the in oclock seven at October, of 20th the day, next The
the to up glided gently Bonadventure the days, four of voyage a after
Mercy. the of mouth the at beach

and weather bad the at uneasy very become had who Neb, and Harding Cyrus
to daybreak at climbed had companions, their of absence prolonged the
of sight caught last at had they and Heights, Prospect of plateau the
returning. in long so been had which vessel the

Harding. Cyrus exclaimed are! they there praised! be God

his clapping round, twirl to dance, to began he joy, his in Neb to As
the than pantomime touching more A master! my Oh! shouting, and hands
discourse. finest

the of deck the on people the counting on idea, first engineers The
Tabor of castaway the found not had Pencroft that was Bonadventure,
his leave to refused had man unfortunate the that rate any at or Island,
another. for prison one change and island

of deck the on alone were Herbert and Spilett, Gideon Pencroft, Indeed
Bonadventure. the

on waiting were Neb and engineer the touched, vessel the moment The
sand, the to on leap to time had passengers the before and beach, the
Did friends! my delay, your at uneasy very been have We said: Harding
accident? any with meet you

went everything contrary, the on Spilett; Gideon replied No,
it. about all you tell will We well. wonderfully

unsuccessful, been has search your engineer, the returned However,
went! you as just three, only are you since

four. are we sailor, the replied captain, me, Excuse

castaway? the found have You

Yes.

him? brought have you And

Yes.

Living?

Yes.

he? is Who he? is Where

Cyrus, There, man! a was he rather or reporter, the replied is, He
you! tell can we all is that

voyage, the during passed had that all of informed then was engineer The
only the how conducted; been had search the conditions what under and
castaway a last at how abandoned; been long had island the in dwelling
human the to belong to longer no appeared who captured, been had
species.

have we if know dont I Pencroft, added point, the just thats And
here. him bring to right done

quickly. engineer the replied Pencroft, have, you Certainly

sense! no has creature wretched the But

few a only but Harding, Cyrus replied present, at possible is That
who And me. and you like man a was creature wretched the ago months
on solitude long a after us of survivor the of become will what knows
it and friends; my alone, be to misfortune great a is It island? this
you since reason, destroy quickly can solitude that believed be must
state! a such in creature poor this found have

the that think to you leads what Herbert, asked captain, But,
back? months few a only began man unfortunate the of brutishness

the answered written, recently been had found we document the Because
it. written have can alone castaway the and engineer,

been not had it that Spilett, Gideon observed supposing, Always
dead. since man, this of companion a by written

Spilett. dear my impossible, is That

reporter. the asked so? Why

replied castaways, two of spoken have then would document the Because
one. only mentioned it and Harding,

and voyage, the of incidents the related words few a in then Herbert
prisoners the in gleam passing of sort the of fact curious the on dwelt
a become had he storm the of height the in instant an for when mind,
sailor.

great attach to right are you engineer, the replied Herbert, Well,
and incurable, be cannot man unfortunate The fact. this to importance
fellow-men, his find will he here but is; he what him made has despair
save! shall we soul this him, in soul a still is there since and

and engineer the of pity great the to Island, Tabor of castaway The
he which cabin the from brought then was Neb, of astonishment great the
he land on once when Bonadventure; the of part fore the in occupied
away. run to wish a manifested

a with shoulder his on hand his placed approaching, Harding Cyrus But
tenderness. infinite with him at looked and authority, of full gesture
gradually will, superior a to submitting man, unhappy the Immediately
more no made he and bent, head his fell, eyes his calm, became
resistance.

engineer. the murmured fellow! Poor

appearance his by judge To him. observed attentively had Harding Cyrus
and him, about human anything longer no had being miserable this
an look his in observed already, reporter the had as Harding, yet
intelligence. of trace indefinable

was he as stranger the rather or castaway, the that decided was It
rooms the of one in live should companions, his by termed thenceforth
led was He escape. not could he however, which, from House, Granite of
perhaps, might, it attention, careful with and difficulty, without there
in settlers the to companion a be would he day some that hoped be
Island. Lincoln

prepare, to hastened had Neb which breakfast, during Harding, Cyrus
in heard hunger, of dying were Pencroft and Herbert, reporter, the as
to exploration of voyage the marked had which incidents the all detail
stranger the that point, this on friends his with agreed He islet. the
them leading Britannia name the American, or English either be must
under and beard, bushy the through besides, and, this, suppose to
the recognize could he thought engineer the hair, matted shaggy, the
Anglo-Saxon. the of features characteristic

never you Herbert, addressing Spilett, Gideon said bye, the by But,
you that except nothing, know we and savage, this met you how us told
to time in up come to happened not had we if strangled, been have would
you! help

it how say to difficult rather is it Herbert, answered word, my Upon
heard I when plants, my collecting in occupied think, I was, I happened.
scarcely I tree. tall very a from falling avalanche an like noise a
doubt without was who man, unfortunate This round. look to time had
you tell to take I than time less in me upon rushed tree, a in concealed
Pencroft-- and Spilett Mr. unless and it, about

perhaps, but, danger, great a ran you Harding, Cyrus said boy! My
from himself hidden still have would creature poor the that, without
companion. new a had have not should we and search, your

the asked man? the reforming in succeed to Cyrus, then, hope, You
reporter.

engineer. the replied Yes,

and House Granite left companions his and Harding over, Breakfast
the unloading in themselves occupied there They beach. the to returned
tools, and arms the examined having engineer, the and Bonadventure,
the of identity the establish to them help could which nothing saw
stranger.

very being as upon looked was islet, the on made pigs, of capture The
where sty, the to led were animals the and Island, Lincoln to profitable
home. at became soon they

box the as well as shot, and powder the containing barrels, two The
small a establish to agreed was It welcome. very were caps, of
Cavern, Upper the in or House Granite outside either powder-magazine,
pyroxyle of use the However, explosion. of fear no be would there where
there results, excellent giving substance this for continued, be to was
powder. ordinary substituting for reason no was

finished,-- was vessel the of unloading the When

our put to prudent be would it think I Pencroft, said Captain,
place. safe a in Bonadventure

Harding. Cyrus asked Mercy? the of mouth the at safe not she Is

on stranded is she time the of Half sailor. the replied captain, No,
she and see, you craft, famous a is She her. works that and sand, the
return. our on us struck which squall the during admirably behaved

river? the in float not she Could

the in and there, shelter no is there but could; she captain, doubt, No
the from much suffer would Bonadventure the that think I winds, east
surf.

Pencroft? her, put you would where Well,

by in shut creek, little That sailor. the replied Balloon, Port In
want. we harbor the just be to me to seems rocks,

far? rather not it Is

a have we and House, Granite from miles three than more not is it Pooh!
there! us take to road straight fine

replied there, Bonadventure your take and Pencroft, then, it Do
immediate more our under her have rather would I yet and engineer, the
her. for harbor little a make must we time, have we When protection.

and pier, a lighthouse, a with harbor A Pencroft. exclaimed Famous!
easy. becomes everything captain, you, with really Ah! dock!

condition, on but engineer, the answered Pencroft, brave my Yes,
our all in men three as much as do you for me, help you that however,
work.

Bonadventure, the board on re-embarked then sailor the and Herbert
rapidly her drove wind the and hoisted, sail the weighed, was anchor the
tranquil the on reposing was she after, hours Two Cape. Claw towards
Balloon. Port of waters

he had House, Granite in stranger the by passed days first the During
becoming was nature savage his that think to reason them given already
In mind? obscured that of depths the in burn light brighter a Did tamed?
body? the to returning soul the was short,

the and Harding Cyrus that degree, a such to and certainty, a to Yes,
been ever had man unfortunate the of reason the if wondered reporter
the to air, open the to accustomed first, At extinguished. totally
stranger the Island, Tabor on enjoyed had he which liberty unrestrained
throw might he that feared was it and fury, sullen a manifested
House. Granite of windows the of one of out beach, the onto himself
his to allowed was freedom more and calmer, became he gradually But
movements.

his forgetting Already, much. hope to and hope, to reason had They
nourishment bestial less a accepted stranger the instincts, carnivorous
produce not did meat cooked and islet, the on fed he which on that than
board on showed had he which repulsion of sentiment same the him in
was he when moment a by profited had Harding Cyrus Bonadventure. the
of sort a formed which beard, matted and hair his cut to sleeping,
more clothed been also had He aspect. savage a such him gave and mane
result The him. covered which rag the of rid got having after suitably,
more a resumed stranger the attentions, these to thanks that, was
milder. become had eyes his if as seemed even it and appearance, human
face mans this intelligence, by up lighted formerly when Certainly,
beauty. of sort a had have must

hours some passing of task the himself on imposed Harding day, Every
in himself occupied and him, near worked and came He company. his in
be would indeed, spark, A attention. his fix to as so things, different
brain that crossing recollection a soul, that reillumine to sufficient
the board on storm, the during seen, been had That reason. recall to
so aloud, speak to either neglect not did engineer The Bonadventure!
the sight and hearing of organs the by time same the at penetrate to as
companions, his of one Sometimes intelligence. torpid that of depths
of often most spoke They him. joined all sometimes another, sometimes
sailor. a interest must which navy, the to belonging things

said, was what to attention slight some gave stranger the times, At
them. understood partly he that convinced soon were settlers the and
a sorrowful, deeply was countenance his of expression the Sometimes
mistaken; be not could face his for mentally, suffered he that proof
almost they however, times, different at although speak, not did he but
the events, all At lips. his from issue to about were words that thought
sad! and quiet quite was creature poor

result the only sadness his not Was apparent? only calm his not was But
certain only Seeing ascertained. be yet could Nothing seclusion? his of
colonists, the with contact in always space, limited a in and objects
satisfy, to desires no having accustomed, become soon would he whom to
nature physical his that natural was it clothed, better fed, better
new a of sense the with penetrated he was but improve; gradually should
applicable exactly be would which word a employ to rather, or life?
his with company in animal an like tamed, becoming not he was him, to
anxious was Harding Cyrus which question, important an was This master?
Would roughly! invalid his treat to wish not did he yet and answer, to
convalescent? a be ever he

for watch the on was he How moment! every him observed engineer the How
it! grasp to ready was he How expression! the use may one if soul, his
cure the of phases the all sympathy real with followed settlers The
and humanity, of work this in also him aided They Harding. by undertaken
hope his both shared soon Pencroft, incredulous the perhaps except all,
faith. his and

showed even he and said, been has as deep, was stranger the of calm The
evidently he influence whose engineer, the for attachment of sort a
him transporting by him, try to then resolved Harding Cyrus felt.
been had eyes his formerly which ocean that from scene, another to
might which forest, the of border the to contemplate, to accustomed
passed! been had life his of years many so where those recall perhaps

if escape, not will he that hope we can Spilett, Gideon said But,
liberty? at set once

engineer. the replied tried, be must experiment The

fresh the feels and outside, is fellow that When Pencroft. said Well!
him! carry can legs his as fast as off be will he air,

Harding. returned so, think not do I

Spilett. said try, us Let

engineer. the replied try, will We

Tabor of castaway the consequently and October, of 30th the on was This
was It days. nine for House Granite in prisoner a been had Island
and Harding Cyrus island. the on rays its darted sun bright a and warm,
lying found was who stranger, the by occupied room the to went Pencroft
sky. the at gazing and window the near

him. to engineer the said friend, my Come,

and Harding, Cyrus on fixed were eyes His immediately. rose stranger The
confident little them, behind marched sailor the while him, followed he
experiment. the of result the to as

in place his take him made Pencroft and Harding door, the at Arrived
before them for waited Spilett Gideon and Herbert, Neb, while lift, the
united were all moments few a in and descended, lift The House. Granite
beach. the on

him leave to as so stranger, the from distance short a went settlers The
liberty. at

with brightened look his and sea, the toward steps few a made then He
escape. to attempt slightest the make not did he but animation, extreme
on rippled islet, the by broken which, waves little the at gazing was He
sand. the

does it possibly and Spilett, Gideon observed sea, the only is This
escape! to wish any with him inspire not

border the on plateau, the to him take must we Harding, replied Yes,
conclusive. more be will experiment the There forest. the of

is bridge the since Neb, said away, run not could he Besides,
raised.

like stream a by troubled be to man a isnt that Pencroft, said Oh!
bound! single a at directly, it cross could He Glycerine! Creek

eyes his replying, with himself contented Harding see, soon shall We
patient. his of those quitting not

climbing all and Mercy, the of mouth the towards led then was latter The
Heights. Prospect reached river, the of bank left the

the of trees beautiful first the grew which on spot the at Arrived
stranger the breeze, the by agitated slightly foliage their forest,
the filled which odor penetrating the in drink to greedily appeared
chest. his from escaped sigh long a and atmosphere,

movement any made he if him seize to ready him, behind kept settlers The
escape! to

the into springing of point the on was creature poor the indeed, And,
an for bent were legs his and forest, the from him separated which creek
half back, stepped he immediately almost but spring, a for if as instant
eyes. his from fell tear large a and down, sank

can you for again, man a become have you Harding, Cyrus exclaimed Ah!
weep!



16 Chapter

had doubtless recollection Some wept! had man unfortunate the Yes!
by expression, Hardings Cyrus use to and brain, his across flashed
man. a more once was he tears those

withdrew and plateau, the on time some for him left colonists The
but free; himself feel might he that so distance, short a to themselves
brought soon Harding and liberty, this by profiting of think not did he
stranger the occurrence, this after days Two House. Granite to back him
He life. common their with mingle to gradually wish to appeared
strangely he was evidently less no but understood, and heard evidently
Pencroft, evening, one for colonists; the to speak to not determined
his from escape words these heard room, his of door the at listening
lips:--

never! I! here! No!

companions. his to words these reported sailor The

Harding. said there! mystery painful some is There

the in worked he and tools, laboring the use to begun had stranger The
remained he case, the often was as work, his in stopped he When garden.
they recommendation, engineers the on but himself, within retired
the of one If keep. to wished apparently he which reserve the respected
sobs, with heaved chest his and back, drew he him, approached settlers
overburdened! if as

believe to compelled were They thus? him overwhelmed that remorse it Was
observation,-- this making day one help not could Spilett Gideon and so,

serious too things fear, I has, he because is it speak not does he If
told! be to

wait. and patient be must They

the on working stranger, the November, of 3rd the on later, days few A
Harding, and ground, the to drop spade his letting stopped, had plateau,
again were tears that saw distance, little a from him observing was who
the towards him led pity irresistible of sort A eyes. his from flowing
lightly. arm his touched he and man, unfortunate

he. said friend! My

having Harding Cyrus and look, his avoid to tried stranger The
quickly. back drew he hand, his take to endeavored

it! wish I me, at look voice, firmer a in Harding said friend, My

power, his under be to seemed and engineer, the at looked stranger The
away. run to wished He mesmerist. a of influence the under subject a as
eyes His transformation. a underwent suddenly countenance his then But
longer no could He lips. his from escape to struggled Words flashed.
hollow a in then, arms; his folded he last At himself! contain
Harding. Cyrus asked he you? are voice,--Who

We deep. was emotion whose engineer, the replied you, like Castaways,
fellow-men. your among here, you brought have

none! have I fellow-men!.... My

friends. of midst the in are You

in face his hiding stranger, the exclaimed friends! me! Friends!--for
me! leave me! No--never--leave hands. his

and sea, the overlooked which plateau the of side the to rushed he Then
motionless. time long a there remained

just had what them to related and companions his rejoined Harding
happened.

Spilett, Gideon said life, mans that in mystery some is there Yes!
of path the by society re-entered only had he if as appears it and
remorse.

sailor. the said here, brought have we man a of sort what know dont I
secrets-- has He

has he If quickly. Harding Cyrus interrupted respect, will we Which
eyes our in and it, expiated fearfully most has he crime, any committed
absolved. is he

under evidently shore, the on alone remained stranger the hours two For
life--a past his all recalled which recollections of influence the
of sight losing without colonists, the doubtless--and life melancholy
hours, two after However, solitude. his disturb to attempt not did him,
Harding. Cyrus find to came he resolution, a formed have to appearing
longer. no wept he but shed, had he tears the with red were eyes His
timorous, anxious, appeared He humility. deep expressed countenance His
ground. the on fixed constantly were eyes his and ashamed,

English? you are you, and companions your Harding, to he said Sir,

Americans. are we engineer, the answered No,

that! prefer I murmured, he and stranger, the said Ah!

engineer. the asked friend? my you, And

hastily. he replied English,

the to retreated he say, to difficult been had words few these if as And
of mouth the and cascade the between down and up walked he where beach,
agitation. extreme of state a in Mercy, the

stifled a in and stopped he Herbert, to close moment one passing Then,
voice,--

asked. he month? What

Herbert. replied December,

year? What

1866.

exclaimed. he years! twelve years! Twelve

abruptly. him left he Then

had which answers and questions the colonists the to reported Herbert
made. been

longer no was Spilett, Gideon observed man, unfortunate This
years! or months either with acquainted

islet the on already years twelve been had he and Herbert, added Yes!
there! him found we when

a after solitude, of years twelve Ah! Harding. rejoined years! Twelve
reason! mans a impair well may perhaps, life, wicked

wrecked not was man this that Pencroft, said think, to induced am I
left was he crime some of consequence in that but Island, Tabor on
there.

so is it if and reporter, the replied Pencroft, right, be must You
to return may island the on him left who those that impossible not is it
day! some him fetch

Herbert. said him, find longer no will they And

and-- return, must they Pencroft, added then, But

question this discuss us let not do Harding, Cyrus said friends, My
has man unhappy the that believe I it. about more know we until
may they whatever faults, his expiated severely has he that suffered,
let not Do him. stifles himself unburden to wish the that and been, have
doubtless, us to it tell will He history! his us tell to him press us
follow. to best be will it course what see shall we it, know we when and
certainty, a hope, a than more has he if us, tell can besides alone He
it! doubt I but country, his to day some returning of

reporter. the asked why? And

a at delivered being of sure being his of event the in that, Because
would and deliverance his of hour the waited have would he time, certain
that probable more is it No, sea. the into document this thrown have not
see to expected never he that and islet, that on die to condemned was he
again! fellow-creatures his

explain. cannot I which thing one is there sailor, the observed But,

it? is What

may one Island, Tabor on years twelve for left been had man this If
in state wild the in already years several been had he that suppose well
him! found we which

Harding. Cyrus replied probable, is That

document! that wrote he since years many be then must It

written! recently been have to appears document the yet and doubt, No

document the enclosed which bottle the that know you do how Besides,
Lincoln to Island Tabor from come to years several taken have not may
Island?

reporter. the replied impossible, absolutely not is That

island? the of coast the on already time long a been have not it Might

even not could We floating. still was it for Pencroft, answered No,
it shore, the on time of length any for stayed had it after that suppose
rocks, all is coast south the for sea, the by off swept been have would
there! pieces to smashed been have certainly would it and

thoughtfully. Harding Cyrus rejoined true, is That

years several was document the if sailor, the continued then, And
would it years, several for bottle that in up shut been had it if old,
was it and kind, the of nothing is there Now, damp. by injured been have
preservation. of state perfect a in found

an out pointed and just, very was reasoning sailors The
recently been have to appeared document the for fact, incomprehensible
gave it Moreover, bottle. the in it found colonists the when written,
that implied which correctly, Island Tabor of longitude and latitude the
be could than hydrography of knowledge complete more a had author its
sailor. common a of expected

engineer, the said unaccountable, something again, this, in is There
my likes, he When speak. to companion our urge not will we but
him! hear to ready be shall we then friends,

not did and word, a speak not did stranger the days following the During
losing without away, worked He plateau. the of precincts the leave once
place. retired a in always but rest, minutes a taking without moment, a
several invited although House, Granite to came never he times meal At
vegetables. raw few a eating with himself contented but so, do to times
remained but him, to assigned room the to return not did he nightfall At
some in crouched bad was weather the when or trees, of clump some under
no had he when as manner same the in lived he Thus rocks. the of cleft
persuasion all as and Island, Tabor of forests the than shelter other
colonists the vain, in was life his improve to him induce to
almost seemed, it as when, near, was time the And patiently. waited
escaped confession terrible a conscience, his by urged involuntarily
him.

night as evening, the in oclock eight about November, of 10th the On
settlers, the before unexpectedly appeared stranger the on, coming was
he and strangely, burned eyes His veranda. the under assembled were who
days. worst his of aspect wild the resumed quite had

overcome that, seeing on astounded were companions his and Harding Cyrus
person a of those like chattered teeth his emotion, terrible some by
his of sight the Was him? with matter the was What fever. a in
a to return this of weary he Was him? to insupportable fellow-creatures
savage former his for pining he Was existence? of mode civilized
these in himself express to heard was he soon as so, appeared It life?
sentences:-- incoherent

islet?.... my from me dragged you have right what By here?.... I am Why
know you Do me?.... and you between tie any be could there think you Do
told who And there--alone? was I done--why have I am--what I who
die to condemned not was I there--that abandoned not was I that you
not have I that know you do How past?.... my know you Do there?....
to fit being--only accursed wretch--an a not am I murdered--that stolen,
it? know you all--speak--do from far beast, wild a like live

from creature, miserable the interrupting without listened colonists The
himself. of spite in were, it as escaped, confessions broken these whom
back. drew hastily he but him, approached him, calm to wishing Harding

free? I only--am word one exclaimed; he no! No!

engineer. the answered free, are You

madman. a like fled and cried, he then! Farewell,

wood--but the of edge the towards also ran Herbert and Pencroft, Neb,
alone. returned they

Harding. Cyrus said alone! him let must We

Pencroft. exclaimed back! come never will He

engineer. the replied back, come will He

of sort a it Harding--was but passed; days Many
the later or sooner that idea fixed the in presentiment?--persisted
return. would man unhappy

has remorse which he, said nature, wild his of revolt last the is It
terrify. will solitude renewed which and touched,

Prospect on well as continued, were sorts all of works meanwhile, the In
is It farm. a build to intended Harding where corral, the at as Heights
Tabor on Herbert by collected seeds the that say to unnecessary
immense one formed thus plateau The sown. carefully been had Island
of arms the that so tended, carefully and out laid well kitchen-garden,
to something always was There work. of want in never were settlers the
to necessary became it number, in increased esculents the As done. be
fields regular into grow to threatened which beds, simple the enlarge
the of parts other in abounded grass But meadows. the replace and
on go to obliged being onagers the of fear no was there and island,
Prospect turn to besides, while, worth well was It allowance. short
and creeks, of belt deep its by defended kitchen-garden, a into Heights
against protection of need no had which meadows, the to them remove to
quadrapeds. and quadrumana of depredations the

How in. gathered was harvest third the November, of 15th the On
months eighteen since extent, in increased field the had wonderfully
six of crop second The sown! was wheat of grain first the when ago,
or bushels, thousand four time this produced grains thousand hundred
grains! of millions hundred five

for sufficient were alone bushels ten for corn, in rich was colony The
and men of both food the for crop ample an produce to year every sowing
month the of fortnight last the and completed, was harvest The beasts.
man. for food into it converting of work the to devoted was November of
mill a of establishment the and flour, not but corn, had they fact, In
which fall second the utilized have could Harding Cyrus necessary. was
first the power, motive his establish to Mercy the into flowed
some after but, mill, felting the moving with occupied already being
on built be should windmill simple a that decided was it consultation,
than difficulty more no presented this of building The Heights. Prospect
would there that certain moreover was it and former, the of building the
breezes. sea the to was it as exposed plateau, the on wind of want no be

lively more be will windmill the that Pencroft, said mention, to Not
landscape! the in effect good a have will and

the of machinery and frame the for timber choosing by work to set They
easily be could lake, the of north the at found stones, large Some mill.
case inexhaustible the sails, the to as and millstones, into transformed
material. necessary the furnished balloon the of

a chosen was mill the of site the and model, his made Harding Cyrus
The lake. the of shore the near poultry-yard, the of right the to little
it that so timbers, strong with supported pivot a on rest to was frame
wind the as according contained it machinery the all with turn could
become had Pencroft and Neb rapidly. advanced work The it. required
models the copy to but do to nothing had and carpenters, skilful very
engineer. the by provided

a with pepper-pot, a like shape in box, cylindrical of sort a Soon
the formed which frames four The chosen. spot the on rose roof, pointed
certain a form to as so beam, center the in fixed firmly been had sails
different the to As clamps. iron with secured and it, with angle
two the contain to destined box the mechanism, internal the of parts
of sort a hopper, the stone, moving the and stone fixed the millstones,
would which bottom, the at narrow top, the at wide trough, square large
to intended spout oscillating the stones, the on fall to grain the allow
which machine, bolting the lastly and grain, the of passing the regulate
flour, the from bran the separates sifting, of operation the by
not work the and good, were tools The difficulty. without made were
This simple. very is mill a of machinery the reality, in for difficult,
time. of question a only was

1st the on and mill, the of construction the at worked had one Every
his with delighted was Pencroft usual, As finished. was it December of
perfect. was apparatus the that doubt no had and work,

harvest first our grind shall we and he, said wind, good a for Now
splendidly!

much, too not but engineer, the answered certainly, wind, good A
Pencroft.

faster! the go only would mill our Pooh!

It Harding. Cyrus replied fast, very so go to it for need no is There
performed is work of quantity greatest the that experience by known is
six is minute a in sails the by made turns of number the when mill a by
moderate A second. a in wind the by traversed feet of number the times
give will second, the to feet twenty-four over passes which breeze,
of need no is there and minute, a during sails the to turns sixteen
more.

northeast, the from blowing is breeze fine a Herbert, cried Exactly!
us. for business our do soon will which

the for mill, the of inauguration the delaying for reason no was There
Island. Lincoln in bread of piece first the taste to eager were settlers
next the and ground, were wheat of bushels three or two morning this On
although perhaps, heavy little a loaf, magnificent a breakfast at day
one Every House. Granite at table the on appeared yeast, with raised
understood. easily be may which pleasure a with it at away munched

Gideon times Several reappeared. not had stranger the meanwhile, the In
Granite of neighborhood the in forest the searched Herbert and Spilett
became They him. of trace any finding or meeting without House,
former the Certainly, absence. prolonged this at uneasy seriously
forest, the in live to how perplexed be not could island Tabor of savage
his resumed had he that feared be to not it was but game, in abounding
instincts? wild his him in revive would freedom this that and habits,
persisted always doubtless, presentiment, of sort a by Harding, However,
return. would fugitive the that saying in

his which confidence a with repeated he return! will he Yes,
Tabor on was man unfortunate this When share. not could companions
are fellow-men that knows he Here, alone! be to himself knew he Island,
poor the life, past his of spoken partially has he Since him! awaiting
belong will he day that from and whole, the tell to return will penitent
us! to

December, of 3rd the On predictions. Hardings Cyrus justified event The
the of bank southern the on fish and go to plateau the left had Herbert
for precautions any taken never had then till and unarmed, was He lake.
of part that on themselves shown not had animals dangerous as defense,
island. the

while poultry-yard, the in working were Neb and Pencroft Meanwhile,
soda, making in Chimneys the at occupied were reporter the and Harding
exhausted. being soap of store the

resounded,-- cries Suddenly

help! Help!

not had distance, a great too at being reporter, the and Harding Cyrus
poultry-yard the leaving Neb, and Pencroft shouts. the hear to able been
lake. the towards rushed haste, all in

had one no place this at presence whose stranger, the then, before But
the from plateau the separated which Glycerine, Creek crossed suspected,
bank. opposite the up bounded and forest,

the to similar jaguar, fierce a with face to face there was Herbert
was he surprised, Suddenly End. Reptile on killed been had which one
itself gathering animal the while tree, a against back his with standing
spring. to about was together

the on rushed knife, a than weapon other no with stranger, the But
adversary. new this meet to turned who animal, formidable

and strength immense possessed stranger The short. was struggle The
holding hand, powerful one with throat jaguars the seized He activity.
flesh, his tore which claws beasts the heeding without vise, a in as it
heart. its into knife his plunged he other the with and

to about was and body, the away kicked stranger The fell. jaguar The
but battle, of field the on arrived settlers the when moment the at fly
cried,-- him, to clinging Herbert,

go! not shall you no! No,

him saw he when frowned who stranger, the towards advanced Harding
shirt, torn his under shoulder his from flowed blood The approaching.
it. of notice no took he but

of debt a contracted just have we Harding, Cyrus said friend, My
life! your risked have you boy our save To you. to gratitude

than Less worth? that is What stranger. the murmured life! My
nothing!

wounded? are You

matter. no is It

hand? your me give you Will

him, saved just had which hand the seize to endeavored Herbert as And
and darkened, look his heaved, chest his arms, his folded stranger the
himself, over effort violent a making but escape, to wish to appeared he
tone,-- abrupt an in and

me? to be to claim you do what and asked, he you? are Who

first the for and demanded, thus he which history colonists the was It
own. his tell would he recounted, history this Perhaps time.

their since happened had that all related Harding words few a In
they resources what and managed, had they how Richmond; from departure
disposal. their at had now

attention. extreme with listened stranger The

Herbert, Spilett, Gideon were, all they who told engineer the Then
they happiness greatest the that added, he and, himself, Neb, Pencroft,
the of return the on was Island Lincoln in arrival their since felt had
them among include to able been had they when Island, Tabor from vessel
companion. new a

breast, his on sunk head his flushed, face strangers the words these At
countenance. his on depicted was confusion and

your us give you will Harding, Cyrus added us, know you that now And
hand?

men! honest are You no! voice; hoarse a in stranger the replied No,
I-- And



17 Chapter

been had There presentiment. colonists the justified words last These
which from but men, of sight the in expiated perhaps past, mournful some
felt man guilty the rate any At him. absolved yet not had conscience his
pressed cordially have would friends new his and repented, he remorse,
extend to worthy himself feel not did he but sought; they which hand the
not did he jaguar, the with scene the after However, men! honest to it
enclosure the beyond go not did day that from and forest, the to return
House. Granite of

of speak day one stranger the Would life? his of mystery the was What
secret his that agreed was it rate, any At show. could alone Time it?
if as him with live would they that and him, from asked be never should
nothing. suspected they

Gideon and Harding Cyrus before. as continued life their days some For
experimentalists. sometimes chemists, sometimes together, worked Spilett
for Herbert, with hunt to except engineer the left never reporter The
the in alone ramble to lad the allow to prudent been have not would it
Neb to As guard. their on be to necessary very was it and forest;
the at another poultry-yard, and stables the at day one Pencroft, and
want in never were they House, Granite in work reckoning without corral,
employment. of

never life, usual his resumed had he and alone, worked stranger The
never plateau, the in trees the under sleeping meals, at appearing
of society the if as seemed really It companions. his with mingling
him! to insupportable was him saved had who those

his of help the entreat he did why Pencroft, observed then, But
sea? the into paper that throw he did Why fellow-creatures?

Harding. Cyrus replied invariably why, us tell will He

When?

Pencroft. think, you than sooner Perhaps

near. was confession of day the indeed, And,

House, Granite to return his after week a December, of 10th the On
humble and voice calm a in who, approaching, stranger the saw Harding
you. of make to request a have I Sir, him: to said tone,

question. a you ask me let first but engineer, the answered Speak,

of point the on was and reddened, stranger the words these At
of mind the in passing was what understood Harding Cyrus withdrawing.
interrogate would engineer the that feared doubtless who man, guilty the
life. past his on him

back. him held Harding

I friends. your but companions your only not are we he, said Comrade,
you. to listen will I now and that, believe to you wish

a with seized was He eyes. his over hand his pressed stranger The
to able being without moments few a remained and trembling, of sort
word. a articulate

favor. a me grant to you beg to come have I last, at he said Sir,

it? is What

domesticated your for corral a here, from miles five or four have, You
to me allow you Will of. care taken be to need animals These animals.
them? with there live

a with moments few a for man unfortunate the at gazed Harding Cyrus
then,-- commiseration; deep of feeling


for fit hardly stables only has corral the he, said friend, My
animals.

sir. me, for enough good be will It

anything. in you constrain not will we Harding, answered friend, My
always be however, will, You it. be so corral, the at live to wish You
corral the at live to wish you since But House. Granite at welcome
comfortably being your for arrangements necessary the make will we
there. established

well. very do shall I that, mind Never

this of use made intentionally always who Harding, answered friend, My
do to best be will it what judge us let must you appellation, cordial
respect. this in

withdrew. he as stranger the replied sir, you, Thank

had which proposal the companions his to known made then engineer The
wooden a build should they that agreed was it and him, to made been
possible. as comfortable as make would they which corral, the at house

necessary the with corral the to repaired colonists the day very That
receive to ready was house the before passed not had week a and tools,
from and sheds, the from feet twenty about built was It tenant. its
numbered then which sheep, of flock the overlook to easy was it there
and cupboard, bench, table, bed, a furniture, Some eighty. than more
carried were tools and ammunition, gun, a and manufactured, were chest
corral. the to

he and dwelling, new his of nothing seen had however, stranger, The
occupied he while him, without there work to settlers the allowed had
stroke finishing the put to doubtless, wishing, plateau, the on himself
ready and up dug was ground the all him, to thanks Indeed, work. his to
came. time the when sowed be to

corral the at arrangements the all that December of 20th the on was It
dwelling his that stranger the to announced engineer The completed. were
and go would he that replied latter the and him, receive to ready was
evening. very that there sleep

Granite of diningroom the in gathered were colonists the evening this On
was companion their which at hour the oclock, eight then was It House.
thus and presence, their by him trouble to wishing Not them. leave to
be perhaps might which farewells saying of necessity the him on imposing
House. Granite to ascended and alone him left had they him, to painful

light a when minutes, few a for room the in talking been had they Now,
entered, stranger the immediately Almost door. the at heard was knock
preamble,-- any without and

should you that right is it you, leave I before he, said Gentlemen,
you. it tell will I history. my know

his and Harding Cyrus impressed profoundly words simple These
rose. engineer The companions.

be to right your is it he; said friend, my nothing, you ask We
silent.

speak. to duty my is It

then. down, Sit

stand. will I No,

Harding. replied you, hear to ready are We

the in little a room, the of corner a in standing remained stranger The
it and chest, his across folded arms his bareheaded, was He shade.
one some like speaking voice, hoarse a in that posture this in was
his which recital, following the gave he speak, to himself obliges who
interrupt:-- once not did auditors

Scotch a to belonging steam-yacht, a 1854, December, of 20th the On
western the on Bernouilli, Cape off anchored Glenarvan, Lord nobleman,
yacht this board On parallel. thirty-seventh the in Australia, of coast
French a army, English the in major a wife, his and Glenarvan Lord were
the were last two These boy. young a and girl, young a geographer,
lost, been had Britannia, the ship, whose Grant, Captain of children
Captain by commanded was Duncan The before. year a cargo, and crew
men. fifteen of crew a by manned and Mangles, John

of coast the off lay time this at yacht the reason the is This
in written document a enclosing bottle, a before, months Six Australia.
picked and Sea, Irish the in found been had French, and German, English,
still there that substance in stated document This Duncan. the by up
these that Britannia, the of wreck the from survivors three existed
found had they that and men, his of two and Grant Captain were survivors
of but latitude, the gave document the which of land, some on refuge
legible. longer no was sea, the by effaced longitude, the which

being longitude the therefore, south; 11 37deg was latitude This
continents over parallel thirty-seventh the followed they if unknown,
Captain by inhabited spot the reach to certain be would they seas, and
to hesitated having Admiralty English The companions. two his and Grant
to everything attempt to resolved Glenarvan Lord search, this undertake
joined who Grant, Robert and Mary with communicated He captain. the find
which in voyage, distant the for equipped was yacht Duncan The him.
part, take to wished children captains the and family noblemans the
Atlantic, the towards proceeded Glasgow, leaving Duncan, the and
as Pacific the ascended and Magellan, of Straits the through passed
the of interpretation previous a to according where, Patagonia, as far
the among prisoner a was Grant Captain that supposed they document,
Indians.

of coast western the on passengers her disembarked Duncan The
at coast eastern the on again up them pick to sailed and Patagonia,
the following Patagonia, traversed Glenarvan Lord Corrientes. Cape
he captain, the of trace no found having and parallel, thirty-seventh
through search his pursue to as so November, of 13th the on re-embarked
Ocean. the

and dAcunha Tristan of islands the visited unsuccessfully having After
arrived said, have I as Duncan, the course, her in situated Amsterdam,
December, of 20th the on coast, Australian the on Bernouilli, Cape at
1854.

had he as Australia traverse to intention Glenarvans Lord was It
was coast the from miles few A disembarked. he and America, traversed
to hospitality offered who Irishman, an to belonging farm, a established
cause the Irishman the to known made Glenarvan Lord travelers. the
a whether knew he if asked and parts, these to him brought had which
than less lost been had Britannia, the vessel, English three-masted
Australia. of coast west the on before years two

surprise great the to but, wreck, this of heard never had Irishman The
said,-- and forward came servants his of one bystanders, the of

is he living, still is Grant Captain If God! thank and praise lord, My
shores. Australian the on living

Glenarvan. Lord asked you? are Who

of one am I man; the replied lord, my yourself, like Scotchman A
Britannia. the of castaways the of crew--one Grants Captain

of mate boatswains the fact, in was, He Ayrton. called was man This
Grant Captain from separated But, showed. papers his as Britannia, the
then till had he rocks, the upon struck ship the when moment the at
he, that and perished, had crew his all with captain the that believed
Britannia. the of survivor sole the was Ayrton,

coast east the on but coast, west the on not was it added, he Only,
still is Grant Captain if and lost, was vessel the that Australia of
natives, the among prisoner a is he indicates, document his as living,
for. looked be must he that coast other the on is it and

words his look; confident a with and voice frank a in spoke man This
for been had he service whose in Irishman, The doubted. be not could
Glenarvan, Lord trustworthiness. his for answered year, a than more
advice, his by and, man this of fidelity the in believed therefore,
Lord parallel. thirty-seventh the following Australia, cross to resolved
Captain Frenchman, the major, the children, two the wife, his Glenarvan,
command the under band little the composed sailors few a and Mangles,
Austin, Tom mate, the of charge under Duncan, the while Ayrton, of
instructions. Glenarvans Lord await to there Melbourne, to proceeded

1854. December, of 23rd the on out set They

the indeed, was, He traitor. a was Ayrton that say to time is It
his with dispute some after but, Britannia, the of mate boatswains
ship, the seize and mutiny to crew the incite to endeavored he captain,
the on 1852, April, of 8th the on him, landed had Grant Captain and
only was as there, him leaving sailed, then and Australia, of coast west
just.

the of wreck the of nothing knew man wretched this Therefore
his Since account. Glenarvans from it of heard just had he Britannia;
of leader the Joyce, Ben of name the under become, had he abandonment,
had wreck the that maintained boldly he if and convicts; escaped the
that in proceed to Glenarvan Lord led and coast, east the on place taken
the seize ship, his from him separate to hoped he that was it direction,
Pacific. the in pirate a yacht the make and Duncan,

he but trembled, voice His moment. a for stopped stranger the Here
continued,--

was It Australia. across proceeded and out set expedition The
be may he as Joyce, Ben or Ayrton, since unfortunate, inevitably
of band his by followed sometimes preceded, sometimes it, guided called,
do. to had they what told been had who convicts,

was It repairs. for Melbourne to sent been had Duncan the Meanwhile,
Melbourne leave to her order to Glenarvan Lord get to then, necessary,
seize to easy be would it where Australia, of coast east the to go and
the in coast, the to enough near expedition the led having After her.
which letter, a obtained Ayrton resources, no with forests vast of midst
which letter Duncan--a the of mate the to carry to charged was he
Twofold to coast, east the to immediately repair to yacht the ordered
the where place the from journey days few a say to is that Bay,
his meet to agreed had Ayrton that there was It stopped. had expedition
he letter, the of possession gaining after days two and accomplices,
Melbourne. at arrived

able be would He design. wicked his in succeeded had villain the far So
the for easy be would it where Bay, Twofold into Duncan the take to
become would Joyce Ben massacred, crew her and her, seize to convicts
of accomplishment the prevent to God pleased it But seas. the of master
projects. terrible these

Tom mate, the to letter the delivered Melbourne, at arrived Ayrton,
rage Ayrtons of judge but sail, set immediately and it read who Austin,
taking was mate the that found he day next the when disappointment, and
to but Bay, Twofold to Australia, of coast east the to not vessel, the
showed Austin but him, stop to wished He Zealand. New of coast east the
French the of error providential a by indeed, And letter!... the him
Zealand New of coast east the letter, the written had who geographer,
destination. of place the as mentioned was

him put They outrageous. became He frustrated! were plans Ayrtons All
knowing not Zealand, New of coast the to taken then was He irons. in
Lord of become would what or accomplices, his of become would what
Glenarvan.

On March. of 3rd the until coast this on about cruised Duncan The
were Duncan the on guns The guns. of report the heard Ayrton day that
board. on came companions his and Glenarvan Lord soon and fired, being

happened. had what is This

had Glenarvan Lord dangers, thousand a hardships, thousand a After
at Australia, of coast east the on arrived and journey, his accomplished
answered, They Melbourne. to telegraphed He Duncan! No Bay. Twofold
unknown. Destination instant. 18th the on sailed Duncan

honest his that conclusion; one at arrive only could Glenarvan Lord
pirate a become had and Joyce, Ben of hands the into fallen had yacht
vessel!

generous and bold a was He up. give not would Glenarvan Lord However,
New of coast west the to sailed vessel, merchant a in embarked He man.
without parallel, thirty-seventh the along it traversed Zealand,
his to side, other the on but Grant; Captain of trace any finding
under Duncan, the found he Heaven, of will the by and surprise, great
weeks! five for him for waiting been had who mate, the of command

the board on now was Glenarvan Lord 1855. March, of 3rd the on was This
nobleman, the before appeared He also. there was Ayrton but Duncan,
Captain about knew villain the that all him from extract to wished who
at that him, told then Glenarvan Lord speak. to refused Ayrton Grant.
English the to up delivered be would he into, put they port first the
mute. remained Ayrton authorities.

parallel. thirty-seventh the along voyage her continued Duncan The
of resistance the vanquish to undertook Glenarvan Lady meanwhile, the In
ruffian. the

he what for exchange in Ayrton, and prevailed, influence her last, At
island some on him leave should Glenarvan Lord that proposed tell, could
authorities. English the to up him giving of instead Pacific, the in
about information obtain to anything do to resolving Glenarvan, Lord
consented. Grant, Captain

knew he that certain was it and life, his all related then Ayrton
the on him landed had Grant Captain which on day the from nothing
coast. Australian

The given. had he which promise the kept Glenarvan Lord Nevertheless,
there was It Island. Tabor at arrived and voyage her continued Duncan
a by that, also there was it and landed, be to was Ayrton that
the on exactly men, two and Grant Captain found they miracle, veritable
parallel. thirty-seventh

and islet, desert this on place their take to went then, convict, The
Lord by pronounced were words these yacht the left he moment the at
Glenarvan:--

possible any without and land, any from far be will you Ayrton, Here,
this from escape cannot You fellow-creatures. your with communication
eye the under alone, be will You you. leaves Duncan the which on islet
neither be will you but heart, the of depths the reads who God a of
be to are you as Unworthy Grant. Captain was as forgotten, nor lost
Ayrton, are you where know I you. remember will men men, by remembered
it! forget never will I you. find to where know I and

of 18th was This disappeared. soon sail, making Duncan, the And
1855. March,

taken are related briefly been just have which events (The
read, doubt no have readers our of some which work a from
will They children. Grants Captain entitled, is which and
discrepancy some later, as well as occasion, this on remark
the why understand will they again, later but dates; the in
given.) first at not were dates real

weapons, ammunition, either of want no had he but alone, was Ayrton
seeds. or tools,

Captain honest by built house the was disposal, convicts the his, At
he which crimes the solitude in expiate and live to only had He Grant.
committed. had

very was and crimes his of ashamed was he repented, he Gentlemen,
take to day some came men if that himself, to said He miserable!
he How them! among return to worthy be must he islet, that from him
work! by himself recover to labored he How man! wretched that suffered,
this years, three years, two For prayer! by reformed be to prayed he How
ship some for looking always solitude, by humbled Ayrton, but on, went
would expiation of time the if himself asking horizon, the on appear to
was dreadful how Oh! suffered! other none as suffered complete, be soon
remorse! by tormented heart a to solitude, this

man, unhappy this punished sufficiently not had Heaven doubtless But
that felt He savage! a becoming gradually was he that felt he for
him! on gaining gradually was brutishness

at but solitude, of years three or two after was it if say not could He
found! you creature miserable the became he last

I, and Joyce, Ben Ayrton, that gentlemen, you, tell to need no have I
same. the are

It account. this of end the at rose companions his and Harding Cyrus
and grief, misery, What moved! were they much how say to impossible is
them! before revealed lay despair

but criminal, great a been have you rising, Harding, said Ayrton,
That crimes! your expiated have you that think certainly must Heaven
your among again brought been having your by proved been has
our be will you now And forgiven! are you Ayrton, fellow-creatures.
companion?

back. drew Ayrton

engineer. the said hand! my is Here

tears great and him, to extended Harding which hand the grasped Ayrton
eyes. his from fell

Harding. Cyrus asked us? with live you Will

me leave Ayrton, replied longer, time some me leave Harding, Captain
corral! the in hut the in alone

to going was Ayrton Harding. Cyrus answered Ayrton, like, you As
him:-- to question more one addressed engineer the when withdraw,

alone, live to intention your was it Since friend. my more, word One
track? your on us put which document the sea the into throw you did why

meant. he what know to appear not did who Ayrton, repeated document? A

the us giving bottle, a in enclosed found we which document the Yes,
Island! Tabor of position exact

I thought, having after then brow, his over hand his passed Ayrton
answered. he sea! the into document any threw never

Pencroft. exclaimed Never?

Never!

departed. and door the reached bowing, Ayrton, And



18 Chapter

returned, but door, the to rushed had who Herbert, said man! Poor
the in disappear and lift the on rope the down slide Ayrton seen having
darkness.

Harding. Cyrus said back, come will He

What! mean? that does what Pencroft, exclaimed captain, now, Come,
then? it was Who sea? the into bottle that threw who Ayrton it wasnt

one! that was it made, be to necessary was question a ever if Certainly,

half-mad. was man unhappy the only Neb, answered he, was It

was he what of conscious longer no was he and Herbert, said Yes!
doing.

Harding replied friends, my way, that in explained be only can It
exactly out point to able was Ayrton how now understand I and quickly,
his preceded had which events the since Island, Tabor of situation the
him. to known it made had island the on left being

wrote he when brute a yet not was he if Pencroft, observed However,
ago, years eight or seven sea the into it threw he if and document, that
damp? by injured been not has paper the that it is how

of deprived was Ayrton that Harding, Cyrus answered proves, That
thinks. he than time recent more a at intelligence

fact the that without Pencroft, replied so, be must it course Of
unaccountable. be would

appear not did who engineer, the answered indeed, Unaccountable
conversation. the prolong to desirous

sailor. the asked truth? the told Ayrton has But

in true is told has he which story The reporter. the replied Yes,
the of newspapers the in account the well quite remember I point. every
result. its and Glenarvan, Lord by undertaken expedition yacht

Pencroft, it, doubt not Do Harding. added truth, the told has Ayrton
accuse they when truth the tell People him. to painful was it for
that! like themselves

the to descended colonists December--the of 21st day--the next The
He Ayrton. of nothing found they plateau the climbed having and beach,
settlers the and night the during corral the in house his reached had
would Time presence. their by him agitate to not best it judged
accomplish. to unable been had sympathy what perform doubtless

this On occupations. ordinary their resumed Neb and Pencroft, Herbert,
at workshop the to reporter the and Harding brought work same the day
Chimneys. the

explanation the that Spilett, Gideon said Cyrus, dear my know, you Do
at me satisfied not has bottle the of subject the on yesterday gave you
write to able was man unfortunate the that supposed be it can How all!
the having without sea the into bottle the throw and document that
it? of recollection slightest

Spilett. dear my in, it threw who he it was Nor

then-- think You

am I Harding. Cyrus interrupted nothing! know I nothing, think I
to able been not have I which those among incident this rank to content
day! this to explain

Your incredible! are things these Spilett, said Cyrus, Indeed,
this lastly and adventure, Tops sand, the on stranded case the rescue,
enigmas? these to answer the have never we Shall bottle...

penetrate to have I if even yes, quickly, engineer the replied Yes!
island! this of bowels the into

mystery! this to key the us give perhaps will Chance

in believe I than more any chance, in believe not do I Spilett! Chance!
unaccountable everything for reason a is There world. this in mysteries
the in But discover. shall I reason that and here, happened has which
observe. and work must we meantime

summer The commenced. 1867 year The arrived. January of month The
followed, which days the During continued. assiduously were occupations
corral, the of direction the in gone having Spilett and Herbert
which habitation the of possession taken had Ayrton that ascertained
flock numerous the with himself busied He him. for prepared been had
coming of trouble the companions his spared and care, his to confided
not order in Nevertheless, corral. the visit to days three or two every
paid often settlers the time, a long too for solitude in Ayrton leave to
visit. a him

suspicions some of consequence in either, unimportant not was It
of part this that Spilett, Gideon and engineer the by entertained
that and sort, some of surveillance a to subject be should island the
to neglect not should unexpectedly, occurred incident any if Ayrton,
it. of House Granite of inhabitants the inform

would it which occur would something that happen might it Nevertheless
Independently knowledge. engineers the to rapidly bring to necessary be
others many Island, Lincoln of mystery the on bearing facts of
the of interference prompt the for call would which happen, might
western the on wreck a vessel, a of sighting the as colonists,--such
etc. pirates, of arrival possible the coast,

instantaneous in corral the put to resolved Harding Cyrus Therefore
House. Granite with communication

his to project his known made he that January of 10th the on was It
companions.

Do Pencroft. asked captain? that, manage to going you are how Why!
telegraph? a establishing of think to happen chance by you

engineer. the answered so, Exactly

Herbert. cried Electric?

materials necessary the all have We Harding. Cyrus replied Electric,
stretch to be will thing difficult most the and battery, a making for
it. manage shall we think I drawplate a of means by but wires, the

of despair never shall I sailor, the returned that, after Well,
railway! a on along rolling day some ourselves seeing

if for, thing, difficult most the with beginning work, to set then They
and battery the manufacture to useless be would it that, in failed they
accessories. other

quality, excellent of was said, been has as Island, Lincoln of iron The
by commenced Harding out. drawn being for fit very consequently and
pierced steel, of plate a say, to is that drawplate, a manufacturing
bring successively would which sizes, different of holes conical with
having after steel, of piece This tenacity. wished-for the to wire the
solid a in possible as way a firm as in fixed was tempered, been
fall, great the from feet few a only ground, the in planted framework
as fact In utilize. to intended engineer the which of power motive the
moved beam its use, in then not although there, was fulling-mill the
it rolling by wire the out stretch to serve would power extreme with
The care. much required and operation, delicate a was It itself. round
were which of ends the rods, thin long in previously prepared iron,
of hole largest the into introduced been having file, the with sharpened
itself, round it wound which beam the by out drawn was drawplate, the
same the and unrolled, then feet, thirty or twenty-five of length a to
size. less a of holes the through successively performed was operation
long, feet fifty to forty from wires obtained engineer the Finally,
distance the over stretched and together fastened easily be could which
Granite of bounds the from corral the separated which miles, five of
House.

indeed and work, this perform to days few a than more take not did It
his left Harding Cyrus commenced, been had machine the as soon as
with himself occupied and wiredrawers, of trade the follow to companions
battery. his manufacturing

is It current. constant a with battery a obtain to necessary was It
of composed generally are batteries modern of elements the that known
the to wanting absolutely was Copper copper. and zinc, coal, retort
able been never had researches, his all notwithstanding who, engineer,
to obliged therefore was and Island, Lincoln in it of trace any find to
which graphite hard the say, to is that coal, Retort it. without do
has coal the after manufactories, gas of retorts the in found is
been have would it but obtained, been have could dehydrogenized, been
As labor. great involving apparatus, special a establish to necessary
was Point Flotsam at found case the that remembered be may it zinc, to
this for than utilized better be not could which metal, this with lined
purpose.

a manufacture to decided consideration, mature after Harding, Cyrus
invented that possible as nearly as resembling battery, simple very
other The employed. is only zinc which in and 1820, in Becquerel by
disposal. his at all were potash, and acid azotic substances,

the and follows, as was composed was battery the which in way The
each on potash and acid of reaction the by attained be to were results
acid. azotic with filled and made were bottles glass of number A other.
a passed which through stopper a of means by them corked engineer The
plunged be to intended and extremity, lower its at bored tube, glass
this Into rag. a by secured stopper clay a of means by acid the into
potash, of solution a poured he extremity, upper its through tube,
plants, various ashes to reducing and burning by obtained previously
the through other each on act could potash and acid the way this in and
clay.

plunged was which of one zinc, of slips two took then Harding Cyrus
was current A potash. of solution a into other the acid, azotic into
the in zinc of slip the from transmitted was which produced, immediately
a by connected been having slips two the and tube, the in that to bottle
in that and pole, positive the became tube the in slip the wire metallic
therefore, bottle, Each apparatus. the of pole negative the bottle the
all produce to sufficient be would united as currents many as produced
very and ingenious the was Such telegraph. electric the of phenomena the
would which apparatus an Harding, Cyrus by constructed apparatus simple
Granite between communication telegraphic a establish to them allow
corral. the and House

to road the along planting the commenced was February of 6th the On
to intended and insulators, glass with furnished posts of corral, the
to ready extended, was wire the after, days few A wire. the support
a miles thousand twenty of rate a at current electric the produce
second.

other the House, Granite for one manufactured, been had batteries Two
to able be should corral the necessary was it if for corral; the for
Granite that useful be also might it House Granite with communicate
corral. the with communicate to able be should House

two the At simple. very were they manipulator, and receiver the to As
a round say, to is that magnet, a round wound was wire the stations
thus was communication The wire. a with surrounded iron soft of piece
the from starting current, the poles; two the between established
was which magnet the through passed wire, the traversed pole, positive
negative the to earth the through returned and magnetized, temporarily
became immediately magnet the interrupted, was current the If pole.
the before iron soft of plate a place to sufficient was It unmagnetized.
fall would current, the of passage the during attracted which, magnet,
thus plate the of movement This interrupted. was current the when back
dial, a on arranged needle a it to fasten easily could Harding obtained,
from communicate way this in and alphabet, the of letters the bearing
other. the to station one

day, this On February. of 12th the by arranged completely was All
all if asked wire, the through current the sent having Harding,
a moments few a in received and corral, the at well on going was
every and joy, with wild was Pencroft Ayrton. from reply satisfactory
always which corral, the to telegram a sent he evening and morning
answer. an received

firstly, advantages: real very two presented communication of mode This
and corral; the at was Ayrton that ascertain to them enabled it because
Cyrus Besides, isolated. completely left not thus was he that secondly,
and him, see to going without pass to week a allowed never Harding
a found always he where House, Granite to time to time from came Ayrton
welcome. cordial

The work. usual the of midst the in away passed season fine The
increased corn, and vegetables in particularly colony, the of resources
succeeded had Island Tabor from brought plants the and day, to day from
perfectly.

The aspect. encouraging an presented Heights Prospect of plateau The
one no that supposed be may it and admirable been had harvest fourth
grains of millions thousand hundred four the whether counting of thought
so, doing of thought had Pencroft However, crop. the in appeared duly
three count to managed he if even that him told having Harding Cyrus but
him take would it hour, an thousand nine or minute, a grains hundred
honest the task, his finish to years five-hundred thousand five nearly
idea. the up give to best it considered sailor

but time, day the in warm very temperature the splendid, was weather The
and atmosphere the of heat the tempered sea-breezes the evening the in
were, There House. Granite of inhabitants the for nights cool procured
duration, long of not were they although which, storms, few a however,
blazed lightning The fury. extraordinary with Island Lincoln over swept
hours. some for roll to continued thunder the and

prosperous. extremely was colony little the period this At

surplus, the on lived they and swarmed, poultry-yard the of tenants The
moderate more a to population the reduce to necessary became it but
understood be may it and young, produced already had pigs The number.
and Neb of part great a absorbed animals these for care their that
often most were colts, pretty two had who onagers, The time. Pencrofts
rider excellent an become had who Herbert, and Spilett Gideon by mounted
the to them harnessed also they and instruction, reporters the under
different or House, Granite to coal and wood carrying for either cart
engineer. the by required productions mineral

Far the of depths the into time this about made were expeditions Several
anything having without there venture could explorers The Forests. West
through penetrated scarcely rays suns the for heat, the from fear to
the all visited thus They heads. their above spreading foliage thick the
the to corral the from road the ran which along Mercy, the of bank left
River. Falls of mouth

for armed, well be to care took settlers the excursions these in But
tussle. a had often they which with boars, wild savage with met they
jaguars. the against war fierce made season, this during also, They
pupil his and them, against hatred special a vowed had Spilett Gideon
feared longer no they were, they as Armed well. him seconded Herbert
the and superb, was courage Herberts beasts. those of one meet to
skins magnificent twenty Already astonishing. sang-froid reporters
the continued, this if and House, Granite of dining-room the ornamented
by at aimed object the island, the in extinct be soon would race jaguar
hunters. the

unknown the to made expeditions the in part took sometimes engineer The
for was It attention. great with surveyed he which island, the of parts
the of thickets the searched he that animals of those than traces other
Jup, nor Top Neither appeared. ever suspicious nothing but forest, vast
was there that behavior their by betrayed ever him, accompanied who
at barked dog the again once than more yet and there, strange anything
without explored before had engineer the which well, the of mouth the
result.

of views several took Herbert, by aided Spilett, Gideon time this At
photographic the of means by island, the of parts picturesque most the
any made yet as not had they which of and cases, the in found apparatus
use.

very was object-glass, powerful a with provided apparatus, This
reproduction, photographic the for necessary Substances complete.
it render to silver of nitrate plate, glass the preparing for collodion
of chloride obtained, prints the fix to soda of hyposulfate sensitive,
proof, positive the give to destined paper the soak to which in ammonium
paper, the immerse to which in gold of chloride and soda of acetate
prepared, all there, were papers the Even wanting. was nothing
was it negatives, the upon printing-frame the in laying before and
of nitrate of solution the in minutes few a for them soak to sufficient
silver.

skilful very time short a in became assistant his and reporter The
the as such country, the of views fine obtained they and operators,
distance, the in Franklin Mount with Heights Prospect from taken island,
glade the rocks, high in framed picturesquely so Mercy, the of mouth the
the background, the in mountain the of spurs the with corral, the and
etc. Point, Flotsam Cape, Claw of development curious

the all of portraits the take to forget photographers the did Nor
one. no out leaving island, the of inhabitants

Pencroft. said us, multiplies It

faithfully countenance, own his see to enchanted was sailor the And
stopped he and House, Granite of walls the ornamenting reproduced,
the before done have would he as exhibition this before willingly as
Broadway. in shop-windows richest

was portrait successful most the that acknowledged be must it But
not gravity a with sat had Jup Master Jup. Master of that incontestably
lifelike! was portrait his and described, be to

Pencroft. exclaimed grin! to going just was he if as looks He

very been have would he satisfied, been not had Jup Master if And
own his contemplated and contented quite was he but please; to difficult
of amount small some expressed which air sentimental a with countenance
conceit.

sometimes was weather The March. of month the with ended heat summer The
the to corresponds which March, of month The warm. still but rainy,
been have might as fine so not was latitudes, northern of September
winter. rigorous and early an announced it Perhaps hoped.

snow first the st--that 21 morning--the one supposed been have might It
one from early looking Herbert fact In appearance. its made already had
exclaimed,-- House, Granite of windows the of

snow! with covered is islet the Hallo!

boy. the joining reporter, the answered time? this at Snow

one ascertain only could but them, beside soon were companions Their
was House Granite below beach the all but islet the only not that thing,
white. of sheet uniform one with covered

Pencroft. said snow! be must It

Neb. replied it! like very its rather Or

Gideon observed degrees! fifty-eight marks thermometer the But
Spilett.

for anything, saying without white of sheet the at gazed Harding Cyrus
of time this at phenomenon, this explain to how know not did really he
temperature. a such in and year

frozen! be will plants our all Pencroft, exclaimed Jove! By

nimble the by preceded was he when descend, to about was sailor the And
sand. the to down slid who Jup,

and arose sheet snowy the when ground, the touched not had orang the But
the of light the that flakes innumerable such in air the in dispersed
minutes. some for obscured was sun

Herbert. cried Birds!

plumage. white dazzling with sea-birds, of swarms indeed were They
they and shore, the on and islet the on thousands by perched had They
they if as amazed colonists the leaving distance, the in disappeared
succeeded summer which in scene, transformation some at present been had
been had change the Unfortunately wand. fairys a of touch the at winter
bring to able been had lad the nor reporter the neither that sudden, so
species. the recognize not could they which of birds, these of one down

years two which, on day the March, of 26th the came after days few A
Island. Lincoln upon thrown been had air the from castaways the before,



19 Chapter

no had had colonists the years two for and already! years Two
from news without were They fellow-creatures! their with communication
had they if as completely as island, this on lost world, civilized the
hemisphere! celestial the of star minute most the on been

native their of picture The country? their in happening now was What
the at war civil by torn land the eyes, their before always was land
still perhaps was rebellion Southern the which and it, left they time
often they and them, to sorrow great a was It blood! with staining
that however doubting ever without things, these of together talked
American the of honor the for triumph, must North the of cause the
Confederation.

island; the of sight in passed had vessel a not years two these During
Lincoln that evident was It seen. been had sail a not least, at or,
was unknown,--as was it that also and track, usual the of out was Island
might vessels port, no was there though maps,--for the by proved besides
But water. of store their renewing of purpose the for it visited have
and reach, could eye the as far as deserted was ocean surrounding the
land. native their regaining for themselves on rely must colonists the

discussed was chance this and existed, rescue of chance one However,
gathered were colonists the when April, of week first the on day one
House. Granite of dining-room the in together

they which country, native their of America, of talking been had They
again. seeing ever of hope little so had

for way single one Spilett, said way, one only have we Decidedly
to enough large vessel a build to is, that and Island, Lincoln leaving
a built has one when that me, to appears It miles. hundred several sail
ship! a build to easy as just is it boat

as just Herbert, added Pomoutous, the to go might we which in And
Island. Tabor to went we as easily

vote casting the always had who Pencroft, replied no, say not do I
the exactly not is it although no, say not do I questions; maritime in
had craft little our If voyage! short a as long a make to thing same
Island, Tabor to voyage the during wind of gale heavy any in caught been
but way; either distance great no at was land that known have should we
at is land nearest the and way, long pretty a is miles hundred twelve
distance! that least

asked adventure? the attempt Pencroft, case, that in not, you Would
reporter. the

the answered Spilett, Mr. desired, is that anything attempt will I
flinch! to man a not am I that well know you and sailor,

now, us amongst sailor another number we that besides, Remember,
Neb. remarked

Pencroft. asked that? is Who

Ayrton.

Pencroft. said come, to consent will he If

Lord if that think you do reporter; the returned Nonsense!
still was he while Island, Tabor at appeared had yacht Glenarvans
depart? to refused have would Ayrton there, living

not was Ayrton that Harding, Cyrus said then friends, my forget, You
But there. stay his of years last the during reason his of possession in
among count may we if know to is point The question. the not is that
Now, vessel. Scotch the of return the rescued, being of chances our
from off him take to return would he that Ayrton promised Glenarvan Lord
I and expiated, were crimes his that considered he when Island Tabor
return. will he that believe

for soon, return will he that add will I and reporter, the said Yes,
abandoned. was Ayrton since years twelve is it

will nobleman the that you with agree I Pencroft, answered Well!
not and Island, Tabor At touch? he will where But too. soon and return,
Island. Lincoln at

not is Island Lincoln as Herbert, replied certain, more the is That
map. the on marked even

the take to ought we engineer, the said friends, my Therefore,
on Ayrton of that and presence our making for precautions necessary
Island. Tabor at known Island Lincoln

place to than easier is nothing and reporter, the answered Certainly,
notice a dwelling, Ayrtons and Grants Captain was which hut, the in
the giving finding, help cannot crew his and Glenarvan Lord which
island. our of position

that take to forgot we that sailor, the remarked pity, a is It
Island. Tabor to visit first our on precaution

did we time that At Herbert. asked it? done have we should why And
to likely was one any that know not did we history; Ayrtons know not
season the history, his know did we when and him, fetch to day some come
Island. Tabor to then return to us allow to advanced too was

voyage the off put must we and late, too was it Harding, replied Yes,
spring. next until

Pencroft. said that, before comes yacht Scotch the suppose But

would Glenarvan Lord for engineer, the replied probable, not is That
has he Either seas. these into venture to season winter the choose not
is that us, with been has Ayrton since Island, Tabor to returned already
not will he or again; left has and months five last the during say, to
October fine first the in enough time be will it and later, till come
there. notice a leave and Island, Tabor to go to days

the if unfortunate very be will it that Neb, said allow, must We
ago! months few a only parts these to returned has Duncan

has Heaven that and Harding, Cyrus replied so, not is it that hope I
us. to remains which chance best the of us deprived not

what know shall we rate any at that reporter, the observed think, I
yacht the if for Island, Tabor to been have we when on depend to have we
their of traces some left have necessarily will they there, returned has
visit.

since friends, my then, So engineer. the answered evident, is That
patiently, wait must we country, our to returning of chance this have we
do. to best be will what see shall we us from taken is it if and

we if that understood well is it Pencroft, remarked rate, any At
uncomfortable were we because be not will it Island, Lincoln leave do
there!

far are we because be will it engineer, the replied Pencroft, No,
friends, his family, his world, the in dearest holds man a that all from
land! native his

to enough large vessel a of building the decided, thus being Matters
in Zealand New to or north, the in Archipelagoes the to either sail
their in themselves busied they and of, talked longer no was west, the
Granite in time third a wintering to view a with occupations, accustomed
House.

their on, came weather stormy the before that agreed was it However,
island. the round voyage a making in employed be should vessel little
colonists the and made, been yet not had coast the of survey complete A
the from north, and west the to shore the of idea imperfect an but had
bay narrow the of as well as Capes, Mandible the to River Falls of mouth
jaws. sharks a like opened which them, between

Harding Cyrus and Pencroft, by proposed was excursion this of plan The
his of part this see to wished himself he for it, in acquiesced fully
domain.

sudden by fluctuate not did barometer the but variable, was weather The
However, weather. tolerable on count therefore could they and movements,
a fall, barometrical sudden a after April, of week first the during
six or five lasting wind, of gale heavy a by marked was rise renewed
a at stationary remained instrument the of needle the then days;
appeared weather the and nine-tenths, and inches twenty-nine of height
excursion. an for propitious

Bonadventure, the and April, of 16th the for fixed was departure The
of be might which voyage a for provisioned was Balloon, Port in anchored
duration. some

proposed and expedition, projected the of Ayrton informed Harding Cyrus
on remain to preferring Ayrton but it, in part take should he that
the during House Granite to come should he that decided was it shore,
company, him keep to ordered was Jup Master companions. his of absence
remonstrance. no made and

Top, including colonists, the all April of 16th the of morning the On
Bonadventure the and south-west, the from blew breeze fine A embarked.
ninety the Of End. Reptile reach to as so Balloon Port leaving on tacked
the included twenty measured, island the of perimeter the which miles
right being wind The promontory. the and port the between coast south
shore. the hug to necessary was it ahead

leaving on vessel the for promontory, the reach to day whole the took It
for way make to therefore had and tide ebb of hours two only had port
was promontory the before nightfall was It flood. the against hours six
doubled.

continue should they that engineer the to proposed then sailor The
to preferred Harding But sail. the in reefs two with slowly sailing
of part that survey to as so shore, the from cable-lengths few a anchor
anxious were they as that also agreed was It day. the during coast the
the during sail not should they coast the of exploration minute a for
anchor at be it, permitted weather the when always, would but night,
shore. the near

fallen, having wind the and promontory, the under passed was night The
the of exception the with passengers, The silence. the disturbed nothing
would they as Bonadventure the board on well as slept scarcely sailor,
however. sleep did they but House, Granite at rooms their in done have
tack larboard the on going by and day, of break at sail set Pencroft
shore. the to close keep could they

already had they since coast, wooded beautiful this knew colonists The
They admiration. their excited again it yet and foot, on it explored
everything, notice to as so possible, as in close as along coasted
there. and here floated which trees of trunks the always avoiding
of photographs took Spilett Gideon and anchored, they also times Several
scenery. superb the

River. Falls of mouth the at arrived Bonadventure the noon About
three and appeared, trees scattered few a bank, left the on Beyond,
western the among groups solitary into dwindled these even further miles
shore. the to down sloped ridge arid whose mountain, the of spurs

coast! the of part southern and northern the between contrast a What
and rugged other the was so fertile and woody was one as proportion In
as coasts, iron those of one as designated been have might It barren!
to appeared confusion wild its and countries, some in called are they
yet the in produced been had crystallization sudden a that indicate
masses stupendous These sea. geological distant some of basalt liquid
on first at cast been had they if settlers the terrified have would
sinister the perceive to able been not had They island! the of part this
they for Franklin, Mount of summit the from shore this of aspect
it sea the from viewed but height, a great too from it overlooked
any in equaled be perhaps not could which appearance wild a presented
globe. the of corner

a half of distance the for coast this along sailed Bonadventure The
sizes, all of blocks of composed was it that see to easy was It mile.
round shapes, all of and height, in feet hundred three to twenty from
conical obelisks, like pyramidal steeples, like prismatic towers, like
been have not could seas Polar the of iceberg An chimneys. factory like
thrown were bridges Here, sublimity! terrible its in capricious more
the into wave, a of those like arches there, another; to rock one from
vaulted large place, one in penetrate; not could eye the which of depths
of crowd a another, in aspect; monumental a presented excavations
ever cathedral Gothic no as such arches, and spires, columns,
the of those than varied more still nature, of caprice Every possessed.
length a over extended which coast, grand this on appeared imagination,
miles. nine or eight of

surprise of feeling a with gazed, companions his and Harding Cyrus
Top, silent, remained they although But, stupefaction. on bordering
were which barks uttered sort, this of feelings with troubled being not
engineer The cliff. basaltic the of echoes thousand the by repeated
those like them, in strange something had barks these that observed even
House. Granite in well the of mouth the at uttered had dog the which

he. said in, close go us Let

shore. rocky the to possible as near as sailed Bonadventure the And
existed explore, to advisable be would it which cave, some Perhaps
could which cleft a not cavern, a not nothing, saw Harding But there?
was cliff the of foot the for whatever, being any to retreat a as serve
continued vessel the and ceased, barks Tops Soon surf. the by washed
coast. the from cables-length few a at course her

and flat again became shore the island the of part northwest the In
which ground, marshy low, a above rose there and here trees few A sandy.
other the to contrast violent in and surveyed, already had colonists the
of myriads of presence the by manifested again was life shore, desert
bay small a in anchored Bonadventure the evening That water-fowl.
water of depth the was such land, the near island, the of north the to
last the with away died breeze the for quietly, passed night The there.
dawn. of streaks first the with again rose only and day, of light

say, to is that colony, the of hunters usual the land, to easy was it As
and so, or hours two of ramble a for went Spilett, Gideon and Herbert
had Top snipe. and duck wild of strings several with returned
and zeal his to thanks lost, been had bird a not and wonders, done
cleverness.

ran and sail, set Bonadventure the morning the in oclock eight At
and astern right was wind the for Cape, Mandible North towards rapidly
rapidly. freshening

came gale a if surprised be not should I Pencroft, observed However,
horizon, red-looking very a in set sun the Yesterday west. the from up
good. anything forbode dont mares-tails those morning, this now, and

their zenith, the in scattered clouds, cirrus are mares-tails These
like look They feet. thousand five than less being sea the from height
some announces usually presence their and wool, cotton of pieces light
weather. the in change sudden

run and possible, as sail much as carry us let Harding, said Well,
be will Bonadventure the that think I Gulf. Shark into shelter for
there. safe

merely is coast north the besides, and Pencroft, replied Perfectly,
at. look to uninteresting very sand,

to-night only not pass to engineer, the resumed sorry, be not shall I
explored. carefully being worth is which bay, that in to-morrow but

not, or it like we whether so, do to obliged be shall we that think I
west. the towards threatening very looks sky the for Pencroft, answered
on! coming is weather Dirty

Mandible, Cape reaching for wind favorable a have we rate any At
reporter. the observed

the enter to tack must we but sailor; the replied wind, fine very A
quarters. unknown these in clear way my see to like should I and gulf,

we if Herbert, added rocks, with filled be to appear which Quarters
Gulf. Shark of coast south the on saw we what by judge

it leave will we best, think you as do Harding, Cyrus said Pencroft,
you. to

not shall I sailor, the replied captain, uneasy, mind your make Dont
ribs my into run were knife a rather would I needlessly! myself expose
Bonadventure! my of those into rock sharp a than

water, under vessel his of part the was ribs called Pencroft which That
skin. own his than more it valued he and

Pencroft. asked it? is oclock What

Spilett. Gideon replied oclock, Ten

captain? Cape, the to it is distance what And

engineer. the replied miles, fifteen About

we and sailor, the said half, a and hours two of matter a Thats
the Unluckily, oclock. one and twelve between Cape the off be shall
gulf. the of out ebbing be will and moment, that at turning be will tide
wind both having in, get to difficult very be will it that afraid am I
us. against tide and

and Herbert, remarked to-day, moon full a is it that so more the And
strong. very are tides April these

Cape? the off anchor not you can Harding, asked Pencroft, Well,

sailor. the exclaimed on! coming weather bad with land, near Anchor
a of aground, run should We captain? of, thinking you are What
certainty!

then? do you will What

till say, to is that flood, the until offing the in keep to try shall I
will I enough light still is there if and evening, the in seven about
the during on and off stand must we not, if gulf; the enter to try
sunrise. at to-morrow enter will we and night,

Harding. answered you, to it leave will we Pencroft, you, told I As

it coast, the on lighthouse a only was there if Pencroft, said Ah!
sailors. for convenient more much be would

obliging no have shall we time this and Herbert, replied Yes,
port! into us guide to fire a light to engineer

you; thanked never have we Spilett, said Cyrus, dear my indeed, Why,
able-- been have never should we fire that without frankly, but

words. reporters the at astonished much Harding, asked fire? A

Bonadventure the board on that Pencroft, answered captain, mean, We
we and return, our before hours few the during anxious very were we
the for been not had it if island, the of windward to passed have should
October, of 19th the of night the fire a lighting of took you precaution
Heights. Prospect on

engineer. the replied mine! of idea lucky a was That yes! Yes,

to occurs idea the unless sailor, the continued time, this And
service! little that us do to one no be will there Ayrton,

Harding. Cyrus answered one! No No!

vessel, the of bows the in alone himself finding after, minutes few A
whispered,-- and down bent engineer the reporter, the with

I that is it Spilett, world, this in certain thing one is there If
neither October, of 19th the of night the during fire any lighted never
island! the of part other any on nor Heights Prospect on



20 Chapter

in mistaken seldom being he predicted, had Pencroft as happened Things
soon it breeze fresh a from and rose, wind The prognostications. his
from of speed a acquired it say, to is that gale; regular a to increased
sea open the in ship a which before hour, an miles forty-five to forty
six nearly was it as Now, topsails. close-reefed under run have would
that at as and gulf, the reached Bonadventure the when oclock
therefore were They enter. to impossible was it turned, tide the moment
Pencroft so, do to wished had he if even for off, stand to compelled
the to jib the Hoisting Mercy. the of mouth the gained have not could
the of head the putting to, hove he storm-sail, a of way by mainmast
land. the towards vessel

by sheltered being sea, the strong was wind the although Fortunately,
from fear to little then had They high. very run not did land, the
would Bonadventure The craft. small endanger always which waves, the
enormous but ballasted, well was she for capsized, have not doubtlessly
timbers her if her injure might deck the on falling water of masses
prepared was sailor, good a as Pencroft, them. sustain not could
but vessel, his in confidence great had he Certainly, anything. for
anxiety. some with day of return the awaited he nevertheless

opportunity no had Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus night, the During
reporters the in pronounced words the yet and together, talking for
the with together discussed, being worth well were engineer the by ear
Gideon Island. Lincoln over reign to appeared which influence mysterious
inexplicable and new this over pondering from cease not did Spilett
fire The island. the of coast the on fire a of appearance the incident,
seen had Pencroft, and Herbert companions, His seen! been actually had
island the of position the signalize to served had fire The him! with it
by lighted was it that doubted not had they and night, dark that during
that declaring expressly Harding Cyrus was here and hand; engineers the
to recur to resolved Spilett sort! the of anything done never had he
Cyrus urge to and returned, Bonadventure the as soon as incident this
Perhaps facts. strange these with companions their acquaint to Harding
every of investigation complete a common in make to decided be would it
Island. Lincoln of part

yet these on lighted was fire no evening this on be, might that However
little the and gulf, the to entrance the formed which shores, unknown
night. the during off stood vessel

the horizon, western the in appeared dawn of streaks first the When
enabled and points, two shifted fallen, slightly had which wind,
seven Towards ease. greater with gulf narrow the enter to Pencroft
North the weathering Bonadventure, the morning, the in oclock
so waters, the to on glided and strait the entered Cape, Mandible
lava. of frame the in enclosed strangely

a which in roads, admirable make would bay this Pencroft, said Well,
ease! their at lie could fleet whole

gulf the that is Harding, observed curious, especially is What
and volcano, the by out thrown lava, of rivers two by formed been has
is gulf the that is result The eruptions. successive by accumulated
the in even that believe I and sides, all on sheltered completely
lake. a as calm as be must here sea the weather, stormiest

narrow that only has wind the since sailor, the returned doubt, No
north the besides, and, by, in get to capes two the between entrance
entrance the make would which way a in south the of that protects cape
here stay could Bonadventure our declare I difficult. very gusts of
her at dragging even without other, the to year the of end one from
anchor!

reporter. the observed her! for large rather is It

large too is it that agree I sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. Well!
a of want in were Union the of fleets the if but Bonadventure, the for
place better a find ever would they think dont I Pacific, the in harbor
this! than

the of form the to alluding Neb, remarked mouth, sharks the in are We
gulf.

not are you but Herbert, replied Neb! honest my mouth, its into Right
you? are us, upon shut will it that afraid

please doesnt here gulf this yet and Neb, answered Herbert, Mr. No,
look! wicked a has It much! me

gulf, my at nose his up turning Neb is here Pencroft, cried Hallo!
America! to it presenting of thinking was I as just

a for engineer, the asked enough? deep water the is rate, any at But,
enough be not would Bonadventure the of keel the for sufficient depth
iron-clads. our of those for

Pencroft. replied out, found easily is That

a as him served which cord, long a with sounded sailor the And
measured cord This iron. of lump a fastened was which to and lead-line,
finding without unrolled was length entire its and fathoms, fifty nearly
bottom. any

all! after here come can iron-clads our Pencroft, exclaimed There,
aground! run not would They

but, abyss, regular a is gulf this Spilett, Gideon said Indeed,
not is it island, the of origin volcanic the consideration into taking
depressions. similar offer should sea the that astonishing

perfectly were cliffs these that Herbert, observed too, say would One
five line a with even foot, their at that believe I and perpendicular;
bottom. find not would Pencroft longer, times six or

out point must I but reporter, the said then well, very all is That
respect! important very one in wanting is harbor his that Pencroft to

Spilett? Mr. that, is what And

of interior the to access give to sort, some of cutting a opening, An
in And, land. could we which on spot a see not do I island. the
for suitable place single a afford not did cliffs lava steep the fact,
more with but recalling, barrier, insuperable an formed They landing.
close as coasting Bonadventure, The Norway. of fiords the wildness,
which projection a even discover not did cliffs, the along possible as
deck. the leave to passengers the allow would

they mine a of help the with that saying by himself consoled Pencroft
as then, and necessary, was that when cliff the out open soon could
his steered he gulf, the in done be to nothing evidently was there
the in oclock two about at out passed and strait the towards vessel
afternoon.

satisfaction. of sigh a uttering Neb, said Ah!

in ease his at feel not did Negro honest the that say really might One
jaws. enormous those

more not was Mercy the of mouth the to Cape Mandible from distance The
Granite towards put was Bonadventure the of head The miles. eight than
the along rapidly ran she sails, her filling wind fair a and House,
coast.

dunes, sand capricious those soon succeeded rocks lava enormous the To
which and recovered, singularly so been had engineer the which among
thousands. in frequented seabirds

his on islet the of point the leaving Pencroft oclock, four About
five at and coast, the from it separated which channel the entered left,
the at sand the in buried was Bonadventure the of anchor the oclock
Mercy. the of mouth

Ayrton dwelling. their from days three absent been had colonists The
them, meet to joyously came Jup and beach, the on them for waiting was
satisfaction. of grunts deep to vent giving

made, been now had island the of coast the of exploration complete A
being mysterious any If observed. been had appearances suspicious no and
forest impenetrable the of cover under be only could it it, on resided
directed yet not had colonists the which to Peninsula, Serpentine the of
investigations. their

was it and engineer, the with things these discussed Spilett Gideon
the to companions their of attention the direct should they that agreed
island, the on occurred had which incidents certain of character strange
unaccountable. most the was last the which of and

on kindled been having fire a of fact the to returning Harding, However,
the for repeating from refrain not could hand, unknown an by shore the
reporter,-- the to time twentieth

eruption partial a not it Was it? seen having of sure quite you are But
meteor? some perhaps or volcano, the of

by lighted fire a certainly was it reporter, the answered Cyrus, No,
as it saw They Herbert. and Pencroft question Besides; man. of hand the
words. my confirm will they and myself, it saw I

in April, of 25th the on after, days few a therefore, consequence, In
Heights, Prospect on collected all were settlers the when evening, the
saying,-- by began Harding Cyrus

certain to attention your call to duty my it think I friends, My
I which of subject the on island, the in occurred have which incidents
speak, to so are, incidents These advice. your have to happy be shall
supernatural--

from smoke of volume a emitting sailor, the exclaimed Supernatural!
supernatural? is island our that possible be it Can mouth. his

engineer; the replied certainly, most mysterious, but Pencroft, No,
failed now until have I and Spilett which that explain can you unless
understand. to

sailor. the answered captain, away, Speak

that it was how engineer, the said then understood, you have Well,
the into mile a of quarter a found was I sea, the into falling after
of consciousness any having my without that, and island, the of interior
there? removal my

Pencroft. said unconscious-- being Unless,

Have continue. to But engineer. the replied admissible, not is That
from miles five retreat your discover to able was Top how understood you
lying? was I which in cave the

Herbert. observed instinct-- dogs The

the notwithstanding since reporter, the returned instinct! Singular
arrived Top night, that during raging was which wind and rain of storm
mud! of speck a without and dry Chimneys, the at

our how understood you Have engineer. the resumed continue, us Let
his after lake, the of water the of out up thrown strangely so was dog
dugong? the with struggle

the which wound the and Pencroft, replied all, at not confess, I No!
a with made been have to seemed which wound a side, its in had dugong
either. understood, be cant that instrument; sharp

friends, my understood, you Have Harding. said again, continue us Let
case that how peccary; young the of body the into got bullet that how
trace any being there without stranded, fortunately so be to happened
itself presented document the containing bottle that how wreck; a of
having canoe, our how sea-excursion; first our during opportunely, so
rejoined and Mercy the of current the down floated moorings, its broken
the invasion ape the after how it; needed we moment very the at us
how lastly, and House; Granite from down thrown obligingly so was ladder
into fell him, by written never was asserts Ayrton which document, the
hands? our

singular the one, forgetting without enumerated, thus Harding Cyrus As
Pencroft and Neb, Herbert, island, the in occurred had which incidents
of succession this for reply, to what knowing not other, each at stared
their excite but not could time, first the for thus grouped incidents,
degree. highest the to surprise

it and captain, right, are you last, at Pencroft said word, my Pon
things! these all explain to difficult is

been just has fact last a engineer, the resumed friends, my Well,
others! the than incomprehensible less no is it and these, to added

quickly. Herbert asked captain? it, is What

the continued Pencroft, Island, Tabor from returning were you When
Island? Lincoln on appeared fire a that said you engineer,

sailor. the answered Certainly,

fire? this seen having of certain quite are you And

now. you see I as sure As

Herbert? also, You

the of star a like blazing was fire that Herbert, cried captain, Why,
magnitude! first

engineer. the urged star? a not it was But

and clouds, thick with covered was sky the for Pencroft, replied No,
Mr. But horizon. the on low so been have not would star a rate any at
words. our confirm will he and we, as well as it saw Spilett

and bright, very was fire the that reporter, the said add, will I
lightning. of sheet a like up shot it that

the on placed certainly was it and Herbert, added exactly, yes! Yes,
House. Granite of heights

19th the of night the during Harding, Cyrus replied friends, my Well,
coast. the on fire any lighted I nor Neb neither October, of

astonishment, his of height the in Pencroft, exclaimed not! did You
sentence. his finish to able being not

fire a if and Harding, Cyrus answered House, Granite leave not did We
ours! than hand another by lighted was it coast, the on appeared

be could illusion No stupefied. were Neb and Herbert, Pencroft,
the of night the during eyes their met actually had fire a and possible,
An existed! mystery a it, acknowledge to had they Yes! October. of 19th
very but colonists, the to favorable evidently influence, inexplicable
time of nick the in always executed was curiosity, their to irritating
profoundest its in hidden being some be there Could Island. Lincoln on
this. ascertain to cost any at necessary was It recesses?

and Top of behavior singular the of companions his reminded also Harding
Granite placed which well, the of mouth the round prowled they when Jup
had he that them told he and sea, the with communication in House
final The suspicious. anything discovering without well, the explored
members the all by conversation, this of consequence in taken, resolve
would they returned season fine the as soon as that was colony, the of
island. the of whole the search thoroughly

the if as felt He anxious. be to appeared Pencroft day that from But
him to belonged property personal own his made had he which island
to master, another with it shared he that and longer, no entirely
those of talked often he and Neb subject. felt he not, or willing whom,
the to them inclining natures their both, and things, unaccountable
the under was Island Lincoln that believing from far not were marvelous,
power. supernatural some of dominion

the May, of month the with came weather bad the meanwhile, the In
would winter the that appeared It zones. northern the of November
were season winter the for preparations The forward. and severe be
delay. without commenced therefore

winter, the meet to prepared well were colonists the Nevertheless,
the and clothing, felt of plenty had They be. might it hard however
wool of abundance an furnished had time, this by numerous very musmons,
material. warm this of manufacture the for necessary

this with provided been had Ayrton that say to unnecessary is It
to come should he that proposed Harding Cyrus clothing. comfortable
be would he where House, Granite in them with season bad the spend
soon as so, do to promised Ayrton and corral, the at than lodged better
the towards this did He finished. was corral the at work last the as
made and life, common the shared Ayrton time that From April. of middle
took never he sad, and humble still but occasions; all on useful himself
companions. his of pleasures the in part

passed settlers the which winter third the this, of part greater the For
many were There House. Granite to confined were they Island, Lincoln in
rocks the shake to appeared which tempests, frightful and storms violent
the overwhelm to threatened waves Immense foundations. very their to
have would shore the near anchored vessel any certainly and island,
Mercy the hurricanes, these of one during Twice, pieces. to dashed been
bridges the that fear to reason give to as degree a such to swelled
the on those strengthen to necessary was it and away, swept be would
beat sea the when waters, foaming the under disappeared which shore,
beach. the against

in water-spouts to comparable storms, such that supposed be well may It
the on havoc great cause would snow, and rain mingled were which
particularly poultry-yard the and mill The Heights. Prospect of plateau
repairs, immediate make to obliged often were colonists The suffered.
seriously been have would birds the of safety the which without
threatened.

quadrumana of troops and jaguars several weather, worst the During
that feared be to always was it and plateau, the of edge the to ventured
cross to manage hunger, by urged would, audacious and active most the
passage. easy an them offered frozen, when besides, which stream, the
infallibly been have then would animals domestic and Plantations
to necessary often was it and watch, constant a without destroyed,
respectful a at visitors dangerous those keep to guns the of use make
without for colonists, the to wanting not was Occupation distance.
the for plans thousand a always had they cares, out-door their reckoning
House. Granite of up fitting

the during made were which excursions, sporting fine some also had They
by aided Herbert, and Spilett Gideon Marsh. Tadorn vast the in frost
wild-duck, of myriads of midst the in shot a miss not did Top, and Jup
easy; was hunting-grounds these to access The others. and teal, snipe,
after Balloon, Port to road the by them reached they whether besides,
Flotsam from rocks the turning by or Bridge, Mercy the passed having
two than more House Granite from distant never were hunters the Point,
miles. three or

is that rigorous, really were which months, winter four the passed Thus
House Granite short, in But, September. and August, July, June, say, to
was it and weather, the of inclemency the from much suffer not did
and plateau, the than exposed less which, corral, the with same the
the of remains the received only Franklin, Mount by partly sheltered
the of rocks high the and forests the by broken already hurricanes,
the and importance, small of consequently were there damages The shore.
in time some when them, repaired promptly Ayrton of skill and activity
corral. the in days few a pass to returned he October

Nothing occurred. incident inexplicable fresh no winter, this During
the for watch the on were Neb and Pencroft although happened, strange
cause. mysterious any attached they which to facts insignificant most
any gave or well the round growled longer no themselves Jup and Top
of series the if as therefore, appeared, It uneasiness. of signs
of talked often they although interrupted, was incidents supernatural
thoroughly remained they and House, Granite in evenings the during them
the parts those in even searched, be should island the that resolved
and importance, highest the of event an But explore. to difficult most
from diverted momentarily terrible, be might consequences the which of
companions. his and Harding Cyrus projects their

returning. swiftly was season fine The October. of month the was It
coniferae the of foliage evergreen the among and reviving; was Nature
leaves young the appeared already wood, the of border the formed which
trees. other and deodars, banksias, the of

different at had, Herbert and Spilett Gideon that remembered be may It
Island. Lincoln of views photographic taken times,

in oclock three towards October, of month this of 17th the on Now,
of thought sky, the of charms the by enticed Herbert, afternoon, the
Cape from Heights, Prospect to opposite was which Bay, Union reproducing
Cape. Claw to Mandible

soft a under undulating sea, the and clear, beautifully was horizon The
there and here sparkling lake, a of waters the as calm as was breeze,
rays. suns the under

dining-room the of windows the of one at placed been had apparatus The
bay. the and shore the overlooked consequently and House, Granite at
obtained, negative the and do, to accustomed was he as proceeded Herbert
dark a in deposited chemicals the of means by it fix to away went he
House. Granite of nook

perceived Herbert well, it examining and light, bright the to Returning
horizon. sea the on spot little imperceptible almost an negative his on
not could but washing, reiterated by disappear it make to endeavored He
it. accomplish

thought. he glass, the in flaw a is It

strong a with flaw this examine to curiosity the had he then And
telescopes. the of one from unscrewed he which magnifier

glass the and cry, a uttered he when it, at looked scarcely had he But
hands. his from fell almost

he was, then Harding Cyrus which in room the to running Immediately
out pointing engineer, the towards magnifier and negative the extended
spot. little the

window. the to rushed he telescope his seizing then it; examined Harding

on stopped last at horizon, the swept slowly having after telescope, The
word one pronounced it, lowering Harding, Cyrus and spot, looked-for the
only,--

vessel! A

Island! Lincoln off sight, in was vessel a fact in And





3 PART

ISLAND THE OF SECRET THE



1 Chapter

had balloon the from castaways the since half a and years two now was It
no been had there period that during and Island, Lincoln on thrown been
reporter the Once fellow-creatures. their and them between communication
to confiding by world inhabited the with communicate to attempted had
that but situation, their of secret the contained which letter a bird a
Ayrton, seriously. reckon to impossible was it which on chance a was
to come had related, been have which circumstances the under alone,
October, of 17th the day, this on suddenly, Now, colony. little the join
that on island, the of sight in appeared unexpectedly had men other
sea! deserted

she would But there! was vessel A it! about doubt no be could There
would colonists the hours few a In port? into put she would or on, pass
expect. to what know definitely

Spilett, Gideon called immediately having Herbert and Harding Cyrus
them told House, Granite of dining-room the into Neb and Pencroft,
the swept rapidly telescope, the seizing Pencroft, happened. had what
on say, to is that point, indicated the on stopping and horizon,
photographic the on spot imperceptible almost the made had which that
negative,--

which voice a in exclaimed, he vessel! a really is it but blessed Im
satisfaction. of amount great any express not did

Spilett. Gideon asked here? coming she Is

rigging her for Pencroft, answered yet, anything say to Impossible
seen. be can hull her of bit a not and horizon, the above is alone

lad. the asked done? be to is What

Harding. replied Wait,

to up given silent, remained settlers the time considerable a for And
which hopes, the all fears, the all emotions, the and thoughts, the all
occurred had which important most incident--the this by aroused were
not were colonists the Certainly, Island. Lincoln in arrival their since
constantly islet, sterile a on abandoned castaways of situation the in
and existence, miserable their for nature cruel a against contending
countries. inhabited to return to longing the by tormented incessantly
and happy so once at themselves felt who especially, Neb, and Pencroft
were They regret. without island their left have not would rich, so
which domain the of midst the in life new this to besides, accustomed,
ship this rate any at But civilized. were it as had intelligence their
was It land. native their from even perhaps world, the from news brought
deeply how conceived be may it and them, to fellow-creatures bringing
sight! the at moved were hearts their

the at himself rested and glass the took Pencroft time to time From
was which vessel, the examined attentively very he thence From window.
yet, as had colonists The east. the to miles twenty of distance a at
have not would flag A presence. their signalizing of means no therefore,
have not would fire a heard; been have not would gun a perceived; been
by overtopped island, the that certain was it However, visible. been
But lookout. vessels the of notice the escape not could Franklin, Mount
to it brought which chance simple it Was there? coming ship the was why
Tabor except land no mentioned maps the where Pacific, the of part that
vessels by followed usually route the of out was itself which Island,
the from and Zealand, New from Archipelagoes, Polynesian the from
reply a himself, asked one each which question, this To coast? American
Herbert. by made suddenly was

cried. he Duncan? the be it Can

had which yacht, Glenarvans Lord was said, been has as Duncan, The
fetch to someday there return to was which and islet, the on Ayrton left
but Island, Lincoln from distant far so not was islet the Now, him.
A other. the of sight in pass could one, the for standing vessel, a that
in seventy and longitude, in them separated only miles fifty and hundred
latitude.

him for send and Spilett, Gideon said Ayrton, tell must We
Duncan. the is it if say can alone He immediately.

telegraphic the to going reporter, the and all, of opinion the was This
House, Granite with communication in corral the placed which apparatus
speed. possible all with telegram:--Come this sent

sounded. bell the minutes few a In

Ayrton. replied coming, am I

vessel. the watch to continued settlers the Then

her recognize will Ayrton Herbert, said Duncan, the is it If
time. some for her board on sailed he since difficulty, without

him agitate will it Pencroft, added her, recognizes he if And
exceedingly!

on return to worthy is Ayrton now but Harding; Cyrus answered Yes,
Glenarvans Lord indeed is it that Heaven pray and Duncan, the board
are These vessel. other any of suspicious be should I for yacht,
to pirates Malay from visit a feared always have I and seas, ill-famed
island. our

Herbert. cried it,, defend could We

be would it but smiling, engineer the answered boy, my doubt, No
it. defend to have to not better

to unknown is Island Lincoln Spilett. said observation, useless A
Do maps. recent most the on even marked not is it since navigators,
finding ship, a for motive sufficient a is that that Cyrus, think, you
than rather visit and try to land, new of sight in unexpectedly herself
it? avoid

Pencroft. replied Certainly,

is it that said be even may It engineer. the added too, so think I
yet not island or land any survey and come to captain a of duty the
position. this in is Island Lincoln and known,

a there anchors and comes vessel this suppose Pencroft, said Well,
do? we shall what island, our from cables-lengths few

Cyrus But reply. any without first at remained question sudden This
was which tone calm the in replied thought, moments some after Harding,
him,-- to usual

will this:--we is do to ought we What friends? my do, shall we What
we and her, board on passage our take will we ship, the with communicate
name the in it of possession taken having after island, our leave will
to wish may who any with return will we Then States. United the of
Republic American the endow and definitely, it colonize to us follow
Ocean! Pacific the of part this in station useful a with

present small no be will that and Pencroft, exclaimed Hurrah!
almost already is colonization The country! our to make shall we which
is there island; the of part every to given are names finished;
and dockyard, a telegraph, a roads, water, fresh port, natural a
inscribe to but done be to nothing be will there and manufactories;
maps! the on Island Lincoln

Spilett. Gideon observed absence? our in it seizes anyone if But

guard to alone all remain rather would I sailor. the cried it! Hang
a like him, from it steal shouldnt they Pencroft, to trust and it:
swell! a of pocket the from watch

the whether certainty any with say to impossible was it hour an For
was She Island. Lincoln towards standing not was or was vessel
not could Pencroft This sailing? she was direction what in but nearer,
all in northeast, the from blowing was wind the as However, determine.
the Besides, tack. starboard the on sailing was vessel the probability
sea the and, island, the towards her bringing for favorable was wind
shallows the although approach to afraid be not would she calm, being
chart. the on marked not were

arrived for--Ayrton sent been had he after hour oclock--an four Towards
saying,-- dining-room the entered He House. Granite at

gentlemen. service, your At

leading and, do, to custom his was as hand, his him gave Harding Cyrus
window,-- the to him

important an for here come to you begged have we he, said Ayrton,
island. the of sight in is ship A reason.

dim; became eyes his moment a for and slightly, paled first at Ayrton
see could but horizon, the surveyed he window, the out leaning then,
nothing.

for Ayrton, carefully, look and Spilett, said telescope, this Take
for seas these to come Duncan the be may ship this that possible is it
again. home you taking of purpose the

escaped word last This Already? Ayrton. murmured Duncan! The
hands. his upon drooped head his and involuntarily, if as lips Ayrtons

a him to appear island desert a on solitude years twelve not Did
pardoned, himself feel yet penitent the not Did expiation? sufficient
others? of eyes the in or eyes own his in either

Duncan! the be cannot it no! he, said No,

we that necessary is it for engineer, the said then Ayrton, Look,
expect. to what beforehand know should

During indicated. direction the in it pointed and glass the took Ayrton
a uttering without moving, without horizon the examined he minutes some
Then,-- word.

the is she think not do I but he, said vessel, a indeed is It
Duncan.

Spilett. Gideon asked so? think not you do Why

trace any perceive cannot I and steam-yacht, a is Duncan the Because
vessel. that near or above either smoke of

is wind The Pencroft. observed sailing, simply is she Perhaps
may she and taking, be to appears she which direction the for favorable
land. from far so being coal, her economize to anxious be

Ayrton, answered Pencroft, Mr. right, be may you that possible is It
she until wait must We fires. her extinguished has vessel the that and
expect. to what know soon shall we then and nearer, is

silent. remained and room the of corner a in down sat Ayrton saying, So
no took Ayrton but ship, strange the discussed again colonists The
it found they that mood a such in were All conversation. the in part
were Pencroft and Spilett Gideon work. their continue to impossible
one in still remain to able not coming, going, nervous, particularly
usual his maintained alone Neb curiosity. more felt Herbert place.
the to As was? master his where that country his not Was manner. calm
feared heart his in and thought, deep in plunged remained he engineer,
the meanwhile, the In ship. the of arrival the desired than rather
was it glass, the of aid the With island. the nearer little a was vessel
which proas, Malay those of one not and brig, a was she that ascertained
therefore, was, It Pacific. the of pirates the by used generally are
be not would apprehensions engineers the that believe to reasonable
the of vicinity the in vessel this of presence the that and justified,
danger. no with fraught was island

that affirm to positively able was examination, minute a after Pencroft,
obliquely standing was she that and brig, a as rigged was vessel the
and topsails her under tack, starboard the on coast, the towards
in continuing by But Ayrton. by confirmed was This top-gallant-sails.
wind the as Cape, Claw behind disappear soon must she direction this
necessary then be would it her watch to and southwest, the from was
provoking Balloon--a Port near Bay, Washington of height the ascend to
the and evening, the in oclock five already was it for circumstance,
difficult. extremely observation any make soon would twilight

we Shall Spilett. Gideon asked on? comes night when do we shall What
coast? the on presence our signal to as so fire, a light

still engineer the although yet, and question, serious a was This
affirmative. the in answered was it presentiments, his of some retained
this and, ever, for leave and disappear might ship the night the During
Island? Lincoln of waters the to return ever another would gone, ship
the for store in have then would future the what foresee could Who
colonists?

vessel, that to known make to ought we reporter, the said Yes,
the neglect To inhabited. is island the that be, may she whoever
everlasting create to be might us to offered is which opportunity
regrets.

Port to go should Pencroft and Neb that decided therefore was It
immense an light should they nightfall, at there, that and Balloon,
the of attention the attract necessarily would which of blaze the fire,
brig.

leave to preparing were sailor the and Neb when moment the at But
stood and course, her altered suddenly vessel the House, Granite
approached she for sailer, good a was brig The Bay. Union for directly
the and therefore, departure, their off put Pencroft and Neb rapidly.
certain for ascertain might he that hands, Ayrtons into put was glass
also was yacht Scotch The Duncan. the not was or was ship the whether
discerned be could chimney a whether was, question The brig. a as rigged
only of distance a at now was which vessel, the of masts two the between
miles. five

Ayrton and easy, was examination The clear. very still was horizon The
saying-- again, fall glass the let soon

be! not could It Duncan! the not is It

and telescope, the of range the within brig the brought again Pencroft
burden, tons hundred four and three between of was she that see could
very a be must and built, admirably well-masted, narrow, wonderfully
to difficult was That belong? she did nation what to But sailer. rapid
say.

I but peak, her from floating is flag a sailor, the added yet, And
it. of colors the distinguish cannot

reporter. the answered that, about certain be shall we hour an half In
this of captain the of intention the that evident very is it Besides,
the at to-morrow today, not if consequently, and, land, to is ship
acquaintance. his make shall we latest,

deal to have we whom know to best is It Pencroft. said mind! Never
colors! fellows that recognize to sorry be not shall I and with,

began day The glass. the left never sailor the speaking, thus while And,
hung ensign brigs The also. fell breeze the day the with and fade, to
it. observe to difficult more and more became it and folds, in

the nor time, to time from Pencroft said flag, American the not is It
German or French the nor seen, easily be could which of red the English,
would One Spain. of yellow the nor Russia, of flag white the nor colors,
generally we do what seas, these in see: Lets color. one all was it say
is Brazilian?--it tri-color. is that flag?--but Chilean The with? meet
this-- while black, and yellow is Japanese?--it green.

the seizing Ayrton flag. unknown the out blew breeze the moment that At
a in and eye, his to it put down, put had sailor the which telescope
voice,-- hoarse

exclaimed. he flag! black The

brig, the of mast the from floating was bunting somber the indeed And
suspicious a be to her considering for reason good now had they and
vessel!

a this Was presentiments? his in right been then, engineer, the Had
proas Malay the with competing Pacific, the scour she Did vessel? pirate
of shores the at look to come she had what For it? infest still which
become to ready island, unknown an them to it Was Island? Lincoln
a coast the on find to come she Had cargoes? stolen for magazine a
domain honest settlers the Was months? winter the for port sheltered
of headquarters refuge--the infamous an into transformed be to destined
Pacific? the of piracy the

colonists the to themselves presented instinctively ideas these All
which signification the of besides, doubt, no was There imaginations.
of that was It flag. hoisted the of color the to attached be must
the had carried, have would Duncan the which that was It pirates!
before lost was time No design! criminal their in succeeded convicts
it. discussing

to wishes only vessel this perhaps Harding, Cyrus said friends, My
is There land. not will crew her Perhaps island. the of coast the survey
to can we everything do to ought we be, may that However it. of chance a
easily too is Heights Prospect on windmill The here. presence our hide
also must We sails. the down take and go Neb and Ayrton Let seen.
fires the All branches. thick with House Granite of windows the conceal
on men of presence the betray may nothing that so extinguished, be must
island. the

Herbert. said vessel? our And

defy I and Balloon, Port in sheltered is she Pencroft, answered Oh,
her! find to there rascals those of any

Ayrton and Neb executed. immediately were orders engineers The
conceal to precautions necessary the took and plateau, the ascended
their occupied, thus were they While settlement. a of indication any
large a back brought and Wood, Jacamar of border the to went companions
appear distance some at would which creepers, and branches of quantity
cliff. granite the in windows the disguise thus and foliage, natural as
be to as so ready placed were guns and ammunition the time, same the At
attack. unexpected an of case in hand at

taken,-- been had precautions these all When

the if emotion, some betrayed voice his and Harding, said friends, My
we it--shall defend shall we Island, Lincoln seize to endeavor wretches
not?

to die will we necessary if and reporter, the replied Cyrus, Yes,
it! defend

warmly. it pressed who companions, his to hand his extended engineer The
he, Perhaps colonists. the joining not corner, his in remained Ayrton
so! do to unworthy himself felt still convict, former the

to going and mind, Ayrtons in passing was what understood Harding Cyrus
him--

do? you will what asked, he Ayrton, you, And

Ayrton. answered duty, My

the through gazed and window the near station his up took then He
foliage.

ago minutes twenty disappeared had sun The seven. half-past now was It
becoming was horizon Eastern the Consequently House. Granite behind
Union towards advance to continued brig the meanwhile the In obscured.
the opposite exactly and off, miles two than more not now was She Bay.
she Cape, Claw off tacked having after for Heights, Prospect of plateau
One tide. rising the of current the in north the towards drifted had
vast the entered already had she distance this at that said have might
would Mandible Cape to Cape Claw from drawn line straight a for bay,
quarter. starboard her on rested have

first the was That bay? the into far penetrate to about brig the Was
the was That there? anchor she would bay, the in once When question.
and coast, the surveying only with herself content not she Would second.
in this know would They crew? her landing without again sea to out stand
wait. but nothing do could colonists The hour. an

flag black the hoist vessel suspected the seen not had Harding Cyrus
which work the against menace direct a not it Was anxiety. deep without
these Had successfully? so conducted now till had companions his and he
else--already nothing be could brig the of sailors the pirates--for
their hoisted had they it approaching on since island, the visited
unaccountable certain that so it, invaded formerly they Had colors.
as the in exist there Did way? this in explained be might peculiarities
communication into enter to ready accomplice some parts unexplored yet
them? with

not knew Harding himself, asked mentally he which questions these all To
but not could colony the of safety the that felt he but reply; to what
brig. the of arrival the by threatened seriously be

last the to fight to determined were companions his and he However,
pirates the if know to important very been have would It gasp.
this was how But colonists. the than armed better and numerous were
obtained? be to information

enveloped darkness Profound disappeared. had moon new The fell. Night
piles heavy the through pierce could light No sea. the and island the
the with completely away died had wind The horizon. the on clouds of
on murmured ripple a not trees, the on rustled leaf a Not twilight.
being lights her all ship, the of seen be could Nothing shore. the
her island, the of sight in still was she if and extinguished,
discovered. be not could whereabouts

stand will craft cursed that Perhaps Pencroft. said knows? who Well!
daybreak. at her of nothing see shall we and night, the during off

in flashed light bright a observation, sailors the to reply in if As
heard. was cannon-shot a and darkness, the

board. on guns had and there still was vessel The

report. the and flash the between elapsed seconds Six

coast. the from quarter a and mile a about was brig the Therefore

the through rattling heard were chains the time, same the At
hawse-holes.

House! Granite of sight in anchored just had vessel The



2 Chapter

had They intentions. pirates the to as doubt any longer no was There
evident was it and island, the from distance short a at anchor dropped
the on land to purposed they boats their of means by day next the that
beach!

determined but, act, to ready were companions his and Harding Cyrus
their Perhaps prudent. be to forget not must they were, they though
contenting pirates the of event the in concealed be still might presence
of interior the examining without shore the on landing with themselves
obtain to was intention only their that indeed, be, might It island. the
bridge, the that impossible not was it and Mercy, the from water fresh
at manufactory the and mouth, the from half a and mile a across thrown
notice. their escape might Chimneys the

shot that was What peak? brigs the at hoisted flag that was why But
of act the of sign a was it unless doubtless, bravado Pure for? fired
And armed. well was vessel the that now knew Harding possession. taking
guns? pirates the to reply to Island Lincoln of colonists the had what
only. muskets few A

impregnable an in are we here Harding, Cyrus observed However,
it that now outlet, the of mouth the discover cannot enemy The position.
impossible be would it consequently and grass, and reeds under hidden is
House. Granite into penetrate to them for

everything! all, corral, our poultry-yard, our plantations, our But
everything, spoil may They foot. his stamping Pencroft, exclaimed
hours! few a in everything destroy

of means no have we and Harding, answered Pencroft, Everything,
them. preventing

they If reporter. the said question, the is that numerous? they Are
forty, but them, stop to able be shall we dozen, a than more not are
perhaps! more fifty,

engineer, the towards advancing Ayrton, said then Harding, Captain
leave? me give you will

friend? my what, For

crew. her of strength the out find to vessel that to go To

your risk will you hesitating, engineer, the answered Ayrton-- But
life--

sir? not, Why

duty. your than more is That

Ayrton. replied do, to duty my than more have I

Spilett. Gideon asked boat? the in ship the to go you Will

glide may man a where seen be would boat A swim. will I but sir, No,
water. and wind between

said shore? the from quarter a and mile a is brig the that know you Do
Herbert.

Herbert. Mr. swimmer, good a am I

engineer. the said life, your risking is it you tell I

a as this ask I Harding, Captain Ayrton. answered matter, no is That
eyes! own my in me raising of means a be will it Perhaps favor.

would refusal a that sure felt who engineer, the replied Ayrton, Go,
man. honest an become now convict, former the wounded deeply have

Pencroft. said you, accompany will I

quickly. Ayrton said me! mistrust You

humbly,-- more Then

Alas!

does Pencroft Ayrton, no, animation, with Harding exclaimed no! No!
wrongly. words his interpret You you. mistrust not

as Ayrton accompany to propose only I sailor, the returned Indeed,
one that possible, scarcely is it although be, may It islet. the as far
too be not will men two case that in and landed, has villains these of
the on Ayrton for wait will I alarm. the giving from him hinder to many
do to proposed has he since vessel, the to alone go shall he and islet,
departure. his for preparations made Ayrton to, agreed things These so.
the of darkness the to thanks succeed, might it but bold, was plan His
main the to on holding Ayrton, side, vessels the at arrived Once night.
intentions the overhear perhaps and number the reconnoiter might chains,
pirates. the of

the to descended companions, their by followed Pencroft, and Ayrton
suffer to as so grease, with himself rubbed and undressed Ayrton beach.
might, He cold. still was which water, the of temperature the from less
hours. several for it in remain to obliged be indeed,

moored boat, the fetch to gone had time, this during Neb, and Pencroft
time the by and Mercy, the of bank the on up, higher feet hundred few a
his over thrown was coat A start. to ready was Ayrton returned, they
hand. his press to him round came all settlers the and shoulders,

boat. the in Pencroft with off shoved then Ayrton

disappeared adventurers two the when evening the in ten half-past was It
Chimneys. the at wait to returned companions Their darkness. the in

opposite the touched boat the and traversed, easily was channel The
lest fear for precaution, without done not was This islet. the of shore
survey, careful a after But there. about roaming be might pirates the
by followed then, Ayrton deserted. was islet the that evident was it
the in nestled birds the scaring step, rapid a with it crossed Pencroft,
sea, the into plunged he hesitating, without then, rocks; the of holes
lights few a which in ship, the of direction the in noiselessly swam and
Pencroft, to As situation. exact her showing appeared, recently had
his of return the awaited and rock, the of cleft a in down crouched he
companion.

glided stroke, vigorous a with swimming Ayrton, meanwhile, the In
His ripple. slightest the producing without water of sheet the through
of hull dark the on fixed were eyes his and it above emerged just head
thought He water. the in reflected were lights the which from brig, the
the of nothing and accomplish, to promised had he which duty the of only
often sea, the in but ship, the board on only not ran, he which danger
receded rapidly he and along him bore current The sharks. by frequented
shore. the from

or seen either been having without Ayrton, afterwards, hour an Half
took He main-chains. the of hold caught and ship the at arrived heard,
of extremity the reach to managed he up, himself hoisting then, breath,
He trousers. sailors of pairs several drying were There cutwater. the
not were They listened. he firmly, himself settling Then pair. a on put
singing, talking, were they contrary, the On brig. the board on sleeping
which oaths, with accompanied sentences, the were these And laughing.
Ayrton:-- struck principally

acquisition. famous a is brig Our

Speedy. the of name her merits and well, sails She

heels. of pair clean a Norfolk of navy the all show would She

captain! her for Hurrah

Harvey! Bob for Hurrah

be may conversation of fragment this overheard he when felt Ayrton What
one recognized he Harvey Bob this in that known is it when understood
his continued had who sailor, daring a companions, Australian old his of
Island Norfolk of shores the on seized, had Harvey Bob career. criminal
tools and utensils, ammunition, arms, with loaded was which brig, this
had gang his All Islands. Sandwich the of one for destined sorts, all of
wretches, these convicts, been having after pirates and board, on gone
Pacific, the scoured themselves, Malays the than ferocious more
crews. their massacring and vessels, destroying

deeply drinking deeds, their recounted they loudly, spoke convicts The
crew actual The gathered. Ayrton what is this and time, same the at
from escaped prisoners, English of solely composed was Speedy the of
Island. Norfolk

south 2 29deg In was. island this what explain to well be may it Here
is Australia, of east the to longitude, east 42 165deg and latitude,
Mount by overlooked circumference, in miles six island, little a found
sea. the of level the above feet 1,100 of height a to rises which Pitt,
were which in establishment an of seat the once Island, Norfolk is This
penitentiaries. English the from convicts intractable most the lodged
terrible with threatened discipline, iron an under 500, numbered They
employed 150 and soldiers, 150 by guarded were and punishments,
imagine to difficult be would It governor. the of orders the under
very Sometimes,--although ruffians. greater of collection a
were they which of surveillance extreme the rarely,--notwithstanding
they which vessels seizing and escape, to managed many object, the
Archipelagoes. Polynesian the infested they surprised,

formerly Ayrton had Thus done. companions his and Harvey Bob had Thus
sight in anchored Speedy, brig the seized had Harvey Bob do. to wished
ship this year a for and massacred; been had crew the Island; Norfolk of
and pirate, a now Harvey, of command the under Pacific, the scoured had
Ayrton! to known well

a but poop; the under assembled part, most the for were, convicts The
loudly. talking were deck, the on stretched few,

Ayrton libations. and shouts amid continued still conversation The
Lincoln of sight in Speedy the brought had alone chance that learned
Harding Cyrus as but, it; on foot set yet never had Harvey Bob Island;
position its course, his in land unknown this finding conjectured, had
and, it, visiting of project the formed had he chart, no on marked being
headquarters. brigs the it making of suitable, it found he if

which gun the and peak, Speedys the at hoisted flag black the to As
their lower they when men-of-war of imitation in fired, been had
no and signal, a way no in was It bravado. piratical pure was it colors,
Island. Lincoln and convicts the between existed yet communication

Evidently danger. terrible with menaced now was domain settlers The
so kinds all of resources its harbor, its water, its with island, the
by afforded concealment the and colonists, the by value in increased
their in convicts; the for convenient be but not could House, Granite
unknown, being and, refuge, of place excellent an become would it hands
security. and impunity perhaps, time long a for them, assure would it
and respected, be not would settlers the of lives the also, Evidently,
them massacre to be would care first accomplices his and Harvey Bob
the even not therefore, had, companions his and Harding mercy. without
convicts the since island, the in themselves hiding and flying of choice
Speedy the of event the in since, and there, reside to intended
would crew the of some that probable was it expedition, an on departing
it Therefore, there. themselves settle to as so shore, on remain
scoundrels, these of one every destroy to fight, to necessary be would
thought So right. be would means any whom against and pity, of unworthy
of way his of be would Harding Cyrus that knew well he and Ayrton,
thinking.

would That possible? victory place, last the in and, resistance was But
she which men of number the and brig, the of equipment the on depend
carried.

his after hour an as and cost, any at learn to resolved Ayrton This
number large a as and away, die to begun had vociferations the arrival
not did Ayrton sleep, drunken a in buried already were convicts the of
extinguished the which deck, Speedys the onto venture to hesitate
the onto himself hoisted He darkness. total in left now lanterns
gliding Then, forecastle. the at arrived bowsprit the by and cutwater,
the of round the made he there, and here stretched convicts the among
throw would which guns, four carried Speedy the that found and ship,
touching on also, found He weight. in pounds ten to eight from of shot
modern of therefore, were They breech-loaders. were guns these that them
effect. terrible of and used, easily make,

but number, in ten about were they deck, the on lying men the to As
by Besides, below. down sleeping were more that supposed be to was it
on fifty were there that understood had Ayrton them, to listening
to Island Lincoln of settlers six the for number large a was That board.
would Harding Cyrus devotion, Ayrtons to thanks now, But with! contend
and adversaries, his of strength the know would he surprised, be not
accordingly. arrangements his make would

his to render and return, to but do to Ayrton for more nothing was There
himself, charged had he which with mission the of account an companions
let might he that so brig, the of bows the regain to prepared he and
had he as was, wish whose man, this to But water. the into down himself
was This thought. heroic an came there duty, his than more do to said,
Cyrus colonists. the and island the save but life, own his sacrifice to
who, armed, well all ruffians, fifty resist not could evidently Harding
starving by or House, Granite into force main by penetrating by either
he then And wanted. they what them from obtain could besieged, the out
an and man, a again him made had who preservers--those his of thought
works their pity, without all--murdered owed he whom to those mm, honest
himself to said He den! pirates a into turned island their destroyed,
his since disasters, many so of cause principal the was Ayrton, he, that
a and plans, own his realized but had Harvey, Bob companion, old
an with seized was he Then him. of possession took horror of feeling
had she whom all her, with and brig the up blow to desire irresistible
his done have would he but explosion, the in perish would He board. on
duty.

always is which powder-room, the reach To hesitate. not did Ayrton
want no be would There easy. was vessel, a of after-part the in situated
be would spark a and trade, a such followed which vessel a in powder of
instant. an in it destroy to enough

numerous with strewn between-decks, the along carefully stole Ayrton
lighted was lantern A sleep. than drunkenness by more overcome sleepers,
furnished gun-rack, a hung was which round mainmast, the of foot the at
sorts. all of weapons with

was it that himself assured and rack, the from revolver a took Ayrton
of work the accomplish to needed was more Nothing primed. and loaded
the under arrive to as so stern, the towards glided then He destruction.
powder-magazine. the at poop brigs

without deck lighted dimly the along proceed to difficult was It
and oaths by retorted who convict, half-sleeping some over stumbling
at But halt. to obliged once than more therefore, was, Ayrton kicks.
the found and aftercabin, the dividing partition the at arrived he last
itself. magazine the into opening door

difficult a was It work. to set open, it force to compelled Ayrton,
But padlock. a break to had he for noise, without perform to operation
open. was door the and broke, padlock the hand, vigorous his under

shoulder. Ayrtons on laid was hand a moment that At

who, voice, harsh a in man, tall a asked here? doing you are What
Ayrtons in lantern a of light the threw quickly shadow, the in standing
face.

recognized had he lantern, the of flash rapid the In back. drew Ayrton
he as him, known have not could who Harvey, Bob accomplice, former his
dead. since long Ayrton thought have must

the by Ayrton seizing Harvey, Bob said again here? doing you are What
waistband.

and grasp his from himself wrenched replying, without Ayrton, But
the of midst the into fired shot A magazine. the into rush to attempted
over! be would all and powder-casks,

Harvey. Bob shouted lads! Help,

on rushing and, up, jumped awoke, pirates three or two shout his At
from himself extricated soon He down. him throw to endeavored Ayrton,
but fell, convicts the of two and revolver, his fired He grasp. their
his in gash a made off ward not could he which knife a from blow a
shoulder.

project. his out carry to hope longer no could he that perceived Ayrton
movement a and powder-magazine, the of door the reclosed had Harvey Bob
must Ayrton pirates. the of awakening general a indicated deck the on
nothing was There Harding. Cyrus of side the at fight to himself reserve
flight! but him for

to resolved Ayrton yet doubtful, was It possible? still flight was But
companions. his rejoin to order in everything dare

were Two undischarged. still were revolver the of barrels Four
rate any at or him, wound not did Harvey, Bob at aimed fired--one,
his of retreat momentary the by profiting Ayrton, and slightly, only
deck. the gain to companion-ladder the towards rushed adversaries,
of butt the from blow a with it smashed he lantern, the before Passing
Two flight. his favored which ensued, darkness profound A revolver. his
at ladder the descending were noise, the by awakened pirates, three or
moment. same the

not back, drew others the and low, one laid Ayrton from shot fifth A
and bounds, two in deck on was Ayrton on. going was what understanding
of face the in barrel last his discharged having later, seconds three
the over leaped he throat, the by him seize to about was who pirate a
sea. the into bulwarks

him around splashing were shots before strokes six made not had Ayrton
hail. like

What islet! the on rock a under sheltered feelings, Pencrofts were What
the in crouched Neb, and Herbert, reporter, the Harding, of those were
out rushed They brig! the board on reports the heard they when Chimneys,
repel to ready stood they shouldered, guns their and, beach, the to on
attack. any

pirates, the by surprised Ayrton, themselves! it about doubt no had They
night the by profit would wretches the perhaps, and, murdered, been had
island! the on descent a make to

and ceased, had firing The anxiety. terrible in passed was hour an Half
invaded? islet the Was reappeared. had Pencroft nor Ayrton neither yet
The how? But Pencroft? and Ayrton of help the to fly to not they Ought
boat The impassable. channel the rendered time, that at high being tide
possession took which anxiety horrible the imagine may We there! not was
companions! his and Harding of

the touched men, two carrying boat, a twelve, half-past towards last, At
Pencroft, and shoulder, the in wounded slightly Ayrton, was It beach.
arms. open with received friends their whom sound, and safe

all recounted Ayrton There Chimneys. the in refuge took immediately All
had he which brig, the up blowing for plan his to even passed, had that
execution. into put to attempted

that them from conceal not did who Ayrton, to extended were hands All
knew They alarmed. been had pirates The serious. was situation their
numbers in it upon land would They inhabited. was Island Lincoln that
fall settlers the Should nothing. respect would They armed. well and
mercy! no expect must they hands, their into

reporter. the said die! to how know shall we Well,

engineer. the answered watch, and in go us Let

sailor. the asked captain? escape, of chance any we Have

Pencroft. Yes,

fifty! against six Hum!

counting-- without six! Yes!

Pencroft. asked Who?

upwards. pointed but reply, not did Cyrus



3 Chapter

vive, qui the on were colonists The incident. without passed night The
their on pirates, The Chimneys. the at post their leave not did and
last the Since land. to attempt any made have to appear not did side,
the betrayed had sound, a even not report, a not Ayrton at fired shots
have might It island. the of neighborhood the in brig the of presence
deal to had she that thinking anchor, weighed had she that fancied been
coast. the left had and match, her with

could settlers the dawn to began day when and thing, such no was it But
Speedy. the was It mist. morning the through mass confused a see

which arrangements the are engineer, the said friends, my These,
It away. clears completely fog the before make to best me to appear
attracting without act can we and pirates, the of eyes the from us hides
convicts the that is, thing important most The attention. their
and numerous, are island the of inhabitants the that believe should
we that propose therefore I them. resisting of capable consequently
the at posted be shall which of first The parties. three into divide
think I third, the to As Mercy. the of mouth the at second the Chimneys,
all at or prevent, to as so islet, the on it place to best be would it
and rifles two of use the have We landing. at attempt any delay, events
provided amply are we as and, armed, be will us of Each muskets. four
to nothing have We fire. our spare not need we shot, and powder with
they can What brig. the of guns the from even nor muskets the from fear
of windows the from fire not shall we as And, rocks? these against do
damage irreparable causing of think not will pirates the House, Granite
of necessity the is, feared be to is What it. against shell throwing by
We side. their on numbers have convicts the since hand-to-hand, meeting
discovering without but landing, from them prevent to try therefore must
but often, Fire ammunition. the economize not do Therefore, ourselves.
they and kill, to enemies ten or eight each have We aim. sure a with
killed! be must

spoke he although situation, their represented clearly had Harding Cyrus
piece a directing of question a was it if as voice, calmest the in
these approved companions His battle. a ordering not and work of
be to more nothing was There word. a uttering even without arrangements
completely be should fog the before place his take to each for but done
and House Granite to ascended immediately Pencroft and Neb dissipated.
and Spilett Gideon ammunition. of quantity sufficient a back brought
rifles, two the with armed were marksmen, good very both Ayrton,
among divided were muskets other four The mile. a nearly carried which
Herbert. and Pencroft, Neb, Harding,

manner:-- following the in arranged were posts The

thus Chimneys, the at ambush in remained Herbert and Harding Cyrus
House. Granite of foot the to shore the commanding

the of mouth the at rocks the among crouched Neb and Spilett Gideon
any prevent to as so raised, been had drawbridges the which from Mercy,
shore. opposite the on landing or boat a in crossing from one

to prepared and boat, the in off shoved they Pencroft, and Ayrton to As
islet. the on stations separate two up take to and channel the cross
once, at points different four from fired being shots way, this In
largely both was island the that believe to led be would convicts the
defended. strongly and peopled

able been having their without effected being landing a of event the In
being of point the on were they that saw they if also and it, prevent to
their in return to were Pencroft and Ayrton boat, brigs the by off cut
spot. threatened the towards proceed and shore the to boat

time last the for colonists the posts, their occupy to starting Before
hands. others each wrung

his suppress to sufficiently himself controlling in succeeded Pencroft
separated. they then and boy! his Herbert, embraced he when emotion

Neb and reporter the side, one on Herbert and Harding moments few a In
later minutes five and rocks, the behind disappeared had other, the on
channel, the crossed difficulty without having Pencroft, and Ayrton
its of clefts the in themselves concealed and islet the on disembarked
shore. eastern

scarcely could themselves they for seen, been have could them of None
fog. the in brig the distinguish

morning. the in six half-past was It

issued brig the of topmasts the and away, clear to began fog the Soon
of surface the over rolled masses great minutes some For vapor. the from
mist. the dispelled rapidly which up, sprang breeze a then sea, the

her cable, her on spring a with view, full in appeared now Speedy The
as Just island. the to side larboard her presenting north, the to head
from quarter a and mile a than more not was she calculated, had Harding
coast. the

peak. the from floated flag black sinister The

board on guns four the that see could telescope, his with engineer, The
a at fire to ready evidently were They island. the at pointed were
notice. moments

pirates thirty About silent. remained Speedy the meanwhile the In
others two poop; the on more few A deck. the on moving seen be could
attentively were spyglasses, with armed and shrouds, the in posted
island. the surveying

an give to easily able be not would crew his and Harvey Bob Certainly,
Had brig. the board on night the during happened had what of account
and powder-magazine, the of door the forced had who man, half-naked this
revolver his discharged times six had who struggled, had they whom with
shot? their escaped others, two wounded and one killed had who them, at
his been had What come? he did Whence shore? to swim to able been he Had
Harvey Bob as brig, the up blow to been really design his Had object?
minds. convicts the to enough confused be must this All thought? had
before island unknown the that was doubt longer no could they what But
was, there that and inhabited, was anchor cast had Speedy the which
be to was one no yet And it. defend to ready colony numerous a perhaps,
be to appeared beach The heights. the on nor shore, the on neither seen,
Had dwellings. of trace no was there rate, any At deserted. absolutely
captain pirate the probably Thus interior? the into fled inhabitants the
reconnoiter to wished he man, prudent a like doubtless, and reasoned,
there. venture to men his allowed he before locality the

be could landing or attack of indication no half, a and hour an During
Even hesitating. was Harvey Bob Evidently brig. the board on observed
the of one perceived have not could he telescopes strongest his with
his that probable even not was It rocks. the among crouched settlers
creepers and branches green of screen the by awakened been had attention
on conspicuously rather showing and House, Granite of windows the hiding
hollowed was dwelling a that imagine he could how Indeed, rock. bare the
the to Cape Claw From granite? solid the in height, that at out,
to nothing was there Bay, Union of extent the all in Capes, Mandible
inhabited. be could or was island the that suppose to him lead

board on movement a observed colonists the however, oclock, eight At
They her. into jumped men seven and lowered, was boat A Speedy. the
oars, the others four yoke-lines, the took one muskets; with armed were
reconnoitered fire, to ready bows, the in kneeling others, two the and
to not but examination an make to doubt no was object Their island. the
The numbers. larger in come have would they case latter the in for land,
sheltered was coast the that seen have could look-out their from pirates
width. in mile a half channel a by it from separated islet, an by
the observing on Harding, Cyrus to evident soon was it However,
penetrate to attempt not would they that boat, the by followed direction
islet. the on land would but channel, the into

them saw rock, the of cleft narrow a in hidden each Ayrton, and Pencroft
range. within were they till waited and them, towards directly coming

the into dipped only oars The caution. extreme with advanced boat The
convicts the of one that seen be now could It intervals. long at water
of depth the fathom to wished he that and hand, his in lead-line a held
that showed This Mercy. the of current the by out hollowed channel the
possible as near as brig his bring to intention Harveys Bob was it
followed rigging, the in scattered pirates, thirty About coast. the to
landmarks certain of bearings the took and boat, the of movement every
more not was boat The danger. without approach to them allow would which
the at man The stopped. she when islet the off cables-lengths two than
land. to which at place best the for looked and up stood tiller

the among from up curled Smoke heard. were shots two moment that At
lead-line the with man the and helm the at man The islet. the of rocks
struck had balls Pencrofts and Ayrtons boat. the into backwards fell
moment. same the at both them

issued smoke of cloud a heard, was report louder a immediately Almost
which rock the of summit the striking ball, a and side, brigs the from
two the but splinters, in fly it made Pencroft, and Ayrton sheltered
unhurt. remained marksmen

continued immediately which boat, the from burst imprecations Horrible
his of one by replaced was tiller the at been had who man The way. its
However, water. the into plunged rapidly were oars the and comrades,
boat the expected, been have might as board on returning of instead
pirates The point. southern its round to as so islet, the along coasted
the of range of out get might they that oars their at vigorously pulled
bullets.

the of part that of cables-lengths five within to advanced They
a in it rounded having after and Point, Flotsam by terminated shore
proceeded they guns, brigs the by protected still line, semicircular
Mercy. the of mouth the towards

off cut and channel, the into penetrate to was intention evident Their
their whatever that way, a such in islet, the on posted colonists the
the and boat the from fire the between placed being be, might number
disadvantageous very a in themselves find would they brig, the from fire
position.

direction. this in advanced boat the while passed hour an of quarter A
water. the on and air the in reigned calm perfect silence, Absolute

being of risk the ran they knew they although Ayrton, and Pencroft
show to wish not did they that both post, their left not had off, cut
the to themselves expose and assailants, their to yet as themselves
Spilett, Gideon and Neb on relied they that and guns, Speedys
in Herbert, and Harding Cyrus on and river, the of mouth the at watching
Chimneys. the at rocks the among ambush

than less was boat the fired, were shots first the after minutes Twenty
with rise to beginning was tide the As Mercy. the off cables-lengths two
the straits, the of narrowness the by caused violence, accustomed its
hard of dint by only was it and river, the towards drawn were pirates
as But, channel. the of middle the in keep to able were they that rowing
balls two Mercy, the of mouth the of range good within passing were they
of bottom the in laid were number their of more two and them, saluted
aim. their missed not had Spilett and Neb boat. the

the by betrayed post the on ball second a sent immediately brig The
rock. the splintering of that than result other any without but smoke,

current, the by on Carried men. able three only contained now boat The
before passed arrow, an of rapidity the with channel the through shot it
their withheld range, within it thinking not who, Herbert, and Harding
two the with islet the of point northern the rounding then, fire,
brig. the towards pulled they oars, remaining

adversaries Their of. complain to nothing had settlers the Hitherto
men four counted already latter The it. of worst the had certainly had
not had unwounded, contrary, the on they, dead; not if wounded seriously
if way, this in them attack to continued pirates the If shot. a missed
be could they boat, a of means by land to attempt their renewed they
one. by one destroyed

had arrangements engineers the advantageous how seen now was It
and numerous with deal to had they that think would pirates The been.
of. better the get easily not could they whom adversaries, well-armed

current, the against pull to having boat, the before passed hour an Half
they when heard were cries Frightful Speedy. the alongside get could
fired were guns three or two and wounded, the with board on returned
results. no with

possibly and rage, with maddened convicts, other dozen a about now But
the into themselves threw potations, evenings the of effect the by
their took men eight which in lowered, also was boat second A boat.
dislodge to islet, the for straight pulled first the while and places,
the force to as so maneuvered second the thence from colonists the
Mercy. the of entrance

and Pencroft for dangerous very becoming evidently was situation The
mainland. the regain must they that saw they and Ayrton,

two when range, within was boat first the till waited they However,
and Pencroft Then, disorder. into crew its threw balls well-directed
ran muskets, dozen the from fire under posts, their abandoning Ayrton,
the crossed boat, their into jumped speed, full at islet the across
ran and end, southern the reached boat second the moment the at channel
Chimneys. the in themselves hide to

islet the before Herbert, and Harding Cyrus rejoined scarcely had They
moment, same the at Almost direction. every in pirates with overrun was
boat second the which to station, Mercy the from resounded reports fresh
her, manned who men eight the of out Two, approaching. rapidly was
herself, boat the and Neb, and Spilett Gideon by wounded mortally were
the of mouth the at in stove was reefs, the onto irresistibly carried
to heads their above muskets their holding survivors, six the But Mercy.
right the on land to managed water, the with contact from them preserve
the of fire the to exposed were they finding Then, river. the of bank
range of out Point, Flotsam of direction the in fled they there, ambush
balls. the of

convicts, dozen a were islet the on this: was situation actual The
their at boat a still had who but wounded, doubt no were some whom of
possibility any by not could who but six, were island the on disposal;
bridges the all river, the cross not could they as House, Granite reach
raised. being

hallo, Chimneys, the into rushed he as Pencroft exclaimed Hallo,
now? it, of think you do What captain!

new a take now will combat the that engineer, the answered think, I
as foolish so be will convicts the that supposed be cannot it for form,
them! for unfavorable so position a in remain to

Mr. and Ayrton sailor. the said channel, the cross wont They
carry they that know You them. prevent to there are rifles Spiletts
mile! a than more

the against do rifles two can what but Herbert; replied doubt, No
guns? brigs

Pencroft. said fancy! I yet, channel the in isnt brig the Well,

Harding. said there? come does she suppose But

lost! being and aground running risk would she for impossible, Thats

high the by profit might convicts The Ayrton. said possible, is It
it tide, low at grounding of risk the with channel, the enter to tide
no be would posts our guns, her from fire the under then, but true; is
tenable. longer

the if as seems really it Pencroft, exclaimed them! Confound
anchor. weigh to preparing were blackguards

observed House! Granite in refuge take to obliged be shall we Perhaps
Herbert.

Harding. Cyrus answered wait! must We

Pencroft. said Neb? and Spilett Mr. But

is It Ayrton. ready, Be us. rejoin to best is it when know will They
now. speak must which rifles Spiletts and yours

anchor, her weigh to beginning was Speedy The true. too only was It
would tide The islet. the approach to evidently was intention her and
already being current ebb the and half, a and hour an for rising be
entering to as But advance. to brig the for easy be would it weakened,
believe not could opinion, Ayrtons to contrary Pencroft, channel, the
it. attempt to dare would she that

gradually had islet the occupied who pirates the meanwhile, the In
the from separated only now were and shore, opposite the to advanced
channel. the by mainland

settlers, the to harm no do could they alone, muskets with armed Being
knowing not but, Mercy; the of mouth the and Chimneys the at ambush in
did side their on they rifles, long-range with supplied be to latter the
they therefore, uncovered, Quite exposed. be to themselves believe not
shore. the examined and islet, the surveyed

Spiletts Gideon and Ayrtons duration. short of was illusion Their
disagreeable very some imparted doubt no and spoke, then rifles
backwards. fell they for convicts, the of two to intelligence

even not others, ten The helter-skelter. general a was there Then
other the to fled companions, wounded or dead their up pick to stopping
and them, brought had which boat the into tumbled islet, the of side
strength. their all with away pulled

that thought have would one Really, Pencroft. exclaimed less! Eight
together! fire to word the given had Ayrton and Spilett Mr.

more becoming is this gun, his reloaded he as Ayrton, said Gentlemen,
sail! making is brig The serious.

Pencroft. exclaimed weighed! is anchor The

moving. already is she and Yes,

The windlass. the of creaking the hear distinctly could they fact, In
been had that when then, anchor; her by held first at was Speedy
blowing was wind The shore. the towards drift to began she raised,
vessel the and hoisted, were foretopsail the and jib the sea; the from
island. the approached gradually

her watched they Chimneys the and Mercy the of posts two the From
What emotion. some without not but life, of sign a giving without
short a at exposed, be to than colonists the for terrible more be could
any with reply to able being without guns, brigs the to distance,
landing? from pirates the prevent then they could How effect?

would it what himself asked he and strongly, this felt Harding Cyrus
his for upon called be would he long, Before do. to possible be
Granite in up themselves shut To be? to it was what But determination.
even, months for weeks, for there remain to there, besieged be to House,
that? after But good! far So provisions? of abundance an had they since
they which island, the of masters be less the not would pirates The
having by end would they time, in and pleasure, their at ravage would
House. Granite in prisoners the on revenge their

all, after Harvey, Bob that was it remained; yet chance one However,
keep would he that and channel, the into ship his venture not would
a half by coast the from separated still be would He islet. the outside
destructive. very be not could shot his distance that at and mile,

good a is he if never, will Harvey Bob Pencroft, repeated Never!
brig, the risk would it that well knows He channel! that enter seaman,
without him of become would what And little! so ever up got sea the if
vessel? his

seen be could it and islet, the approached brig the meanwhile the In
light, was breeze The end. lower the make to endeavoring was she that
had Harvey Bob force, its of much lost then had current the as and
vessel. his over command absolute

to her allowed had boats the by followed previously route The
it. entered boldly she and channel, the reconnoiter

her bring to wished he evident; too only now was design pirates The
and shell with reply to there from and Chimneys the on bear to broadside
crew. her decimated then till had which shot the to ball

with it rounded she islet; the of point the reached Speedy the Soon
stood wind, the hugging brig the and up, braced was mainsail the ease;
Mercy. the of mouth the across

Pencroft. said coming! are they scoundrels! The

were Herbert, and sailor, the Ayrton, Harding, Cyrus moment, that At
Spilett. Gideon and Neb by rejoined

at post the abandon to best it judged had companion his and reporter The
they and ship, the against nothing do could they which from Mercy, the
at together be should colonists the that better was It wisely. acted had
Gideon action. decisive a in engage to about were they when moment the
not though rocks, the behind dodging by arrived had Neb and Spilett
reached however, not, had which bullets, of shower a attracting without
them.

wounded? not are You engineer. the cried Neb! Spilett!

But ricochet! the from only bruises few a reporter, the answered No,
channel! the entered has brig cursed that

anchored have will she minutes ten in and Pencroft, replied Yes,
House! Granite before

reporter. the asked Cyrus? plan, any formed you Have

the and time, still is there while House Granite in refuge take must We
us. see cannot convicts

up-- shut once but Spilett, Gideon replied too, opinion, my is, That

engineer. the said circumstances, by guided be must We

reporter. the said haste! make and then, off, be us Let

here? remain should I and Ayrton that captain, wish, not you Would
sailor. the asked

will We No. Harding. replied Pencroft? that, of use the be would What
separate! not

A Chimneys. the left colonists The lost. be to moment a not was There
brig, the in those by seen being from them prevented cliff the of bend
told rock, the on bullets of crash the and reports, three or two but
distance. great no at was Speedy the that them

Granite of door the to up themselves hoist lift, the into spring To
to before, evening the since up shut been had Jup and Top where House,
only. minute a of work the was room, large the into rush

the see could branches, the through settlers, the for time, quite was It
was firing The channel. the up gliding smoke, with surrounded Speedy,
Mercy the on both blindly, struck guns four the from shot and incessant,
were rocks The Chimneys. the on and occupied, not was it although post,
they However, discharge. each accompanied cheers and splintered,
Hardings to thanks spared, be would House Granite that hoping were
door, the piercing shot, a when windows the concealing of precaution
passage. the into penetrated

Pencroft. exclaimed discovered! are We

Bob that certain was it but seen, been perhaps, not, had colonists The
foliage suspected the through ball a send to proper thought had Harvey
attack, his redoubled he Soon cliff. the of part that concealed which
gaping a disclosed screen, leafy the away torn having ball another when
granite. the in aperture

discovered. was retreat Their desperate. was situation colonists The
the protect nor missiles, these to obstacle any oppose not could They
be to nothing was There them. around splinters in flew which stone,
leave and House, Granite of passage upper the in refuge take to but done
by followed heard, was roar deep a when devastated, be to dwelling their
cries! frightful

windows-- the of one to rushed companions his and Harding Cyrus

split just had water-spout, of sort a on raised irresistibly brig, The
her all with up swallowed was she seconds ten than less in and two, in
crew! criminal



4 Chapter

Herbert. cried up! blown has She

returned powder! the to fire set had Ayrton if as just up, blown Yes!
lad. the and Neb with together lift the into himself throwing Pencroft,

this by stunned quite Spilett, Gideon asked happened? has what But
catastrophe. unexpected

quickly. engineer the answered know-- shall we time, this Oh!

know?-- we shall What

have pirates these that is point main The Spilett. Come, later! Later!
exterminated! been

joined Ayrton, and reporter the away hurrying Harding, Cyrus And
beach. the on Herbert and Neb, Pencroft,

been having After masts. her even not brig, the of seen be could Nothing
in sunk had and side, her on fallen had she water-spout, the by raised
as But leak. enormous some of consequence in doubtless position, that
it depth, in feet twenty than more not was channel the place that in
low at reappear would brig submerged the of sides the that certain was
water.

raft a water, the of surface the on floated wreck the from things few A
their with poultry of coops spars, spare of consisting seen be could
the to came gradually which barrels, and boxes living, still occupants
of pieces no but hatchways, the through escaped having after surface,
the from timber nor deck, the from planks neither appeared, wreck the
perfectly Speedy the of disappearance sudden the rendered hull,--which
inexplicable.

the from escaped and broken been had which masts, two the However,
the and furled some sails, their with and up, came stays and shrouds
bring to tide the for wait to necessary not was it But spread. others
the with boat the into jumped Pencroft and Ayrton and riches, these up
the to or beach the to either wreck of pieces the towing of intention
Gideon from observation an off, shoving were they as just But islet.
them. arrested Spilett

the of bank right the on disembarked who convicts six those about What
he. said Mercy?

gone had boat whose men six the that forget to do not would it fact, In
Point. Flotsam at landed had rocks the on pieces to

It visible. were fugitives the of None direction. that in looked They
channel, the in engulfed vessel their seen having that, probable was
island. the of interior the into fled had they

they armed, are they As Harding. said later, them with deal will We
are chances the six, against six is it as but dangerous; be still will
first. business pressing most the To equal.

wreck. the towards vigorously pulled Pencroft and Ayrton

moon new a been had there as high, very tide the and calm was sea The
hull the before elapse would least at hour whole A before. days two but
channel. the of water the from emerge could brig the of

of means by spars and masts the fasten to able were Pencroft and Ayrton
united the by There, beach. the to carried were which of ends the ropes,
the Then up. hauled were wreck of pieces the settlers the of efforts
which boxes, and barrels, coops, floating, was that all up picked boat
Chimneys. the to carried immediately were

of that recognized Ayrton them, Among also. floated bodies Several
some with saying companion, his to out pointed he which Harvey, Bob
emotion,--

Pencroft. been, have I what is That

warmly. sailor the returned Ayrton! brave longer, no are you what But

were six or five Only floated. bodies few so that enough singular was It
the towards current the by carried being already were which counted,
and escape, to time had not had convicts the probably Very sea. open
remained had them of number greater the side, her on over lying ship the
men miserable these of bodies the carrying by current, the Now below.
in them burying of task sad the colonists the spare would sea, to out
island. their of corner some

occupied solely were companions his and Harding Cyrus hours, two For
sails the spreading in then and sand, the to on spars the up hauling in
were they for little, spoke They dry. to uninjured, perfectly were which
minds! their occupied thoughts what but work, their in absorbed

was contained, she that all rather or brig, this of possession The
in world little a like is ship a fact, In wealth. of mine perfect a
large a by increased be would colony the of stores the and miniature,
to equivalent scale, large a on be, would It articles. useful of number
Point. Flotsam at found chest the

refloat to impossible be it should why Pencroft, thought besides, And
from vessel a up; stopped be may that leak, a only has she If brig? the
our to compared ship regular a is she why tons, hundred four to three
go could We her! in distance long a go could we And Bonadventure!
She her! examine must I and Ayrton Harding, Captain liked! we anywhere
trouble! the worth well be would

chances colonists the navigate, to fit still was brig the if fact, In
to But, increased. singularly were land native their to returning of
tide the until wait to necessary was it question, important this decide
examined. be might hull brigs the of part every that so low, quite was

his and Harding shore, on conveyed safely been had treasures their When
almost were They breakfast. to minutes some devote to agreed companions
noted was Neb and off, far not was larder the fortunately, famished;
the near therefore, breakfasted, They cook. expeditious an being for
was nothing supposed, be may as repast, their during and Chimneys,
colony. the saved miraculously so had which event the but of talked

be must it for Pencroft, repeated word, the is Miraculous
moment! right the at just up blew rascals those that acknowledged
habitation! a as uncomfortable be to beginning was House Granite

or happened, it how reporter, the asked Pencroft, guess, you can And
explosion? the occasioned have can what

convict A Pencroft. answered simple, more is nothing Spilett, Mr. Oh!
sailors. not are Convicts man-of-war! a like disciplined not is vessel
firing were they as and open, was powder-magazine the course Of
vessel! the up blew just fellow clumsy or careless some incessantly,

the that is me astonishes what Herbert, said Harding, Captain
and loud, not was report The effect. more produced not has explosion
the if as seems It out. torn timbers and planks few so are there besides
up. blown than foundered rather had ship

engineer. the asked boy? my you, astonish that Does

captain. Yes,

the visit we when but he, replied Herbert, also, me astonishes it And
matter. the of explanation the find doubt no shall we brig, the of hull

Speedy the that suppose dont you Pencroft, said captain, Why,
rock? a on struck has which ship a like foundered simply

channel? the in rocks are there if Neb, observed not, Why

right the at look not did you Pencroft, answered Neb, Nonsense,
well, perfectly saw I as brig, the sank, she before instant An moment.
if Now, side. larboard her on back fell and wave, enormous an on rose
bottom the to gone and quietly sunk have would she struck, only had she
vessel. honest an like

Neb. returned vessel! honest an not was she because just was It

engineer. the said Pencroft, see, soon shall we Well,

my wager would I but sailor, the rejoined see, soon shall We
speak to captain, here, Look channel. the in rocks no are there head
the in marvelous anything is there that say to mean you do candidly,
occurrence?

answer. not did Harding Cyrus

will you explosion, or rock whether Spilett, Gideon said rate, any At
time! of nick the in just occurred it that Pencroft, agree,

ask I question. the not is that but sailor, the replied yes! Yes!
this. all in supernatural anything sees he if Harding Captain

I answer the all is That engineer. the said Pencroft, say, cannot I
make. can

an to stuck He all. at Pencroft satisfy not did which reply A
consent never would He up. it give to wish not did and explosion,
like just bed, sandy fine its with channel, that in that admit to
an be could there water, low at crossed often had he which beach, the
rock. unknown

is that water, high was it foundered, brig the time the at besides, And
rocks any over clear vessel the carry to water enough was there say, to
not could there Therefore, tide. low at uncovered be not would which
had she So struck. not had vessel the Therefore, collision. a been have
up. blown

reasonable. were arguments sailors the that confessed be must it And

the visit to boat the in embarked colonists the one, half-past Towards
been not had boats two brigs the that regretted be to was It wreck.
the of mouth the at pieces to gone had said, been has as one, but saved;
the when disappeared had other the useless; absolutely was and Mercy,
been doubtless having seen, been again not had and down, went brig
crushed.

water. the from issue to beginning just was Speedy the of hull The
broken, being masts her for side, her on over right lying was brig The
the shock, the by displaced ballast the of weight the by down pressed
turned regularly been had She length. whole her along visible was keel
been had which action, submarine frightful but inexplicable the by over
water-spout. enormous an by manifested time same the at

went tide the as proportion in and hull, the round rowed settlers The
the occasioned had which cause the not if ascertain, could they down,
produced. effect the least at catastrophe,

from feet eight or seven keel, the of sides both on bows, the Towards
torn. frightfully were brig the of sides the stem, the of beginning the
leaks, large two opened there feet twenty least at of length a Over
sheathing copper the had only Not up. stop to impossible be would which
the also but powder, to doubt, no reduced, disappeared, planks the and
entire the From them. united which treenails and bolts, iron the ribs,
with separated been had keel false the stern the to hull the of length
in carline the from torn itself, keel the and violence, unaccountable an
length. its all in split was places, several

difficult be will vessel this that Pencroft, exclaimed notion! a Ive
again. afloat get to

Ayrton. said impossible, be will It

explosion, the sailor, the to Spilett Gideon observed rate, any At
the split has It effects! singular produced has one, been has there if
topsides! and deck the up blowing of instead hull, the of part lower
the by than rock a by made been have to rather appear rents great These
powder-magazine. a of explosion

admit will I sailor. the answered channel! the in rock a not is There
rock. the except like, you anything

the said brig, the of interior the into penetrate to try us Let
her of cause the of think to what know then shall we perhaps engineer;
destruction.

to besides, agreed, was it and done, be to thing best the was This
their arrange to and board, on treasures the all of inventory an take
preservation.

still was tide The easy. now was brig the of interior the to Access
heavy of composed ballast, The practicable. was deck the and down going
the of noise The places. several in through broken had iron, of masses
hull. the in holes the at out rushed it as heard be could sea

the along advanced hand, in hatchets companions, his and Harding Cyrus
had they as and, it, encumbered sorts all of Cases deck. shattered
perhaps were contents their water, the in time short very a but been
uninjured.

The safety. in cargo this all placing in themselves busied then They
be must hours these and hours, several for return not would water
the at had, Pencroft and Ayrton way. profitable most the in employed
hoist to serve would which tackle, discovered hull, the in made entrance
them transported and them received boat The chests. and barrels the up
sort to intending came, they as articles the took They shore. the to
afterwards. them

that satisfaction, extreme with once, at saw settlers the rate, any At
of sorts all of assortment cargo--an varied very a possessed brig the
ships the as tools--such and goods, manufactured utensils, articles,
with. laden usually are Polynesia of coasting-trade great the make which
they and everything, of little a find would they that probable was It
Lincoln of colony the for necessary was what exactly was it that agreed
Island.

only, astonishment--not silent in it observed Harding Cyrus However--and
the from suffered enormously brig the of hull the had said, been has as
the but catastrophe, the occasioned had that was, it whatever shock,
bows. the towards especially destroyed, been had arrangements interior
had shell tremendous some if as smashed, were stanchions and Partitions
fore go easily could colonists The brig. the of interior the in burst
They extricated. were they as cases the removed having after aft, and
remove, to difficult been have would which bales, heavy not were
longer no was besides, stowage, the which of packages, simple but
recognizable.

formerly part brig--the the of stern the reached then colonists The
Ayrtons following that, there was It poop. the by surmounted
Harding Cyrus powder-magazine. the for look must they directions,
barrels some possible was it that exploded; not had it that thought
metal in enclosed usually is which powder, the that and saved, be might
water. the with contact from suffered have not might coverings

among from extricated They happened. had what just was fact, in This,
lined were which of insides the barrels, twenty shot of number large a
that eyes own his of evidence the by convinced was Pencroft copper. with
explosion. an to attributed be not could Speedy the of destruction the
moreover, was, situated was magazine the which in hull the of part That
least. suffered had which that

is there rock, a to as but sailor; obstinate the said so, be may It
channel! the in one not

Herbert. asked happen? it did how Then,

and know, doesnt Harding Captain Pencroft, answered know, dont I
know! will ever or knows nobody

to began tide the and researches, these during passed had hours Several
the of fear no was There present. the for suspended be must Work flow.
firmly as fixed already was she for sea, the by away carried being brig
anchors. her by moored if as

to day next the until wait inconvenience, without therefore, could, They
it and doomed, was she itself, vessel the to as but, operations; resume
would she as hull, her of remains the save to hasten to best be would
channel. the of quicksands the in disappearing in long be not

work days hard a been had It evening. the in oclock five now was It
their notwithstanding and appetite, good with ate They men. the for
inspecting of desire their dinner, after resist, not could they fatigue,
Speedy. the of cargo the composed which cases the

well was believed, be may as which, clothes, contained them of Most
every for colony--linen whole a clothe to enough were There received.
feet. ones every for shoes use, ones

with do to going we are what But Pencroft, exclaimed rich! too are We
this? all

he when sailor delighted the of hurrahs the forth burst moment every And
sidearms, and firearms gunpowder, of barrels the of sight caught
and joiners, carpenters, husbandry, of implements cotton, of balls
least the in not seeds, of kinds all of boxes and tools, blacksmiths
before, years two Ah, water. the in sojourn short their by injured
the though even now, And prized! been have would things these how
these tools, with themselves provided had colonists industrious
use. their find would treasures

that but House, Granite of store-rooms the in space of want no was There
do not would It whole. the away stow to them allow not would daytime
landed had crew Speedys the of survivors six the that forget to also
the of scoundrels probability all in were they for island, the on
their on be should colonists the that necessary was it and dye, deepest
raised, were Mercy the over bridges the Although them. against guard
rendered and, stream a or river a by stopped be not would convicts the
anything. of capable be would wretches these desperate,

the in but follow; to best be would it plan what later see would They
heaped packages and cases over guard mount to necessary was it meantime
turn in themselves employed settlers the thus and Chimneys, the near up
night. the during

any attempted having convicts the without however, came, morning The
would House, Granite of foot the at guard on Top, and Jup Master attack.
20th, 19th, days--the following three The alarm. the given quickly have
of or value, of everything saving in employed October--were of 21st and
low At brig. the of rigging or cargo the from either whatever, use any
rescued the away stowed they tide high hold--at the overhauled they tide
the from torn been had sheathing copper the of part great A articles.
the swallowed had sand the before But lower. sank day every which hull,
Pencroft, and Ayrton bottom, the through fallen had which things heavy
of anchors and chains the recovered channel, the of bed the to diving
by floated which, guns, four even and ballast, her of iron the brig, the
shore. to brought were casks, empty of means

the by gained had colony the of arsenal the that seen be may It
always Pencroft, House. Granite of storerooms the as well as wreck,
battery a constructing of spoke already projects, his in enthusiastic
guns, four With river. the of mouth the and channel the command to
from be, might it powerful however fleet, any prevent to engaged he
Island! Lincoln of waters the into venturing

hulk, useless a but brig the of remained nothing when meantime, the In
intended had Harding Cyrus her. finished soon which on, came weather bad
strong a but shore, the on remains the collect to as so up, her blow to
his economize to him compelled sea heavy a and northeast the from gale
powder.

some and up, broke entirely hull the 23rd, the of night the on fact, In
beach. the on up cast was wreck the of

he although that, say to useless is it board, on papers the to As
discover not did Harding poop, the of lockers the searched carefully
that everything destroyed evidently had pirates The them. of trace any
the as and, Speedy, the of owners the or captain the either concerned
which nothing was there counter, her on painted not was port her of name
boats her of shape the by However, nationality. her them tell would
build. English of was brig the that believed Pencroft and Ayrton

though fortunate, the after rather, castrophe--or, the after week A
preservation--nothing its owed colony the which to event inexplicable,
had wreck The tide. low at even vessel, the of seen be could more
had it all nearly by enriched was House Granite and disappeared,
contained.

would destruction strange its enveloped which mystery the However,
Neb, November, of 30th the on if, away cleared been have never doubtless
cylinder, iron thick a of piece a found not had beach, the on strolling
and twisted were cylinder this of edges The explosion. of traces bearing
explosive some of action the to subjected been had they if as broken,
substance.

occupied then was who master, his to metal of piece this brought Neb
Chimneys. the of workshop the in companions his with

to turning then, attentively, cylinder the examined Harding Cyrus
Pencroft,--

was Speedy the that maintaining in he, said friend, my persist, You
collision? a of consequence in lost not

that do I as well as know You sailor. the answered captain, Yes,
channel. the in rocks no are there

engineer, the said iron? of piece this against run had she suppose But
cylinder. broken the showing

perfect of tone a in Pencroft exclaimed pipe! of bit that What,
incredulity.

foundered she before that remember you Harding, resumed friends, My
waterspout? regular a of summit the on rose brig the

Herbert. replied captain, Yes,

was It waterspout? that occasioned what know to like you would Well,
tube. broken the up holding engineer, the said this,

Pencroft. returned That?

torpedo! a of remains that all is cylinder This Yes!

companions. engineers the exclaimed torpedo! A

to like not did who Pencroft, demanded there? torpedo the put who And
yield.

Harding; Cyrus answered I, not was it that is, you tell can I that All
incomparable its of judge to able been have you and there, was it but
power!



5 Chapter

torpedo. this of explosion submarine the by explained was all then, So,
Union, the of war the during as, mistaken, be not could Harding Cyrus
It destruction. of engines terrible these try to occasion had had he
explosive some with charged cylinder, this of action the under was
same the of material other some or picrate, nitro-glycerine, substance,
the dome, a like raised been had channel the of water the that nature,
damage the instantly, sunk had she and in, crushed brig the of bottom
refloat to impossible was it that considerable so being hull her to done
would that torpedo a withstand to able been not had Speedy The her.
fishing-boat! a as easily as ironclad an destroyed have

torpedo the of presence the everything--except explained, was all Yes!
channel! the of waters the in

doubt in be longer no can we Harding, Cyrus said then, friends, My
perhaps, us, like castaway a being, mysterious a of presence the to as
be may Ayrton that order in this say I and island, our on abandoned
these during occurred have which events strange the all with acquainted
so has, intervention whose is, stranger beneficent this Who years. two
imagine. cannot I occasions, many on manifested been us, for fortunately
after himself concealing in thus, acting in be can object his What
are services his But understand: cannot I services, many so us rendering
of possessed man a only that nature a such of are and real, less the not
much as him to indebted is Ayrton them. render could power, prodigious
after waves the from me saved who stranger the was it if for, are, we as
document, the wrote who he was it evidently balloon, the from fall the
the us to known made has who and channel, the in bottle the placed who
that guided who he was it that add will I companion. our of situation
Flotsam on it stranded and wanted, we everything with provided chest,
the of heights the on fire that lighted who he was it that Point;
that fired who he was it that land; to you permitted which island,
that plunged who he was it that peccary; the of body the in found bullet
all that word, a in brig; the destroyed which channel, the into torpedo
are reason, a assign not could we which for events, inexplicable those
whether be, may he whoever Therefore, being. mysterious this to due
we if ungrateful, be shall we island, our on exiled or shipwrecked,
a contracted have We him. towards gratitude from freed ourselves think
it. pay day one shall we that hope I and debt,

Spilett. Gideon replied Cyrus, dear my thus, speaking in right are You
the of part some in hidden being, all-powerful almost an is there Yes,
colony. our to useful singularly been has influence whose and island,
which action of means possess to appears unknown the that add will I
the life practical of events the in if supernatural, the on border
communication secret in is who he it Is recognizable. were supernatural
all of knowledge a thus he has and House, Granite in well the by us with
her made vessel the when bottle, that us threw who he it Was plans? our
the killed and lake, the of out Top threw who he it Was cruise? first
from you saved believe, to us leads everything as who he, it Was dugong?
not would else one any which in circumstances under that and waves, the
renders which power a possesses he he, was it If act? to able been have
elements. the of master him

so. be to it felt one every and just, was reasoning reporters The

is being human a of intervention the if Harding, Cyrus rejoined Yes,
means disposal his at has he that agree I us, for questionable more not
still, mystery a is There humanity. by possessed those beyond action of
The also. discovered be will mystery the man, the discover we if but
generous this of incognito the respect to we ought is, then, question,
your is What out? him find to everything do to we ought or being,
matter? the on opinion

brave a is he be, may he whoever that, is Pencroft, said opinion, My
esteem! my has he and man,

Pencroft. answer, an not is that but Harding, answered so, it Be

we as long as search may we that is, idea my Neb, said then Master,
shall we that but about, talking are you whom gentleman this for like
pleases. he till him discover not

Pencroft. observed Neb, say, you what bad, not Thats

for reason no is that but Spilett, Gideon said opinion, Nebs of am I
or being mysterious this find we Whether adventure. the attempting not
him. towards duty our fulfilled have least at shall we not,

to turning engineer, the said opinion, your us give boy, my you, And
Herbert.

should I how animation, of full countenance his Herbert, cried Oh,
us! saved now has who and first, you saved who he him, thank to like

am I us. of all and I would so Pencroft, replied boy, my course, Of
individual this see to eyes my of one give would I but inquisitive, not
strong, tall, handsome, be must he that me to seems It face! to face
on seated be must he that and hair, radiant beard, splendid a with
hands! his in ball great a clouds,

the of picture a describing are you Spilett, answered Pencroft, But,
Creator.

imagine I how is that but sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. Possibly,
him!

engineer. the asked Ayrton? you, And

in advice better no you give can I Ayrton, replied Harding, Captain
you join to me wish you when best; be will do you Whatever matter. this
you. follow to ready am I researches, your in

more a like should I but Harding, Cyrus answered Ayrton, you, thank I
you companion; our are You you. to put I question the to answer direct
as you, and us, for times several life your endangered already have
important any of matter the in consulted be to ought rest, the as well
therefore. Speak, decision.

do to ought we that think I Ayrton, replied Harding, Captain
alone. is he Perhaps benefactor. unknown this discover to everything
too, I, renewed. be to life a has he Perhaps suffering. is he Perhaps
be could it he, was It him. pay to gratitude of debt a have said, you as
wretch the there found who Island, Tabor to come have must who he only
man unfortunate an was there that you to known made who and knew, you
a become have I that him, to thanks is, it Therefore saved. be to there
him! forget never will I No, again. man

our begin will We Harding. Cyrus said then, settled, is That
island the of corner a leave not will We possible. as soon as researches
will and recesses, secret most its into search will We unexplored.
our of consideration in us pardon will friend unknown our that hope
intentions!

and haymaking in employed actively were colonists the days several For
unknown yet the exploring of project their putting Before harvest. the
work possible all get to wished they execution, into island the of parts
vegetables various the collecting for time the also was It finished.
was there happily and away, stowed was All plants. Island Tabor the from
all housed have might they which in House, Granite in room of want no
there, were colony the of products The island. the of treasures the
believed, be may as place, safe a in and arranged, methodically
man. from as animals from much as sheltered

granite. of mass thick that of middle the in damp of fear no was There
enlarged were passage upper the in situated excavations natural Many
general a became thus House Granite and mine, or pick-axe by either
spare and tools, arms, provisions, the all containing warehouse,
colony. the of stores the all word, a utensils--in

of pieces pretty were they brig, the from obtained guns the to As
tackle of means by hoisted were entreaty, Pencrofts at which, ordnance,
between made were embrasures House; Granite into up right pulleys, and
seen be soon could guns the of muzzles shining the and windows, the
Union all commanded they height this From cliff. granite the through
the off anchored vessel any and Gibraltar, little a like was It Bay.
battery. aerial this of fire the to exposed be inevitably would islet

that now November, of 8th the was it day, one Pencroft said Captain,
tried we if thing good a be would it finished, are fortifications our
guns. our of range the

engineer. the asked useful? is that think you Do

to we are how that Without necessary! is it useful, than more is It
we which with shot pretty those of one send can we distance what to know
provided? are

in that think I However, engineer. the replied Pencroft, them, Try
powder, ordinary the not employ, to ought we experiment, the making
pyroxyle the but untouched, remain should think, I which, of supply the
us. fail never will which

reporter, the asked pyroxyle? the of shock the support cannon the Can
Granite of artillery the try to Pencroft than anxious less not was who
House.

The prudent. be will we engineer, the added However, so. believe I
make. excellent of were guns the that thinking in right was engineer
be to consequently ought they breech-loaders, and steel, forged of Made
range. enormous an have also and charge, considerable a bear to able
ball the by described transit the effect, practical regards as fact, In
be only could tension this and possible, as extended as be to ought
with impelled be should projectile the that condition the under obtained
velocity. initial great very a

in is velocity initial the companions, his to Harding said Now,
of fabrication the In used. powder of quantity the to proportion
highest the with metal a employing on depends everything pieces, these
of metal that incontestably is steel and resistance, of power possible
believe to reason therefore, have, I best. the resists which others all
gas, pyroxyle the of expansion the risk without bear will guns our that
results. excellent give will and

them! tried have we when that of certain more deal great a be shall We
Pencroft. answered

order. perfect in were cannons four the that say to unnecessary is It
great bestowed had sailor the water, the from taken been had they Since
and greasing, rubbing, in spent, had he hours many How them. upon care
were pieces the now And mechanism! the cleaning in and them, polishing
States United the of frigate a board on been had they if as brilliant as
Navy.

colony, the of members the all of presence in therefore, day, this On
tried. successively were cannon four the Top, and Jup Master including
explosive its consideration into taking pyroxyle, with charged were They
powder: ordinary of that times four is said, been has as which, power,
cylindroconic. was fired be to projectile the

fire. to ready stood quick-match, the of end the holding Pencroft,

islet, the over passing shot, The fired. he signal, Hardings At
with calculated be not could which distance a at sea the into fell
exactitude.

and Point, Flotsam of end the at rocks the at pointed was gun second The
House, Granite from miles three nearly rock sharp a striking shot the
and gun this pointed had who Herbert was It splinters. into fly it made
was only Pencroft shot. first his of was he proud very and it, fired
dear his to belonged which of honor the shot, a Such he! than prouder
boy.

side upper the forming downs the at time this aimed shot, third The
having then miles, four of distance a at sand the struck Bay, Union of
spray. of cloud a in sea the in lost was ricocheted:

so charge, the increased slightly Harding Cyrus piece fourth the For
its of fear for aside standing all Then, range. extreme its try to as
cord. long a of means by lighted was match the bursting,

the and good, held had piece the but heard, was report tremendous A
of rocks the graze shot the saw windows, the to rushing colonists
in disappear and House, Granite from miles five nearly Cape, Mandible
Gulf. Shark

the rivaled have might cheers whose Pencroft, exclaimed captain, Well,
in pirates the All battery? our of say you do what themselves, reports
Not House! Granite before themselves present to only have Pacific the
permission! our without now there land can one

to not better be would it engineer, the replied Pencroft, me, Believe
experiment. the make to have

those to regard with done be to ought what sailor, the said Well,
them leave to we Are island? the about roaming are who villains six
are pirates These plantations? our fields, our forests, our overrun to
treat to hesitate to not ought we me to seems it and jaguars, regular
his to turning Pencroft, added Ayrton? think, you do What such! as them
companion.

that regretted Harding Cyrus and reply, to first at hesitated Ayrton
moved much was he And question. this put thoughtlessly so had Pencroft
tone,-- humble a in replied Ayrton when

to right no have I Pencroft. Mr. jaguars, those of one been have I
speak.

away. walked he step slow a with And

understood. Pencroft

to right much as has He Ayrton! Poor exclaimed. he am! I brute a What
one! any as here speak

is it and honor, him does reserve his but Spilett, Gideon said Yes,
past. sad his about has he which feeling the respect to right

of fear no is there and sailor, the answered Spilett, Mr. Certainly,
Ayrton cause than off tongue my bite rather would I again. so doing my
these that me to seems It question. the to return to But pain! any
island the rid to ought we that and pity, any to right no have ruffians
possible. as soon as them of

engineer. the asked Pencroft? opinion, your that Is

opinion. my Quite

had they until wait not would you mercilessly, them hunting before And
us? against hostility of act fresh some committed

not did who Pencroft, asked enough? already done have they what Isnt
scruples. these understand

repent. perhaps and Harding, said sentiments! other adopt may They

shoulders. his shrugging sailor, the exclaimed repent! They

He hand. sailors the taking Herbert, said Ayrton! of think Pencroft,
again! man honest an became

never had He other. the after one companions his at looked Pencroft
nature rough His objection. any with met being proposal his of thought
who rascals the with terms to come to ought they that allow not could
of murderers the accomplices, Harveys Bob with island the on landed had
which beasts wild as them upon looked he and Speedy, the of crew the
remorse. without and delay without destroyed be to ought

to generous be to wish You me! against is Everybody be. said Come!
it! repent maynt we hope I well; Very villains! those

always be to care take we if Herbert, said run, we shall danger What
guard? our on

opinion. decided any given not had who reporter, the observed Hum!
each and corner, a in hid lay each they If armed. well and six are They
colony! the of masters be soon would they us, of one at fired

not was it because doubt No Herbert. said so? done not they have Why
also. six are we Besides, it. do to interest their

convinced. have could reasoning no whom Pencroft, replied well! Well,
think dont and like, they what do to people good these leave us Let
them! about more anything

that! all as bad so out yourself make dont Neb, said Pencroft, Come,
good within you, before here were men unfortunate these of one Suppose
fire. not would you guns, your of range

Pencroft replied Neb, dog, mad a on would I as him on fire would I
coldly.

to deference much shown always have you engineer, the said Pencroft,
me? to yield matter, this in you, will advice; my

was who sailor, the answered Harding, Captain please, you as do will I
convinced. all at not

attacked are we unless them attack not will we and wait, well, Very
first.

although upon, agreed was pirates the towards behavior their Thus
but them, attack to not were They it. from good nothing augured Pencroft
fertile. and large was island the all, After guard. their on be to were
hearts, their of bottom the in remained yet honesty of sentiment any If
in interest their not it Was reclaimed. be perhaps might wretches these
At life? new a begin to themselves found they which in situation the
The wait. to right be would it alone, sake humanitys for rate, any
without come and go to able be before, as longer no would colonists
six now and against, guard to beasts wild only had they Hitherto fear.
their over roaming were perhaps, description, worst the of convicts
have would it men, brave less to and certainly, serious, was It island.
on reason had colonists the present, At matter! No lost! security been
That future? the in right be they Would Pencroft. against side their
seen. be to remained



6 Chapter

complete that make to was colonists the of business chief the However,
would which and upon, decided been had which island the of exploration
was existence whose being mysterious the discover to objects: two have
of become had what out find to time same the at and indisputable, now
were they life of sort what chosen, had they retreat what pirates, the
wished Harding Cyrus them. from feared be to was what and leading,
days some of be would expedition the as but delay; without out set to
and materials different with cart the load to best appeared it duration,
One encampments. the of organization the facilitate to order in tools
harnessed be not could leg, its hurt having however, onagers, the of
was, departure The necessary. was rest days few a and present, at
month The November. of 20th the until week, a for off put therefore,
the in May of month the to corresponds latitude this in November of
entering was sun The season. fine the therefore, was, It zones. northern
time The year. the in days longest the gave and Capricorn, of tropic the
which, expedition, projected the for favorable very therefore, was,
be rate any at would object, principal its accomplish not did it if
since productions, natural of especially discoveries, in fruitful
which West, Far the of forests dense those explore to proposed Harding
Peninsula. Serpentine the of extremity the to stretched

that agreed was it departure, their preceded which days nine the During
off. finished be should Heights Prospect on work the

the where corral, the to return to Ayrton for necessary was it Moreover,
should he that decided was It care. his required animals domesticated
liberally having after House Granite to return and there, days two spend
stables. the supplied

one like not would he if him asked Harding start, to about was he As
than safe less was island the that observing him, accompany to them of
enough was he as unnecessary, was this that replied Ayrton formerly.
anything If danger. no apprehended he besides that and work, the for
warn instantly could he neighborhood, the in or corral, the at occurred
House. Granite to telegram a sending by colonists the

onager, one by drawn cart the taking 9th, the on dawn at departed Ayrton
all found had he that announced wire electric the after, hours two and
corral. the at order in

project a executing in himself busied Harding days two these During
was It surprise. any against House Granite guard completely would which
which outlet, old the of opening the conceal completely to necessary
the at plants, and grass under hidden partly and up walled already was
level the if since easier, was Nothing Grant. Lake of angle southern
quite be would opening the feet, three or two raised was lake the of
at dam a establish to only had they level this raise to Now, it. beneath
Glycerine Creek fed were which by and lake, the by made openings two the
River. Falls and

not did besides which dams two the and will, a with worked colonists The
by erected rapidly were height, in three by width in feet eight exceed
stone. of blocks well-cemented of means

that at that guess to impossible been have would it finished, work This
the which through passage subterranean a existed there lake, the of part
escaped. formerly lake the of overflow

and House Granite of reservoir the fed which stream little the course Of
not could water the and preserved, carefully been had lift, the worked
be would retreat comfortable and sure this raised, once lift The fail.
surprise. any from safe

and Spilett, Gideon Pencroft, that done, quickly so been had work This
was sailor The Balloon, Port to expedition an make to time found Herbert
was Bonadventure the which in creek little the if know to anxious very
convicts. the by visited been had moored,

they if and coast, south the on landed observed, he gentlemen, These
the discovered have may they that feared be to is it shore, the followed
our for half-a-dollar give wouldnt I case, that in and harbor, little
Bonadventure.

visit a and foundation, without not were apprehensions Pencrofts
his and sailor The desirable. very be to appeared Balloon Port to
armed. well dinner, after November, of 10th the on off set companions
his of barrel each into bullets two slipping ostentatiously Pencroft,
one any to good nothing betokened which way a in head his shook rifle,
Gideon said. he as beast, or man whether him, near too approached who
all oclock three about and guns, their took also Herbert and Spilett
House. Granite left three

had they after and Mercy, the of turn the to them accompanied Neb
should gunshot a that agreed was It bridge. the raised he crossed,
return should Neb signal the at that and return, colonists the announce
river. the of banks two the between communication the reestablish and

the to led which road the along directly advanced band little The
miles three of distance a only was This island. the of coast southern
to hours two took companions his and Spilett Gideon but half, a and
forest, thick the road, the of border the all examined They it. traverse
no who, fugitives the of trace no found They Marsh. Tabor as well as
the or colonists, the of number the discovered yet having not doubt,
less the gained had disposal, their at had they which defense of means
island. the of parts accessible

that satisfaction extreme with saw Pencroft Balloon, Port at Arrived
However, creek. narrow the in floating tranquilly was Bonadventure the
scarcely could it that rocks, high among hidden well so was Balloon Port
sea. the or land the from either discovered be

Long yet. there been not have blackguards the Pencroft, said Come,
Far the in them find shall we evidently and best, reptiles suits grass
West.

added Bonadventure, the found had they if for lucky, very its And
been have should we and her, in off gone have would they Herbert,
Island. Tabor to returning from prevented

a take to important be will it reporter, the remarked Indeed,
Island, Lincoln of situation the known make will which there document
fetch to returns yacht Scotch the case in residence, new Ayrtons and
him.

the answered Spilett, Mr. there, always is Bonadventure the Well,
notice! moments a at start to ready are crew her and She sailor.

our after done be to thing a is that that Pencroft, think, I
the that all after possible is It finished. is island the of exploration
Island Tabor about much as know may him, find to manage we if stranger,
author the certainly is he that forget not Do Island. Lincoln about as
the on count may we far how know perhaps, may, he and document, the of
yacht! the of return

knows fellow The be? he can world the in who Pencroft, exclaimed But!
should why castaway, simple a is he If him! about nothing know we and us
of society the and suppose, I men, honest are We himself! conceal he
voluntarily? here come he Did one. any to unpleasant isnt men honest
remain he Will still? here he Is likes? he if island the leave he Can
longer? any

and board on got Herbert and Spilett, Gideon Pencroft, thus, Chatting
sailor the once, at All Bonadventure. the of deck the about looked
was anchor the of cable the which to bitts the examined having
secured,--

queer! is this cried, he Hallo,

reporter. the asked Pencroft? matter, the is What

knot! this made who I not was it that is, matter The

itself. bitt the to cable the fastened which rope a showed Pencroft And

Spilett. Gideon asked you? not was it What,

running a make always I and knot, reef a is This it. to swear can I No!
bowline.

Pencroft. mistaken, be must You

naturally, so it does hand My sailor. the declared mistaken! not am I
mistaken! never is hand ones and

Herbert. asked board? on been have convicts the can Then

certain, is what but Pencroft, answered that, about nothing know I
it dropped and anchor Bonadventures the weighed has one some that is
has anchor the of cable The proof! another is here here, look And again!
repeat I hawse-hole. the at longer no is service its and out, run been
vessel! our using been has one some that

or her, pillaged have would they her, used had convicts the if But
her. with off gone rather

think, you Do Pencroft. replied Island? Tabor to--to where off! Gone
tonnage? small such of boat a in themselves risk would they

the rejoined islet, the of know they that sure be besides, must, We
reporter.

is name my as sure as sailor, the said be, may that However
sailed has Bonadventure our Vineyard, the of Pencroft, Bonadventure
us! without

could Herbert nor Spilett Gideon neither that positive was sailor The
moved, been had vessel the that evident was It statement. his dispute
the to As Balloon. Port to her brought had Pencroft since less, or more
raised been had anchor the that doubt slightest the not had he sailor,
maneuvers, two these of use the was what Now, again. dropped then and
expedition? some in employed been had vessel the unless

of sight the in pass Bonadventure the see not did we it was how But
forward bring to anxious was who reporter, the observed island? the
objection. possible every

start to have only would they sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. Why,
the of sight of out be would they and breeze, good a with night the in
hours. two in island

the could object what again, ask I Spilett, Gideon resumed Well,
had they after why, and Bonadventure, the using in had have convicts
port? to back her brought have they should her, of use made

the among that put must we sailor, the replied Spilett, Mr. Why,
chief The it. about more anything think not and things, unaccountable
Only, now. there is she and there, was Bonadventure the that is thing
very shall we time, second a her take convicts the if unfortunately,
place! her in again her find not likely

the bring to wisest be not it would Herbert, said Pencroft, Then,
House? Granite to off Bonadventure

Mercy the of mouth The no. rather or Pencroft, answered no, and Yes
there. heavy is sea the and vessel, a for place bad a is

Chimneys? the of foot the to sand, the on up her hauling by But

leave must we since rate, any At Pencroft. replied yes, Perhaps
be will Bonadventure the think I expedition, long a for House Granite
here her leave to best do shall we and absence, our during here safer
blackguards. these of rid is island the until

the in rate any At reporter. the said opinion, my exactly is That
at be would she as here exposed be not will she weather, bad of event
Mercy. the of mouth the

Herbert. said visit, another her pay convicts the suppose But

not would they here, her finding not Pencroft, replied boy, my Well,
our during and, House, Granite of sands the on her finding in long be
therefore, agree, I her! seizing from them hinder could nothing absence,
our on if But, Balloon. Port in left be must she that Spilett, Mr. with
prudent be will it rascals, those of island the rid not have we return
fear not need we when time the until House, Granite to boat our bring to
visits. unpleasant any

reporter. the said off, be us Let settled. Thats

House, Granite to return their on Spilett, Gideon and Herbert, Pencroft,
their of approved latter the and passed, had that all engineer the told
the promised also He future. the and present the for both arrangements
the between situated channel the of part that study would he that sailor
possible be not would it if ascertain to as so coast, the and islet
the way, this In dams. of means by there harbor artificial an make to
the of eyes the under reach, within always be would Bonadventure
key. and lock under necessary, if and colonists,

from bring to him requesting Ayrton, to sent was telegram a evening That
the to acclimatize to wished Neb which goats, of couple a corral the
of receipt the acknowledge not did Ayrton enough, Singularly plateau.
astonish but not could This do. to accustomed was he as despatch, the
the in moment that at not was Ayrton that be might it But engineer. the
fact, In House. Granite to back way his on was he that even or corral,
decided been had it and departure, his since passed already had days two
the of morning the latest the at or 10th the of evening the on that
to Ayrton for therefore, waited, colonists The return. should he 11th,
bridge the at watched even Herbert and Neb Heights. Prospect on appear
presented companion their moment the it lower to ready be to as so
himself.

was, It Ayrton. of signs no were there evening, the in ten to up But
immediate an requiring despatch, fresh a send to best judged therefore,
reply.

mute. remained House Granite at telegraph the of bell The

no Ayrton Was happened? had What great. was uneasiness colonists The
control longer no he had there, still was he if or corral, the at longer
night? dark this in corral the to go they Could movements? his over

remain. to others the go, to wished Some consulted. They

the to happened has accident some perhaps Herbert, said But,
longer? no works it that so apparatus, telegraphic

reporter. the said be, may That

indeed, possible, is It Harding. Cyrus replied to-morrow, till Wait
not have we that even or despatch, our received not has Ayrton that
his. received

anxiety. some without not course of waited, They

electric the sent again Harding November, of 11th the day, of dawn At
reply. no received and wire the along current

result. same the again: tried He

he. said corral, the to Off

Pencroft. added armed! well And

alone left be not should House Granite that decided immediately was It
friends his accompanied having After there. remain should Neb that and
he tree a behind waiting and bridge; the raised he Glycerine, Creek to
Ayrton. or companions his either of return the for watched

to attempting and themselves presenting pirates the of event the In
them, on firing by them stop to endeavor to was he passage, the force
where, House, Granite in refuge take to was he resource last a as and
safety. in be would he raised, once lift the

repair to were Pencroft and Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus
neighboring the search Ayrton, find not did they if and corral, the to
woods.

companions three his and engineer the morning, the in oclock six At
mound small a behind himself posted Neb and Glycerine, Creek passed had
stream. the of bank left the on trees, dragon several by crowned

Heights, Prospect of plateau the leaving after colonists, The
guns, their shouldered They corral. the to road the took immediately
and rifles two The demonstration. hostile slightest the on fire to ready
ball. with loaded been had guns two the

have easily might and road the of side each on thick was wood The
been have would weapons their to owing who convicts, the concealed
formidable. really

them, preceded Top silence. in and rapidly walked colonists The
wood, the into ramble a taking sometimes road, the on running sometimes
And unusual. anything fear to appearing not and quiet always but
be to them allow not would dog faithful the that sure be could they
danger. of appearance least the at bark would but surprised,

which wire the road the beside followed companions his and Harding Cyrus
two nearly for walking After House. Granite with corral the connected
difficulty. the of explanation any discovered yet as not had they miles,
at However, extended. regularly wire the order, good in were posts The
slack, be to appeared wire the that observed engineer the moment that
stopped, advance in was who Herbert, 74, No. post at arriving on and
exclaiming,--

broken! is wire The

lad the where spot the at arrived and forward hurried companions His
The path. the across lying and up rooted was post The standing. was
evident was it and here, was difficulty the of explanation unexpected
the at received been not had House Granite from despatches the that
House. Granite at corral the from those nor corral,

Pencroft. observed post, this down blew that wind the wasnt It

foot, its round up dug been has earth The Spilett. Gideon replied No,
man. of hand the by up torn been has it and

had wire the that showing Herbert, added broken, is wire the Besides,
snapped. been

Harding. asked recent? fracture the Is

lately. quite done been certainly has it Herbert, answered Yes,

sailor. the exclaimed corral! the to corral! the To

corral, the and House Granite between way half now were colonists The
with forward pressed They go. to half a and miles two still having
speed. redoubled

in occurred had accident serious some that feared be to was it Indeed,
not had which telegram a sent have might Ayrton doubt, No corral. the
uneasy, so were companions his why reason the not was this but arrived,
to promised had who Ayrton, circumstance, unaccountable more a for,
not was it short, In reappeared. not had before, evening the return
the between stopped been had communication all that motive a without
any have could convicts the but who and House, Granite and corral
communication? this interrupting in interest

were They anxiety. with oppressed hearts their on, hastened settlers The
struck him find to they Were companion. new their to attached sincerely
leader? the formerly was he whom of those of hands the by down

the of side the along led road the where place the at arrived they Soon
meadows the watered and Creek Red the from flowed which stream little
not should they that so pace their moderated then They corral. the of
Their necessary. be might struggle a when moment the at breath of out be
every on watched was forest The cocked. ready hands their in were guns
ominous. rather were which groans sullen uttered Top side.

damage any of trace No trees. the through appeared palisade the last At
the in reigned silence Deep usual. as shut was gate The seen. be could
voice Ayrtons nor sheep the of bleating accustomed the Neither corral.
heard. be could

Harding. Cyrus said enter, us Let

about watch keeping companions, his while advanced, engineer the And
notice. moments a at fire to ready were him, behind paces twenty

it push to about was and gate the of latch inner the raised Harding
a by to responded was and sounded report A loudly. barked Top when back,
pain. of cry

ground. the on stretched lay bullet, a by struck Herbert,



7 Chapter


him. towards rushed fall, gun his letting Pencroft, cry, Herberts At

him! killed have They boy! My cried. he him! killed have They

Herbert. to ran Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus

still was heart lads poor the if ascertain to listened reporter The
beating.

carried-- be must he but he, said lives, He

engineer. the replied impossible! is that House? Granite To

Pencroft. said then! corral, the Into

Harding. said moment, a In

a found he There palisade. the of corner left the round ran he And
few a In hat. his through ball a sent him, at aiming who convict,
fell, he barrel, second his fire to time even had he before seconds,
gun. his than even sure more dagger, Hardings by heart the to struck

over themselves hoisted sailor the and Spilett Gideon time, this During
which props the down threw enclosure, the into leaped palisade, the
poor soon, and house, empty the into ran door, inner the supported
his by was Harding moments, few a In bed. Ayrtons on lying was Herbert
side.

terrible. was grief sailors the senseless, Herbert seeing On

wall. the against head his beat to tried he cried, he sobbed, He

themselves They him. calm could reporter the nor engineer the Neither
speak. not could They emotion. with choked were

the death from rescue to them on depended it that knew they However,
not had Spilett Gideon eyes. their beneath suffering was who boy poor
checkered been had life his which by incidents many the through passed
little a knew He medicine. of knowledge slight some acquiring without
wounds to attend to obliged been had he times several and everything, of
Harding, Cyrus by Assisted shot. or sword-bayonet a by either produced
required. Herbert aid the render to proceeded he

which in stupor complete the by struck immediately was reporter The
shock, the to or hemorrhage, the to either owing stupor a lay, Herbert
violent a produce to force sufficient with bone a struck having ball the
concussion.

felt only Spilett that feeble so pulse his and pale, deadly was Herbert
stopping. of point the on was it if as intervals, long at beat it

serious. very were symptoms These

with stanched been having blood the and bare, laid was chest Herberts
water. cold with bathed was it handkerchiefs,

the below oval appeared,--an wound contused the rather or contusion, The
had Herbert that there was It ribs. fourth and third the between chest
bullet. the by hit been

they as over; boy poor the turned then Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus
his was it thought almost they that feeble so moan a uttered he so, did
sigh. last

by wound, contused another from blood with covered was back Herberts
escaped. immediately had ball the which

and body, the in not is ball the reporter, the said praised! be God
it. extract to have not shall we

Harding. asked heart? the But

dead! be would Herbert been, had it if touched; been not has heart The

groan. a with Pencroft, exclaimed Dead!

reporter. the by uttered words last the heard only had sailor The

pulse His dead. not is He no! Harding, Cyrus replied Pencroft, No,
calm sake, boys your for But moan. a uttered even has He beats. still
self-possession. our all of need have We yourself.

friend. my it, lose us make not Do

down rolled tears great and in, set reaction a but silent, was Pencroft
cheeks. his

and ideas, his collect to endeavored Spilett Gideon meanwhile, the In
the that doubt no had he examination his After methodically. proceed
issued had ribs, eighth and seventh the between front, in entering ball,
ball the had mischief what But fourth. and third the between behind
A reached? been had organs important What passage? its in committed
at this determining in difficulty had have would surgeon professional
reporter. the so more still and once,

the prevent to have would he that was this thing, one knew he However,
with contend to then parts, injured the of strangulation inflammatory
wound, the from result would which fever and inflammation local the
be to ought antiphlogistics what styptics, what Now, mortal! perhaps
prevented? be inflammation could means what By employed?

should wounds two the that was thing important most the rate, any At
Spilett Gideon to necessary appear not did It delay. without dressed be
tepid in them bathing by caused be should blood of flow fresh a that
very been had hemorrhage The lips. their compressing and water,
of loss the by enfeebled much too already was Herbert and abundant,
blood.

wounds two the bathe simply to best it thought therefore, reporter, The
water. cold with

that in maintained was and side, left his on placed was Herbert
position.

most the in is He Spilett. Gideon said moved. be not must He
suppurate to chest and back his in wounds the for position favorable
necessary. is rest absolute and easily,

Pencroft. asked House? Granite to him carry we cant What!

reporter. the replied Pencroft, No,

a in fist his shaking sailor, the cried off! villains the pay Ill
manner. menacing

Harding. Cyrus said Pencroft!

Herbert boy. wounded the of examination his resumed had Spilett Gideon
anxious. felt reporter the that pale, frightfully so still was

You perplexity. terrible in am I surgeon. a not am I he, said Cyrus,
experience! your advice, your with me aid must

the pressing engineer, the answered friend, my courage, Take
be must Herbert this: of only Think coolly. Judge hand. reporters
saved!

had he which self-possession that Spilett Gideon to restored words These
responsibility. great his feeling on discouragement of moment a in lost
Pencroft near. stood Harding Cyrus bed. the to close himself seated He
lint. making mechanically was and shirt, his up torn had

first ought he thought he that Harding Cyrus to explained then Spilett
cause or wounds, two the close not but hemorrhage, the stop to all of
perforation, internal been had there for cicatrization, immediate their
chest. the in accumulate to allowed be not must suppuration the and

should wounds two the that decided was it and entirely, approved Harding
coaptation. immediate by them close to attempting without dressed be

against act to agent efficacious an possess colonists the did now And
occur? might which inflammation the

cold had They it. lavished generously had nature for one, had They Yes.
employed be can that sedative powerful most the say, to is that water,
agent therapeutic efficacious most the wounds, of inflammation against
physicians. all by adopted now is which one the and cases, grave in
absolute in wound the leaving of advantage the moreover, has, water Cold
considerable a dressing, premature all from it preserving and rest,
the with contact that experience by found been has it since advantage,
days. first the during dangerous is air

good simple their with thus reasoned Harding Cyrus and Spilett Gideon
Compresses done. have would surgeon best the as acted they and sense,
kept were and wounds, two Herberts poor to applied were linen of
water. cold with wet constantly

wanting not was which hut, the in fire a lighted first at had sailor The
same the plants, medicinal sugar, Maple life. for necessary things in
to them enabled Grant, Lake of banks the on gathered had lad the which
any taking his without him gave they which drinks, refreshing some make
night and day that all and high, extremely was fever His it. of notice
conscious. becoming his without passed

any at break might thread this and thread, a on hung life Herberts
his and Harding of hopes the November, of 12th the day, next The moment.
stupor. long his of out come had Herbert revived. slightly companions
and reporter, the Harding, Cyrus recognized he eyes, his opened He
had what know not did He words. three or two uttered He Pencroft.
perfectly remain to him begged Spilett and him, told They happened.
wounds his that and danger, in not was life his that him telling still,
all, at suffered scarcely Herbert However, days. few a in heal would
any prevented bathed, constantly were they which with water cold the and
regular a in established was suppuration The wounds. the of inflammation
this that hoped be now might it and increase, not did fever the way,
the felt Pencroft catastrophe. any involve not would wound terrible
mercy, of sister a like was He subside. gradually heart his of swelling
child. her of bed the by mother a like

natural. more appeared sleep his but again, dozed Herbert

me Tell Pencroft. said Spilett, Mr. hope, you that again me Tell
Herbert! save will you that again

serious, is wound The reporter. the replied him! save will we Yes,
perforation the but lungs, the traversed has ball the even perhaps, and,
fatal. not is organ this of

Pencroft. answered you! bless God

in been had they hours four-and-twenty the during believed, be may As
nursing of that than thought other no had colonists the corral, the
them threatened which danger the of either think not did They Herbert.
the for taken be to precautions the of or return, convicts the should
future.

Harding Cyrus sick-bed, the by watched Pencroft while day, this on But
do. to best be would it what to as consulted reporter the and

Ayrton. of trace a not was There corral. the examined they all of First
he Had accomplices? former his by away dragged been man unhappy the Had
was supposition last This struggle? the in overcome been and resisted,
palisade, the scaled he moment the at Spilett, Gideon probable. too only
southern the along running convicts the of one some seen clearly had
those of one was It sprung. had Top whom towards Franklin, Mount of spur
mouth the at rocks the by defeated completely so been had object whose
was body whose and Harding, by killed one the Besides, Mercy. the of
crew. Harveys Bob to belonged course of enclosure, the outside found

closed, were gates The damage. any suffered not had it corral, the to As
could Nor forest. the in disperse to able been not had animals the and
hut, the in either devastation, any struggle, any of traces see they
been had Ayrton which with only, ammunition The palisade. the in or
him. with disappeared had supplied,

man a was he as and Harding, said surprised, been has man unhappy The
overpowered. been have must he himself, defend to

the doubtless, Then, reporter. the said feared! be to is that Yes,
of plenty found they where corral the in themselves installed convicts
evident, very is It coming. us saw they when fled only and everything,
here! not is dead, or living whether Ayrton, moment this at that too,

the rid and engineer, the said forest, the beat to have shall We
mistaken, not were presentiments Pencrofts wretches. these of island
us spared have would That beasts. wild as them hunt to wished he when
misfortunes! these all

be to right the have we now but reporter, the answered Yes,
merciless!

time, some wait to obliged are we engineer, the said rate, any At
to danger without Herbert carry can we until corral the at remain to and
House. Granite

reporter. the asked Neb? But

safety. in is Neb

come? to venture would he absence, our at uneasy if, But

be would He quickly. Harding Cyrus returned come! not must He
road! the on murdered

us! rejoin to attempt will he that however, probable, very is It

is that But warned! be might he acted, still telegraph the if Ah,
could we alone, here Herbert and Pencroft leaving to As now! impossible
House. Granite to alone go will I Well, it! do not

yourself! expose not must you reporter, the answered Cyrus, no! No,
watching evidently are villains The avail. no of be would courage Your
if and it, surround which woods thick the in hidden are they corral, the
one! of instead misfortunes two regret to have soon shall we go you

since hours four-and-twenty now is It engineer. the repeated Neb? But
come! to sure be will He us! of news any had has he

added ourselves, be should we than guard his on less be will he as And
killed! be will he Spilett,

him? warning of way no really there Is

backwards going who, Top, on fell eyes his thought, engineer the While
say,-- to seemed forwards and

here? I not Am

Harding. Cyrus exclaimed Top!

call. masters his at sprang animal The

engineer. the understood had who reporter, the said go, will Top Yes,

of news the House Granite to carry will He cannot! we where go can Top
House! Granite from that us to back bring will he and corral, the

Quick! Harding. said Quick!

words:-- these wrote and note-book, his from leaf a tore rapidly Spilett

leave not Do guard. your on Be corral. the at are We wounded. Herbert
by Reply neighborhood? the in appeared convicts the Have House. Granite
Top.

same the at and know, to ought Neb that all contained note laconic This
and folded was It know. to wished colonists the that all asked time
position. conspicuous a in collar Tops to fastened

Neb! Top! Neb, animal, the caressing engineer, the said dog, my Top,
go! Go,

of expected was what knew he understood, He words. these at bounded Top
he hour an than less In him. to familiar was corral the to road The him.
Harding Cyrus neither where that hoped be might it and it, clear could
among running Top, danger, without ventured have could reporter the nor
unperceived. pass would wood, the in or grass the

it. opened and corral the of gate the to went engineer The

direction the in pointing again engineer, the repeated Neb! Top! Neb,
House. Granite of

disappeared. immediately almost then forwards, sprang Top

reporter. the said there! get will He

animal! faithful the back, come will he and Yes,

Spilett. Gideon asked it? is oclock What

Ten.

return. his for watch will We here. be may he hour an In

reporter the and engineer The closed. was corral the of gate The
the kept Pencroft sleep. a in still was Herbert house. the re-entered
do could he nothing was there seeing Spilett, wet. always compresses
while nourishment, some preparing in himself busied moment, that at
at hill, the against enclosure the of part that watching attentively
expected. be might attack an which

before little A anxiety. much with return Tops awaited settlers The
were hand, in rifle reporter, the and Harding Cyrus oclock, eleven
dog. their of bark first the at it open to ready gate, the behind

Neb House, Granite at safely arrived had Top if that doubt not did They
immediately. back him sent have would

heard, was report a when minutes, ten about for there been both had They
barks. repeated by followed

the in off feet hundred a smoke seeing and gate, the opened engineer The
direction. that in fired he wood,

quickly was gate the and corral, the into bounded Top immediately Almost
shut.

head honest great dogs the taking engineer, the exclaimed Top! Top,
hands. his between

words, these read Harding Cyrus and neck, his to fastened was note A
of neighborhood the in pirates writing:--No large Nebs in traced
Herbert! Mr. Poor stir. not will I House. Granite



8 Chapter

to determined and corral, the watching there, still were convicts the So
but done be to nothing was There other. the after one settlers the kill
for taken, be must precautions great But beasts. wild as them treat to
not and seeing, side, their on advantage the had wretches the now just
attack, their of suddenness the by surprise to able being seen, being
arrangements, made Harding themselves. surprised be to not yet
last would provisions the which of corral, the in living for therefore,
with provided been had house Ayrtons time. of length tolerable a for
by scared convicts, the and existence, for necessary was that all
was It it. pillage to time had not had settlers, the of arrival the
as occurred had things that observed, Spilett Gideon as probable,
follows:

southern the followed had island, the on disembarking convicts, six The
Serpentine the of shore double the traversed having after and shore,
they woods, West Far the into venture to inclined being not Peninsula,
the following by point, this From River. Falls of mouth the reached had
Mount of spurs the at arrive would they watercourse, the of bank right
they and retreat, a seek naturally would they which among Franklin,
uninhabited. then corral, the discovering in long been have not could
moment the awaiting themselves, installed regularly had they There
had arrival Ayrtons execution. into schemes abominable their put to
man, unfortunate the overpower to managed had they but them, surprised
imagined! easily be may rest and--the

armed,--were well but true, is it five, to convicts,--reduced the Now,
to themselves expose to was there venture to and woods, the roaming
prevented. nor against guarded neither be could which attacks, their

When Harding. Cyrus repeated done! be to else nothing is There Wait!
and island, the of battle general a organize can we cured, is Herbert
our of object the be will That convicts. these of satisfaction have
time-- same the at expedition grand

Spilett, Gideon added protector, mysterious our for search the As
dear my acknowledged, be must it And sentence. engineers the finishing
when moment very the at wanting was protection his time this that Cyrus,
us! to necessary most was it

engineer. the replied knows? Who

reporter. the asked mean? you do What

Spilett, dear my yet, trouble our of end the at not are we That
of opportunity another have may intervention powerful his that and
life Herberts now. question the not is that But itself. exercising
everything. before

the and passed, days Several thought. saddest colonists the was This
a at kept always water, Cold worse. no happily was state boys poor
the of inflammation the prevented completely had temperature, suitable
slightly being water, this that reporter the to seemed even It wounds.
volcano, the of neighborhood the by explained was sulphurous,--which
much was suppuration The healing. the on action direct more a had
was he which by care incessant the to thanks and abundant, less
was He abated. fever his and life, to returned surrounded!--Herbert
was weakness his consequently and diet, severe a to subjected besides
and drinks, refreshing of want no was there but extreme; be would and
Gideon Harding, Cyrus him. to benefit greatest the of was rest absolute
lads the dressing in skilful very become had Pencroft and Spilett,
Herberts sacrificed. been had house the in linen the All wounds.
much too neither pressed were lint, and compresses with covered wounds,
any effecting without cicatrization their cause to as so little, too nor
dressing, the in care extreme used reporter The reaction. inflammatory
that companions his to repeating and it, of importance the well knowing
a see to rarer perhaps is it that admit, willingly surgeons most which
performed. well operation an than done well dressing

better. considerably was Herbert November, of 22nd the on days, ten In
nourishment. some take to begun had He

at smiled eyes bright his and cheeks, his to returning was color The
who efforts, Pencrofts notwithstanding little, a talked He nurses. his
him told and speak, to beginning from him prevent to incessantly talked
subject the on him questioned had Herbert stories. improbable most the
that thinking him, near see to not astonished was he whom Ayrton, of
Herbert, distress to wishing not sailor, the But corral. the at was he
to as so Neb, rejoined had Ayrton that replying by himself contented
House. Granite defend

have who gentlemen are they pirates! these Pencroft, said Humph!
by them win to wanted captain the And consideration! any to right no
good a of shape the in but kindness, some them send Ill kindness!
bullet!

Herbert. asked again? seen been not they have And

when and them, find shall we but sailor, the answered boy, my No,
will behind from us strike who cowards the if see shall we cured are you
face! to face us meet to dare

Pencroft! poor my weak, very still am I

the through ball a Whats gradually! return will strength your Well!
of much think dont I and many, seen Ive joke! a but Nothing chest?
them!

complication no if and well, on going be to appeared things last At
what But certain. as regarded be might recovery Herberts occurred,
been had state his if colonists the of condition the been have would
his if body, his in remained had ball the example, for aggravated,--if,
amputated? be to had had leg his or arm

a such of thought never have I once, than more Spilett said No,
shuddering! without contingency

to day one Harding said operate, to necessary been had it if yet, And
hesitated? have not would you him,

been have we that God thank but Spilett, Gideon said Cyrus! No,
complication! this spared

logic the to appealed had colonists the conjectures, other many so in As
once and often, so use made had they which of sense good simple that of
not might But succeeded! had it knowledge, general their to thanks more,
alone were They fault? at be would science their all when come time a
each to necessary are society of states all in men Now, island. the on
some if asked he sometimes and well, this knew Harding Cyrus other.
surmount. to powerless be would they which occur not might circumstance
so then till companions, his and he that besides, him to appeared It
and years two the During period. unlucky an into entered had fortunate,
might it Richmond, from escape their since elapsed had which half a
had island The way. own their everything had had they that said be
as and animals, vegetables, minerals, with them supplied abundantly
take to how known had science their them, loaded constantly had Nature
them. offered she what of advantage

certain in Moreover, complete. therefore was colony the of wellbeing The
all But aid!... their to come had influence inexplicable an occurrences
time. a for be only could that

them. against turned had fortune that believed Harding Cyrus short, In

island, the of waters the in appeared had ship convicts the fact, In
of six destroyed, miraculously speak, to so been, had pirates the if and
the on disembarked had They catastrophe. the escaped had least, at them,
survived. who five the at get to impossible almost was it and island,
possessed who wretches, these by murdered been doubt no had Ayrton
had Herbert them, of made had they that use first the at and firearms,
by aimed blows first the these Were mortally. almost wounded fallen,
This Harding. by asked often was This colonists? the at fortune adverse
the that also him to appeared it and reporter; the by repeated often was
served had then till which efficacious, so yet strange, so intervention,
whatever being, mysterious this Had them. failed now had well, so them
Had island? the abandoned denied, be not could existence whose was, he
succumbed? turn his in he

imagined be not must it But questions. these to possible was reply No
were they things, these of spoke companions his and Harding because that
face, the in situation their looked They that. from Far despair. to men
they event, any for themselves prepared they chances, the analyzed they
last at was adversity if and future, the before straight and firm stood
against struggle to prepared men them in find would it them, strike to
it.



9 Chapter

One progressing. regularly was invalid young the of convalescence The
be to him allow would state his that desired, be to now was only thing
corral the supplied and built well However House. Granite to brought
granite healthy the as comfortable so be not could it was, house
tenants, its and security, same the offer not did it Besides, dwelling.
some of fear in always here were watchfulness, their notwithstanding
that of middle the in contrary, the on There, convicts. the from shot
and fear, to nothing have would they cliff, inaccessible and impregnable
waited therefore They fail. certainly would persons their on attack any
danger without moved be might Herbert when moment the for impatiently
the although move, this make to determined were they and wound, his from
difficult. very was Wood Jacamar through communication

The account. that on uneasy not were but Neb, from news no had They
would House, Granite of depths the in entrenched well Negro, courageous
him, to again sent been not had Top surprised. be to himself allow not
which shot some to dog faithful the expose to useless appeared it as
auxiliary. useful most their of settlers the deprive might

at reunited be to anxious were they although therefore, waited, They
it for divided, forces his see to engineer the pained It House. Granite
they disappearance Ayrtons Since pirates. the to advantage great gave
and counted, be yet not could Herbert for five, against four only were
the understood well who boy, brave the of care least the not was this
cause. the was he which of trouble

act to were they condition, their in how, knowing of question The
November of 29th the on discussed thoroughly was pirates, the against
Herbert when moment a at Pencroft, and Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus by
them. hear not could and asleep was

the of and Neb of talked had they after reporter, the said friends, My
to that you, think,--like I him, with communicating of impossibility
gunshot a receiving risk to be would corral the to road the on venture
best the that think not you do But it. return to able being without
wretches? these to chase give openly to is now done be to thing

were believe I Pencroft. answered thinking, was I what just is That
Harding Captain if me, for as and bullet, a of afraid be to fellows not
is man one it, hang Why, forest! the into dash to ready Im approves,
another! to equal

engineer. the asked five? to equal he is But

well-armed us, of both and reporter, the said Pencroft, join will I
Top-- by accompanied and

reason us let Harding, answered Pencroft, you, and Spilett, dear My
knew we if island, the of spot one in hid were convicts the If coolly.
direct a undertake would I them, dislodge to only had and spot, that
they that contrary, the on fear, to occasion not there is but attack;
shot? first the fire to sure are

its reach always not does bullet a Pencroft, cried captain, Well,
mark.

the replied Pencroft, miss, not did Herbert struck which That
should I corral the left you of both if that observe Besides, engineer.
will convicts the that imagine you Do it. defend to alone here remain
forest, the enter to you allow not will they that it, leave you see not
there that knowing absence, your during it attack not will they that and
man? a and boy wounded a but here one no is

with swelling chest his Pencroft, replied captain, right, are You
the retake to can they all do will they right; are You anger. sullen
hold not could you alone and stored; well be to know they which corral,
them. against it

House! Granite at only were we if Oh,

be would case the engineer, the answered House, Granite at were we If
one, with Herbert leave to afraid be not should I There different. very
we But island. the of forests the search to went three other the while
it leave can we until here stay to best is it and corral, the at are
together.

companions his and unanswerable, was reasoning Hardings Cyrus
well. it understood

fellow! Poor Spilett. Gideon said us! of one still was Ayrton only If
duration. short of but been have will life social to return his

tone. peculiar a in Pencroft, added dead, is he If

asked him? spared have villains the that Pencroft, then, hope, you Do
Spilett. Gideon

so. doing in interest any had they if Yes,

forgetting companions, old his finding Ayrton that suppose you What!
us-- owes he that all

shameful this hazard not did who sailor, the answered knows? Who
hesitating. without supposition

wicked a is that arm, sailors the taking Harding, said Pencroft,
speaking in persist you if much me distress will you and yours, of idea
fidelity. Ayrtons for answer will I thus.

quickly. reporter the added also, I And

wicked a was it Pencroft; replied wrong, was I captain, yes, Yes,
Im do? I can what But it. justifies nothing and had, I that indeed idea
horribly, me wearies corral the in imprisonment This senses. my in not
now. do I as excited so felt never have I and

my be, it will long How engineer. the replied Pencroft, patient, Be
House? Granite to carried be may Herbert think you before Spilett, dear

any for reporter, the answered Cyrus, say, to difficult is That
convalescence his But consequences. terrible involve might imprudence
from days eight in strength, gain to continues he if and progressing, is
see. shall we now--well,

the until House Granite to return the off put would That days! Eight
already had spring of months two time this At December. of days first
The great. be to began heat the and fine, was weather The passed.
approaching was time the and leaf, full in were island the of forests
of plateau the to return The gathered. be to ought crops usual the when
agricultural extensive by followed be therefore, would, Heights Prospect
island. the through expedition projected the by only interrupted labors,

in seclusion this injurious how understood well be therefore, can, It
colonists. the to been have must corral the

so do not did they necessity, before bow to compelled were they if But
impatience. without

the made and road the into out ventured reporter the twice or Once
gun his Spilett, Gideon and him, accompanied Top palisade. the of tour
emergency. any for ready was cocked,

dog His traces. suspicious no found and misadventure no with met He
might it bark, not did Top as and, danger, any of him warned have would
and least, at moment the at fear to nothing was there that concluded be
island. the of part another in occupied were convicts the that

Spilett, Gideon November, of 27th the on sortie, second his on However,
south the towards woods, the into mile a of quarter a ventured had who
no had dog The something. scented Top that remarked mountain, the of
ferreting forwards, and backwards went he manner; unconcerned his longer
suspicious some revealed had smell his if as bushes and grass the among
him. to object

voice, his by him excited him, encouraged Top, followed Spilett Gideon
sheltering and fire, to ready gun his look-out, sharp a keeping while
the scented Top that probable not was It trees. the behind himself
by it announced have would he case, that in for man, of presence
was it growl, not did he as Now, barks. angry sullen, half-uttered,
approaching. nor near neither was danger because

following reporter the rummaging, Top thus, passed minutes five Nearly
bush, thick a towards rushed dog the once, at all when, prudently him
rag. a out drew and

immediately Spilett which torn, and stained cloth, of piece a was It
colonists, the by examined was it There corral. the to back brought
that of piece a waistcoat, Ayrtons of fragment a was it that found who
factory. House Granite the by solely manufactured felt,

the on resistance been has there Harding, observed Pencroft, see, You
in away him dragged have convicts The Ayrton. unfortunate the of part
honesty? his doubt still you Do himself! of spite

a suspicion my of repented I and sailor, the answered captain, No,
the from learned be may something that me to seems it But ago! time long
incident.

reporter. the asked that? is What

him dragged they That corral! the at killed not was Ayrton that is It
still is he perhaps, Therefore, resisted. has he since living, away
living!

thoughtful. remained who engineer, the replied indeed, Perhaps,

Indeed, hold. still could companions Ayrtons which to hope, a was This
had Ayrton corral, the in surprised that, believed before had they
not had convicts the if But fallen. had Herbert as bullet, a by fallen
of part another to living him brought had they if first, at him killed
prisoner? their still was he that admitted be not it might island, the
Australian old his Ayrton in found had them of one even, Perhaps,
knows who And convicts. escaped the of chief the Joyce, Ben companion
Ayrton back bringing of hope impossible the conceived had they that but
been had they if them, to useful very been have would He themselves? to
traitor! turn him make to able

and corral, the at interpreted favorably therefore, was, incident This
again. Ayrton find should they that impossible appeared longer no it
all do doubt no would Ayrton prisoner, a only was he if side, his On
a be would this and villains, the of hands the from escape to could he
settlers! the to aid powerful

to manage did Ayrton happily if Spilett, Gideon observed rate, any At
know not could he for House, Granite to directly go would he escape,
and victim, a been has Herbert which of assassination attempted the of
corral. the in imprisoned being our of think never would consequently

and Pencroft, cried House! Granite at there, was he that wish I Oh!
our to nothing do can rascals the although For, too! there, were we that
poultry-yard! our plantations, our plateau, the plunder may they house,

crops. his to attached heartily farmer, thorough a become had Pencroft
return to any than anxious more was Herbert that said be must it But
settlers the of presence the much how knew he for House, Granite to
corral! the at them keeping was who he was it And there. needed was
when! and corral, the leave mind--to his occupied idea one Therefore,
his sure was He House. Granite to removal bear could he believed He
sight and air the with room, his in quickly more return would strength
sea! the of

with fearing, latter, the but Spilett, Gideon pressed he times Several
the on reopen might healed, half wounds, Herberts that reason, good
start. to order the give not did way,

his and Harding Cyrus compelled which occurred something However,
this that knew alone God and wish, lads the to yield to friends two
remorse. and grief them cause might determination

three The evening. the in oclock seven November, of 29th the was It
quick utter Top heard they when room, Herberts in talking were settlers
barks.

the of out ran and guns their seized Spilett and Pencroft, Harding,
it but barking, jumping, was palisade, the of foot the at Top, house.
anger. not pleasure, with was

coming. is one Some

Yes.

enemy! an not is It

perhaps? Neb,

Ayrton? Or

two his and engineer the between exchanged been hardly had words These
ground the on fell and palisade the over leaped body a when companions
corral. the inside

most a gave immediately Top whom to person, in Jup Master Jup, was It
reception. cordial

Pencroft. exclaimed Jup!


reporter. the said us, to him sent has Neb

him. on note some have must he engineer, the replied Then,

important any had Neb if Certainly orang. the to up rushed Pencroft
or sure more a employ not could he master his to communicate to matter
could, colonists the neither where pass could who messenger, rapid more
himself. Top even nor

in and bag, small a hung neck Jups At mistaken. not was Harding Cyrus
hand. Nebs by traced note little a found was bag this

read they when imagined be may companions his and Harding of despair The
words:-- these


morning. the in oclock six Friday,

convicts. by invaded Plateau

Neb.


re-entered they then word, a uttering without other each at gazed They
that Heights! Prospect on convicts The do? to they were What house. the
ruin. devastation, disaster, was

re-enter, Pencroft and reporter, the engineer, the seeing on Herbert,
no he Jup, saw he when and aggravated, was situation their that guessed
House. Granite menaced misfortune some that doubted longer

must I journey. the bear can I go; must I he, said Harding, Captain
go.

him,-- at looked having then, Herbert; approached Spilett Gideon

he. said then! go, us Let

a on carried be should Herbert whether decided quickly was question The
motion The corral. the to Ayrton brought had which cart the in or litter
it but lad, wounded the for easy more been have would litter the of
have would there say, to is that bearers, two necessitated have would
Would road. the on made was attack an if defense for less guns two been
free? arm every leave cart the employing by contrary, the on not, they
in lying was Herbert which on mattress the place to impossible it Was
It avoided? be should jolt any that care much so with advance to and it,
done. be could

and Harding Cyrus onager. the harnessed Pencroft brought. was cart The
of bottom the on it placed and mattress Herberts raised reporter the
through glanced rays bright suns The fine. was weather The cart. the
trees. the

Harding. Cyrus asked ready? guns the Are

double-barreled a with armed each Pencroft, and engineer The were. They
start. but do to nothing had rifle, his carrying Spilett Gideon and gun,

engineer. the asked Herbert? comfortable, you Are

the on die not shall I uneasy, be dont lad, the replied captain, Ah,
road!

up called had boy poor the that seen be could it thus, speaking While
his collected had will powerful a of energy the by and energy, his all
strength. failing

to hesitated still He painfully. sink heart his felt engineer The
to Herbert driven have would that but departure; for signal the give
perhaps. him despair--killed

Harding. said Forward!

be to when knew who Top, and Jup opened. was corral the of gate The
and reclosed, was gate the out, came cart The advance. in ran silent,
pace. slow a at advanced Pencroft, by led onager, the

than road different a taken have to safer been have would it Certainly,
cart the but House, Granite to corral the from straight led which that
was It trees. the under moving in difficulties great with met have would
to known well was it although way, this follow to therefore, necessary,
convicts. the

cart, the of side each on one walked Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus
the that probable not was it However, attack. any to answer to ready
Heights. Prospect of plateau the left yet have would convicts

convicts the as soon as sent and written been evidently had note Nebs
in oclock six dated was note this Now, there. themselves shown had
the to frequently come to accustomed orang, active the and morning, the
five the cross to hour an of quarters three scarcely taken had corral,
be therefore, would, They House. Granite from it separated which miles
would it firing, for occasion any was there if and time, that at safe
House. Granite of neighborhood the in were they until be not probably
latter the Jup, and Top watch. strict a kept colonists the However,
at wood the beating sometimes front, in sometimes club, his with armed
danger. no signalized road, the of sides the

the left had It guidance. Pencrofts under slowly advanced cart The
miles five the of out four after, hour An seven. half-past at corral
was road The occurred. having incident any without cleared, been had
the between lay which Wood Jacamar the of part that all as deserted as
wood The warning. any for occasion no was There lake. the and Mercy
on landed first colonists the when day the on as deserted as appeared
island. the

bridge the see would they and mile Another plateau. the approached They
place; its in it find to expected Harding Cyrus Glycerine. Creek over
after that, and it, crossed have would convicts the that supposing
they plateau, the enclosed which streams the of one passed having
a open keep to as so again, it lower to precaution the taken have would
retreat.

seen. be to sea-horizon the allowed trees the in opening an length At
defenders its of one not for progress, its continued cart the But
it. abandoning of thought

voice,-- hoarse a in and onager, the stopped Pencroft moment that At

exclaimed. he villains! the Oh!

the and sheds, the mill, the from rising smoke thick a to pointed he And
poultry-yard. the at buildings

Neb. was It smoke. the of midst the in about moving was man A

them. meet to ran and heard, He shout. a uttered companions His

having before, half-an-hour nearly plateau the left had convicts The
it! devastated

Neb. asked Herbert? Mr. And

cart. the to returned Spilett Gideon

consciousness! lost had Herbert



10 Chapter

ruins the House, Granite menaced which dangers the convicts, the Of
longer. no thought colonists the covered, was plateau the which with
the Would considerations. other all outweighed state critical Herberts
reporter The injury? internal some causing by him to fatal prove removal
of despaired almost companions his and he but it, affirm not could
some There river. the of bend the to brought was cart The result. the
the lay which on mattress the received liner, a as disposed branches,
and Spilett, Harding, Cyrus after, minutes Ten Herbert. unconscious
cart the take to Neb leaving cliff, the of foot the at were Pencroft
and motion, in put was lift The Heights. Prospect of plateau the to on
House. Granite in bed his on stretched soon was Herbert

for smiled He life! to back him bring to him on lavished were cares What
murmur even scarcely could but room, his in himself finding on moment a
his examined Spilett Gideon weakness. his was great so words, few a
healed. imperfectly been having reopened, them find to feared He wounds.
prostration? this came then, whence, From sort. the of nothing was There
feverish of kind a into fell then lad The worse? much so Herbert was why
this During bed. the near remained Pencroft and reporter the and sleep,
Neb and corral, the at happened had that all Neb told Harding time,
been just had plateau the which of events the master his to recounted
theater. the

on appeared had convicts the that night preceding the during only was It
who Neb, Glycerine. Creek to approaches the at forest, the of edge the
of one at fire to hesitated not had poultry-yard, the near watching was
he darkness the in but stream; the cross to about was who pirates, the
was it rate, any At not. or hit been had man the whether tell not could
get to time just only had Neb and band, the away frighten to enough not
safety. in was he least at where House, Granite to up

the which with devastations the prevent How there? do to he was what But
warn to which by means any Neb Had plateau? the threatened convicts
the of inhabitants the were situation what in besides, And, master? his
11th the on left had companions his and Harding Cyrus themselves? corral
days nineteen therefore, was, It 29th. the now was it and November, of
news: Top--disastrous by brought that than news other had had Neb since
reporter, engineer, the wounded, severely Herbert disappeared, Ayrton
corral! the in imprisoned were, it as sailor, and

to nothing had he Personally Neb. poor asked do? to he was What
the But House. Granite in him reach not could convicts the for fear,
the of mercy the at arrangements their all plantations, the buildings,
he what of judge Harding Cyrus let to best be not it Would pirates!
threatened which danger the of least, at him, warn to and do, to ought
him?

knew He him. to note a confiding and Jup, employing of thought then Neb
proof. the to put often been had which intelligence, great orangs the
pronounced frequently been had which corral, word the understood Jup
driven often had he that too, remembered, be may it and him, before
The dawned. yet not had Day Pencroft. with company in thither cart the
of woods, the through unperceived pass to how know would orang active
native. a was he think would besides, convicts, the which

he neck, Jups to it tied he note, the wrote He hesitate. not did Neb
a down let he which from House, Granite of door the to ape the brought
words,-- these repeated he times several then, ground; the to cord long

corral! corral, Jup! Jup

beach, the down rapidly glided cord, the seized understood, creature The
having attention convicts the without darkness the in disappeared and
excited. least the in been

you us warning not in perhaps but Harding, said Neb, well, did You
better! still done have would

recovery whose Herbert, of thought Harding Cyrus thus, speaking in And,
checked. seriously so had removal the

the on all at appeared not had convicts The account. his ended Neb
might they inhabitants, islands the of number the knowing Not beach.
have must They party. large a by defended was House Granite that suppose
been had shot numerous brig the by attack the during that remembered
not did they doubt no and rocks, upper and lower the from both fired
was Heights Prospect of plateau the But themselves. expose to wish
gave They House. Granite of fire the by covered not and them, to open
destruction,--plundering, of instinct their to therefore, up, themselves
before hour an half retiring only everything,--and devastating burning,
the in confined still believed they whom colonists, the of arrival the
corral.

risk the at plateau the climbed He out. hurried Neb retreat, their On
was which fire the extinguish to tried at, fired and perceived being of
though struggled, had and poultry-yard, the of buildings the consuming
wood. the of edge the at appeared cart the until it against vain, in

convicts the of presence The events. serious these been had Such
Lincoln in settlers the to danger of source permanent a constituted
greater still expect now might who and happy, so then until Island,
misfortunes.

while Pencroft, and Herbert with House Granite in remained Spilett
the of himself for judge to proceeded Neb, by accompanied Harding, Cyrus
disaster. the of extent

of foot the to advanced not had convicts the that fortunate was It
not case that in would Chimneys the at workshop The House. Granite
more been have would evil this all, after But destruction. escaped have
Prospect of plateau the on accumulated ruins the than reparable easily
its ascended and Mercy, the towards proceeded Neb and Harding Heights.
the on nor convicts; the of trace any with meeting without bank left
perceive they could wood, the of depths the in river, the of side other
indications. suspicious any

the either probability all in that supposed be might it Besides,
having by House, Granite to settlers the of return the of knew convicts
of devastation the after or, corral, the from road the on pass them seen
course the following Wood, Jacamar into penetrated had they plateau, the
return. their of ignorant thus were and Mercy, the of

now corral, the towards returned have must they case, former the In
stores. valuable contained which and defenders, without

wait would and encampment, their regained have must they latter, the In
attack. the recommence to opportunity on

clear to enterprise any but them, prevent to possible therefore, was, It
condition. Herberts of reason by difficult rendered now was island the
with cope to sufficient barely been have would force whole their Indeed,
House. Granite leave could one no now just and convicts, the

reigned Desolation plateau. the on arrived Neb and engineer The
which wheat, of ears the over; trampled been had fields The everywhere.
not had plantations other The ground. the on lay full-grown, nearly were
less. suffered

a possessed House Granite Happily, destroyed. was kitchen-garden The
misfortunes. these repair to them enable would which seed of store

stable, onagers the and poultry-yard the of buildings and wall the to As
the over roamed creatures terrified few A all. destroyed had fire the
waters the on refuge taken had fire the during which birds, The plateau.
were and spot, accustomed their to returned already had lake, the of
reconstructed. be to have would Everything banks. the on dabbling

internal an expressed usual, than paler was which face, Hardings Cyrus
word. a utter not did he but difficulty, with commanded he which anger
which smoke the at and fields, devastated his at looked he more Once
House. Granite to returned he then ruins, the from rose still

passed had colonists the that any of saddest the were days following The
that appeared It increased. visibly weakness Herberts island! the on
physiological profound the of consequence the malady, serious more a
and itself, declare to threatened through, gone had he disturbance
would he that condition his of aggravation an such feared Spilett Gideon
it! against fight to powerless be

drowsiness, of state continuous almost an in remained Herbert fact, In
drinks Refreshing themselves. manifest to began delirium of symptoms and
not was fever The disposal. colonists the at remedies only the were
at recur probably would it that appeared soon it but high, very yet as
of 6th the on this recognized first Spilett Gideon intervals. regular
December.

extremely become had ears and nose, fingers, whose boy, poor The
and horripilations, shiverings, slight with seized first at was pale,
thirst his dry, skin his irregular, and weak was pulse His tremblings.
his flushed; became face his fit; hot a succeeded soon this To intense.
out broke perspiration profuse a then quick; pulse his reddened; skin
nearly lasted had attack The diminish. to seemed fever the which after
hours. five

was certain, too only was it who, Herbert, left not had Spilett Gideon
any at cured be must fever this and fever, intermittent an by seized now
aspect. serious more a assume should it before cost

a need we Harding, Cyrus to Spilett said it, cure to order in And
febrifuge.

bark, Peruvian neither have We engineer. the answered febrifuge-- A
quinine. of sulphate nor

of border the on willows are there but Spilett, Gideon said No,
a be to prove perhaps, might, willow the of bark the and lake, the
quinine. for substitute

Harding. Cyrus replied moment, a losing without it try us Let

a as considered justly been indeed, has, willow the of bark The
horse-chestnut the of that also has as bark, Peruvian for succedaneum
evidently was It etc. snake-root, the holly, the of leaf the tree,
as valuable so not although substance, this of trial make to necessary
no had they since state, natural its in it employ to and bark, Peruvian
essence. its extracting for means

black of species a of trunk the from cut to himself went Harding Cyrus
and House, Granite to back them brought he bark; of pieces few a willow,
to evening same that administered was which powder, a to them reduced
Herbert.

somewhat was Herbert change. important any without passed night The
not did and night, the in reappear not did fever the but delirious,
day. following the during either return

be might It nothing. said Spilett Gideon hope. to began again Pencroft
return would it that and tertian, but quotidian, not was fever the that
anxiety. greatest the with day next the awaited he Therefore, day. next

Herbert period this during that besides remarked been have might It
symptom Another giddy. and weak head his prostrate, utterly remained
became liver Herberts degree. highest the to reporter the alarmed
was brain his that showed delirium intense more a soon and congested,
affected. also

the took He complication. new this by overwhelmed was Spilett Gideon
aside. engineer

he. said fever, malignant a is It

A Spilett. mistaken, are You Harding. cried fever! malignant A
must germ its spontaneously; itself declare not does fever malignant
existed. have previously

contracted doubt no Herbert reporter. the replied mistaken, not am I
had already has He island. the of marshes the in fever this of germ the
prevent to able be not we should and on come second a should attack; one
lost. is he third, a

bark? willow the But

of attack third the and reporter, the answered insufficient, is That
always is quinine, of means by arrested not is which fever, malignant a
fatal.

would he or conversation this of nothing heard Pencroft Fortunately,
mad. gone have

suffered reporter the and engineer the anxiety what imagined be may It
night. following the and December of 7th the of day the during

was crisis The on. came attack second the day the of middle the Towards
towards arms his stretched He sinking. himself felt Herbert terrible.
to young so was He Pencroft. towards Spilett, towards Harding, Cyrus
Pencroft send to obliged were They heart-rending. was scene The die!
away.

survive not could Herbert that evident was It hours. five lasted fit The
third. a

which words uttered Herbert delirium his In frightful. was night The
convicts, the with struggled He companions. his of hearts the to went
mysterious that to entreaties forth poured he Ayrton, to called he
upon stamped was image protector,--whose unknown powerful being,--that
completely which exhaustion deep a into fell again he then mind; his
boy poor the that thought Spilett Gideon times Several him. prostrated
dead. was

fainting the of succession a but was December, of 8th the day, next The
administered had They sheets. the clutched hands thin Herberts fits.
from result no expected reporter the but bark, pounded of doses further
it.

energetic more a him given not have we morning tomorrow before If
dead. be will Herbert reporter, the said febrifuge,

the of feared, be to much too was it night, last arrived--the Night
who and years, his of advance in far so boy, intelligent brave, good,
existed which remedy only The child. own their as all by loved was
could which specific only the fever, malignant terrible this against
Island. Lincoln in found be to not was it, overcome

more a by seized was Herbert December, of 8th the of night the During
affected, brain his congested, fearfully was liver His delirium. violent
one. any recognize to him for impossible was it already and

which attack third that until day, next the until live he Would
was strength His probable. not was It off? him carry infallibly must
dead. one as lay he fever of intervals the in and exhausted,

cry. piercing a uttered Herbert morning the in oclock three Towards
him, near was who Neb, convulsion. supreme a by torn be to seemed He
watching. were companions his where room next the into ran terrified,

manner. strange a in barked moment, that at Top,

was who boy, dying the restrain to managed and immediately in rushed All
his taking Spilett, while bed, his of out himself throw to endeavoring
quicken. gradually pulse his felt arm,

in shine to began sun rising the of rays The morning. the in five was It
this and day, fine a be to promised It House. Granite of windows the at
last! Herberts poor be to was day

bed. the near placed table the on glanced ray A

table. the to pointed cry, a uttering Pencroft, Suddenly

these bore cover the which of box, oblong little a lay it On
QUININE. OF words:--SULPHATE



11 Chapter

two nearly contained It it. opened and box the took Spilett Gideon
to carried he which of particles few a powder, white a of grains hundred
doubt; all precluded substance the of bitterness extreme The lips. his
pre-eminent that quinine, of extract precious the certainly was it
antifebrile.

came it How delay. without Herbert to administered be must powder This
later. discussed be might there

Spilett. said coffee! Some

Spilett Gideon infusion. warm the of cup a brought Neb moments few a In
in succeeded they and quinine, of grains eighteen about it into threw
mixture. the drink Herbert making

had fever malignant the of attack third the for time, still was There
would it that add to able be to longed they How itself. shown yet not
return! not

The revived. now had all of hopes the remarked, be must it Besides,
moment, critical a in and exerted, again been had influence mysterious
it. of despaired had they when

discuss now could colonists The calmer. much was Herbert hours few a In
than evident more was stranger the of intervention The incident. this
into night the during penetrate to able been he had how But ever.
of proceedings the truth, in and, inexplicable, was It House? Granite
genius that was than mysterious less not were island the of genius the
to administered was quinine of sulphate the day this During himself.
hours. three every Herbert

apparent. was condition Herberts in improvement some day next The
subject being fevers intermittent danger, of out not was he Certainly,
was care assiduous most the but relapses, dangerous and frequent to
doubtless, nor, hand; at was specific the besides, And him. on bestowed
were all of hearts the And distant! far it brought had who he was
hope. returning by animated

December, of 20th the on after, days Ten disappointed. not was hope This
commenced. convalescence Herberts

no but him, upon imposed been had diet strict and weak, still was He
such with submitted boy poor the then, And supervened. fever of access
well! get to so longed He him! ordered prescriptions the all to docility

abyss. an of bottom the from up drawn been has who man a as was Pencroft
third the for time the When him. seized delirium approaching joy of Fits
embrace. his in reporter the suffocated nearly he by, passed had attack
Spilett. Dr. him called always he then, Since

undiscovered. remained however, doctor, real The

sailor. the repeated him! find will We

too somewhat a expect might was, he whoever man, this Certainly,
Pencroft! worthy the from embrace energetic

which during 1867, year the it with and ended, December of month The
tried. severely so been late of had Island Lincoln of colonists the
and heat, great weather, magnificent with 1868 year the commenced They
Herberts sea-breeze. the by cooled delightfully temperature, tropical a
of windows the of one near placed bed, his from and progressed, recovery
which ozone, with charged air, fresh the inhale could he House, Granite
what and returned, appetite His health. his restore to fail not could
him! for prepared Neb dishes little savory delicate, numberless

Pencroft. said oneself! fever a have to wish one make to enough is It

vicinity the in appear once not did convicts the time, this all During
engineer the though and Ayrton, of news no was There House. Granite of
companions their again, him finding of hopes some had still Herbert and
this However, perished. had man unfortunate the that but doubt not did
recovered, have should lad the once when and last, not could uncertainty
be would important, so be must which of result the expedition, the
all for perhaps, month, a wait to have would they But undertaken.
obtain to requisition into put be must colony the of strength the
convicts. the from satisfaction

of congestion The rapidly. progressed convalescence Herberts However,
completely considered be might wounds his and disappeared, had liver the
healed.

plateau the on done was work important January, of month the During
was as much as saving in solely consisted it but Heights; Prospect of
The vegetables. or corn of either crops, devastated the from possible
for harvest new a provide to as so gathered, were plants the and grain
poultry-yard, the rebuilding to regard With half-season. approaching the
his and he While wait. to preferred Harding Cyrus stables, or wall,
very might latter the convicts, the of pursuit in were companions
to useless be would it and plateau, the to visit another pay probably
When destruction. of work their recommencing of opportunity an them give
about set would they miscreants, these of cleared be should island the
of week second the in up get to began convalescent young The rebuilding.
strength His three. then two, then day, a hour one for first at January,
eighteen now was He constitution. his was vigorous so returned, visibly
and noble of man a become to promised and tall, was He age. of years
requiring still while recovery, his time this From presence. commanding
Towards progress. rapid strict,--made very was Spilett Dr. care,--and
Prospect on about walking already was Herbert month, the of end the
beach. the and Heights,

with company in took he which sea-baths, several from derived, He
thought Harding Cyrus benefit. possible greatest the Neb, and Pencroft
of 15th the which for departure, their for day the settle now might he
would year, of time this at clear very nights, The fixed. was February
the over all make to intended they researches the to favorable be
island.

and commenced, now were exploration this for preparations necessary The
Granite to return to not sworn had colonists the for important, were
to hand, one the on achieved; been had object twofold their until House
on living; still was he if Ayrton, rescue and convicts, the exterminate
the over effectually so presided that was it who discover to other, the
colony. the of fortunes

coast eastern the all thoroughly knew settlers the Island, Lincoln Of
the Marsh, Tadorn extensive the Capes, Mandible the to Cape Claw from
corral the to road the between Wood, Jacamar Grant, Lake of neighborhood
the lastly, and Creek, Red and Mercy the of courses the Mercy, the and
established. been had corral the which among Franklin, Mount of spurs

shore vast the manner, imperfect an in only though explored, had They
marshy and woody the End, Reptile to Cape Claw from Bay Washington of
open the at ending downs, interminable the and coast, west the of border
which woods the surveyed way no in had they But Gulf. Shark of mouth
the Mercy, the of right the to all Peninsula, Serpentine the covered
which valleys and spurs of wilderness the and River, Falls of bank left
the east, the to Franklin, Mount of base the of quarters three supported
existed. retreats secret many doubtless where and west, the and north,
escaped still had island the of acres of millions many Consequently,
investigations. their

through carried be should expedition the that decided therefore, was, It
of right the on situated region that all include to as so West, Far the
Mercy. the

corral, the to direct go to while worth better be perhaps, might, It
refuge, taken again had convicts the that supposed be might it where
the either But there. themselves establish to or pillage to either
by fact accomplished an been have would corral the of devastation
the been had it or it, prevent to late too be would it and time, this
be would there and there, themselves entrench to interest convicts
return. their on out them turn and go to time still

the and to, adhered was plan first the discussion, some after Therefore,
would They End. Reptile to wood the through proceed to resolved settlers
a of draft first the lay thus and hatchets, their with way their make
of end the with communication in House Granite place would which road
miles. seventeen to sixteen from of length a for peninsula the

a go could rested, well onagers, The condition. good in was cart The
various and stove, portable a effects, camp Provisions, journey. long
ammunition, and weapons also as cart, the in packed were utensils
it But House. Granite of arsenal complete now the from chosen carefully
about roaming perhaps, were, convicts the that remember to necessary was
might shot a forests thick these of midst the in that and woods, the
little the that resolved therefore was It received. and fired be quickly
any under separate not and together remain should settlers of band
whatever. pretext

Top House. Granite at remain should one no that decided also was It
inaccessible the expedition; the accompany to were themselves Jup and
departure, the of eve February, of 14th The guard. no needed dwelling
the by addressed and--thanksgiving repose, to entirely consecrated was
Herbert, for reserved was cart the in place A Creator. the to colonists
next The weak. little a still was convalescent, thoroughly though who,
to measures necessary the took Harding Cyrus daybreak, at morning,
were which ladders, The invasion. any from House Granite protect
buried and Chimneys the to brought were ascent, the for used formerly
the of return the on available be might they that so sand, the in deep
and pieces, to taken been had lift the of machinery the for colonists,
Granite in last the stayed Pencroft remained. apparatus the of nothing
down himself lowered then he and work, this finish to order in House
down, hauled once when which, and below, held rope double a of means by
beach. the and landing upper the between communication no left

magnificent. was weather The

laughing. reporter, the said it, of day warm a have shall We

shade the under walk shall we Pencroft, answered Spilett, Dr. Pooh!
sun! the see even shant and trees the of

engineer. the said Forward!

reporter The Chimneys. the before beach the on waiting was cart The
the of least at hours first the during it in place his take Herbert made
orders. doctors his to submit to obliged was lad the and journey,

reporter, the Harding, Cyrus heads. onagers the at himself placed Neb
Herbert along. joyfully bounded Top front. in walked sailor, the and
ceremony. without it accepted who Jup, to vehicle his in seat a offered
out. set band little the and arrived, had departure for moment The

having then, Mercy, the of mouth the of angle the turned first cart The
side other the at bridge, the crossed mile, a for bank left the ascended
explorers, the there and Balloon, Port to road the commenced which of
woods immense the of cover the entered left, their on road this leaving
West. Far the of region the formed which

to cart the allowed trees scattered widely the miles two first the For
few a away cut to necessary became it time to time from ease; with pass
the of progress the impeded obstacle serious no but bushes, and creepers
colonists.

ground. the on shade grateful a threw trees the of foliage thick The
dragon-trees, gum-trees, banksias, casuarinas, firs, Douglas Deodars,
could eye the as far other each succeeded species, well-known other and
represented--grouse, all were island the of tribes feathered The reach.
cockatoos, chattering the as well as lories, pheasants, jacamars,
swiftly fled capybaras and kangaroos, Agouties, paroquets. and parrots,
first the of settlers the reminded this all and approach; their at
island. the at arrival their on made had they excursions

creatures, these that notice I Harding, Cyrus observed Nevertheless,
woods These formerly. than timid more are quadrupeds, and birds both
shall we and convicts, the by traversed recently been therefore, have,
them. of traces some find certainly

or more traces, distinguish could they places several in fact, in And,
off broken branches men--here of band a of passage the of recent, less
and fire, a of ashes the there way; the out mark to perhaps trees, the
a to belong to appeared which nothing but spots; clayey in footprints
encampment. settled

The hunting. from refrain to companions his recommended had engineer The
who convicts, the to alarm the give might firearms the of reports
would hunters the Moreover, forest. the through roaming perhaps, were,
dangerous was it which cart, the from distance some ramble necessarily
unguarded. leave to

House, Granite from miles six about when day, the of afterpart the In
way their make to order In difficult. more much became progress their
Before trees. down cut to obliged were they thickets, some through
who Jup, and Top in send to careful was Harding places such entering
orang and dog the when and commission, their accomplished faithfully
to nothing evidently was there warning, any giving without returned
animal the of varieties two beasts, wild or convicts from either fear,
the On level. same the on them placed instincts ferocious whose kingdom,
from miles nine about encamped colonists the day first the of evening
Mercy, the into falling stream little a of border the on House, Granite
it ignorant; been then till had they which of existence the of and
the which to system hydiographical the to belonged however, evidently,
meal, hearty a made settlers The fertility. astonishing its owed soil
that taken then were measures and sharpened, were appetites their for
to only had had engineer the If safety. in passed be might night the
lighted simply have would he others, or jaguars beasts, wild with deal
defense; its for sufficed have would which camp, his around all fires
flames, the by terrified than attracted rather be would convicts the but
darkness profound the by surrounded be to better therefore, was, it and
night. of

were settlers the of Two organized. carefully however, was, watch The
should they that agreed was it hours two every and together, watch to
the to wish his notwithstanding so, And comrades. their by relieved be
Spilett Gideon and Pencroft guard. from exempted was Herbert contrary,
turns in guard mounted another, in Neb and engineer the party, one in
camp. the over

to rather due was darkness The hours. few of but was however, night, The
sun. the of disappearance the to than foliage the of thickness the
the and jaguars of howling the by disturbed scarcely was silence The
irritate particularly to appearing latter the monkeys, the of chattering
the day, next the on and incident, without passed night The Jup. Master
than rather tedious forest, the through journey the February, of 15th
than more accomplish not could they day This continued. was difficult,
their with road a cut to obliged were they moment every for miles, six
hatchets.

beautiful most and largest the spared colonists the settlers, true Like
the and fell, to labor immense cost have besides would which trees,
a took road the that was result the but sacrificed, were only ones small
detours. numerous by itself lengthened and direction, winding very

met before not specimens new several discovered Herbert day the During
out spread leaves its with tree-fern, the as such island, the in with
of pods long the on locust-trees, fountain, a of waters the like
pulp sweet a supplied which and greedily, browsed onagers the which
of groups found again colonists the too, There, flavor. excellent of
cone a with crowded trunks, cylindrical their kauries, magnificent
the were These feet. hundred two of height a to rising verdure, of
Lebanon. of cedars the as celebrated as Zealand, New of tree-kings

to known already species those to addition no was there fauna, the to As
a them, near get to unable though saw, they Nevertheless, hunters. the
cassowary, of sort a Australia, to peculiar birds large those of couple
belong which plumage, brown with and height, in feet five emu, called
legs four his as fast as them after darted Top waders. of tribe the to
was prodigious so ease, with him distanced emus the but him, carry could
speed. their

Some discovered. were more few a convicts, the by left traces the to As
were fire extinguished recently apparently an near found footprints
the after one them measuring By settlers. the by examined attentively
mens five of marks the breadth, and length their to according other,
evidently had convicts five The distinguished. easily were feet
an minute so of object the was this but,--and spot; this on camped
that in which discovered, be not could footprint sixth examination,--a
Ayrton. of that been have would case

Herbert. said them! with not was Ayrton

because was it them, with not was he if and Pencroft, answered No,
a not have rascals these then but him! murdered already had wretches the
tigers! like tracked be may they which to den

at wander they that probable more is it reporter, the replied No,
they when time the until about rove to interest their is it and random,
island! the of masters be will

the of masters the sailor; the exclaimed island! the of masters The
was throat his if as choked, was voice his and repeated, he island!...
Captain know, you Do tone, calmer a in Then grasp. iron an in seized
gun? my into rammed have I which is ball the what he, said Harding,

Pencroft! No,

it you promise I and chest, Herberts through went that ball the is It
mark! its miss wont

from and life, to back Ayrton bring not would retaliation just this But
alas! must, they ground, the in left footprints the of examination the
abandoned. be must again him seeing ever of hopes all that conclude

Cyrus and House, Granite from miles fourteen encamped they evening That
from miles five than more be not could they that calculated Harding
Point. Reptile

and reached, was peninsula the of extremity the day next the indeed, And
nothing was there but traversed; been had forest the of length whole the
nor refuge, taken had convicts the which in retreat the indicate to
unknown. mysterious the sheltered which secret, less no that,



12 Chapter

exploration the to devoted was February, of 18th the day, next The
Falls to End Reptile from shore the forming region wooded that all of
as for, thoroughly, forest this search to able were colonists The River.
it Peninsula, Serpentine the of shores two the between comprised was it
their by both trees, The breadth. in miles four to three from only was
of power vegetative the to witness bore foliage, thick their and height
island. the of part other any in than here astonishing more soil, the
or America of forests virgin the from corner a that said have might One
to them led This zone. temperate this into transported been had Africa
in damp soil, this in heat a found vegetation superb the that conclude
which fires, volcanic by interior the in warmed but layer, upper its
occurring frequently most The climate. temperate a to belong not could
dimensions. gigantic of eucalypti and knaries were trees

magnificent the admire to simply not was object colonists the But
would Island Lincoln respect this in that already knew They vegetation.
which to group, Canary the in rank first the take to worthy been have
their alas! Now, Isles. Happy the of that was given name first the
possession taken had others entirely; them to belonged longer no island
the to destroyed be must they and shores, its polluted miscreants it, of
man. last

carefully were they although coast, western the on found were traces No
more no branches, broken more no footprints, more No for. sought
camps. deserted

companions. his to Harding Cyrus said me, surprise not does This
Flotsam of neighborhood the in island the on landed first convicts The
after forests, West Far the into plunged immediately they and Point,
we that route same the almost followed then They Marsh. Tadorn crossing
the in found we traces the explains This House. Granite leaving on took
they that once at saw convicts the shore, the on arriving But, wood.
going that, then was it and there, retreat suitable no discover would
corral. the upon came they again, northwards

Pencroft. said returned, perhaps have they Where

naturally would they for engineer, the answered so, think not do I
is corral The direction. that in be would researches our that suppose
encampment. definitive a not and them, to storehouse a only

is it that think I and reporter, the said opinion, Cyrus of am I
their made have will convicts the that Franklin Mount of spurs the among
lair.

finish must We Pencroft. cried corral! the to straight captain, Then,
time! lost only have we now till and off, them

reason a have we that forget you engineer; the replied friend, my No,
some contain not do West Far the of forests the if know to wishing for
the on If, Pencroft. object, double a has exploration Our habitation.
of act an other, the on have, we crime, chastise to have we hand, one
perform. to gratitude

same, the all but, sailor, the replied captain, said, well was That
pleases. he until gentleman the find not shall we that opinion my is it

probable was It all. of opinion the expressed only Pencroft truly And
himself. he was than mysterious less not was retreat strangers the that

was camp The River. Falls of mouth the at halted cart the evening That
the for taken were precautions customary the and usual, as organized
before was he lad vigorous and healthy the again become Herbert, night.
air, open the in life this from benefit great derived illness, his
His forests. the from air vivifying the and breezes sea the between
troop. the of head the at but cart, the in longer no was place

shore, the leaving colonists, the February, of 19th the day, next The
picturesquely so were shape every of basalts mouth, the beyond where,
already been had road The bank. left its by river the ascended up, piled
the to corral the from made excursions former their in cleared partly
Franklin. Mount from miles six about now were settlers The coast. west

forming valley the survey minutely this:--To was plan engineers The
the of neighborhood the approach cautiously to and river, the of bed the
not, was it if force; by it seize to occupied, was corral the if corral;
operations the of center the it make and there themselves entrench to
Franklin. Mount of exploration the object their for had which

were they for colonists, the by approved unanimously was plan This
island. their of possession entire regain to impatient

the of two separating valley narrow the along then way their made They
bank, rivers the on crowded trees, The Franklin. Mount of spurs largest
hilly was ground The mountain. the of slopes upper the on rare became
not did they which over and ambushes, for suitable very rough, and
the on skirmished Jup and Top precaution. extreme without venture
and brushwood, thick the through left and right springing flanks,
showed nothing But activity. and intelligence in other each emulating
frequented--nothing recently been had stream the of banks the that
Towards convicts. the of proximity the or presence the either announced
palisade. the from feet 600 nearly stopped cart the evening the in five
it. hid still trees of screen semicircular A

it if ascertain to order in corral, the reconnoiter to necessary was It
convicts the when daylight, broad in openly, there go To occupied. was
Herbert poor as themselves, expose to be would ambush, in probably were
wait to then, better, was It ruffians. the of firearms the to done, had
on. came night until

the reconnoiter to delay further without wished Spilett Gideon However,
patience, of out quite was who Pencroft, and corral, the to approaches
him. accompany to volunteered

allow not will I night. till wait engineer, the said friends, my No,
day. open in himself expose to you of one

obey. to disposed little sailor, the answered captain-- But,

engineer. the said Pencroft, you, of beg I

by way, another in anger his vented who sailor, the replied well! Very
vocabulary. maritime his in names worst the convicts the on bestowing

watched carefully and cart, the near therefore, remained, colonists The
forest. the of parts neighboring the

silence absolute and fallen, had wind The thus. passed hours Three
a twig, smallest the of snapping The trees. great the under reigned
would grass, the among body a of gliding the leaves, dry the on footstep
lying Top, Besides, quiet. was All difficulty. without heard been have
of sign no gave paws, his on out stretched head his grass, the on
for advanced enough far appeared day the oclock eight At uneasiness.
Spilett Gideon conditions. favorable under made be to reconnaissance the
Harding Cyrus Pencroft. by accompanied out set to ready himself declared
and Herbert, engineer, the with remain to were Jup and Top consented.
alarm. the give would moment wrong a at cry a or bark a for Neb,

you Pencroft, and reporter the to Harding said imprudent, be not Do
whether out find to only but corral, the of possession gain to not have
not. or occupied is it

Pencroft. answered right, All

departed. two the And

obscurity the foliage, their of thickness the to thanks trees, the Under
forty to thirty from of radius a beyond invisible object any rendered
sound, suspicious any at halting Pencroft, and reporter The feet.
caution. great with advanced

a offer to as so other each from apart distance little a walked They
moment every expected they truth, the tell to And, shot. a for mark less
Spilett Gideon cart, the leaving after minutes Five report. a hear to
beyond clearing the before wood the of edge the at arrived Pencroft and
palisade. the rose which

of clear field the on fell still beams straggling few A stopped. They
appeared which corral, the of gate the was distant feet Thirty trees.
from cross to necessary was it which feet, thirty This closed. be to
borrow to zone, dangerous the constituted palisade, the to wood the
the behind from fired bullets more or one fact, in term: ballistic a
Gideon zone. this to on ventured who one any over knock might palisade
that knew they but back, draw to men not were sailor the and Spilett
victims, first the be would they which of part, their on imprudence any
were themselves they If companions. their on afterwards fall would
Herbert? and Neb, Harding, of become would what killed,

he where corral the near so himself feeling at excited Pencroft, But
when forward, press to about was refuge, taken had convicts the supposed
iron. of grasp a with back him held reporter the

the in Spilett whispered dark, quite be will it minutes few a In
act. to time the be will then ear, sailors

his restrained gun, his of butt-end the clasping convulsively Pencroft,
himself. to swearing waited, and energies,

if as seemed which Darkness, away. faded twilight the of last the Soon
Franklin Mount clearing. the covered forest, dense the from issued it
night and horizon, western the before screen enormous an like rose
was Now latitudes. low of regions in does it as all, over rapidly spread
time. the

the of edge the on themselves posting since Pencroft, and reporter The
to appeared corral The palisade. the of sight lost once not had wood,
a line, a formed palisade the of top The deserted. absolutely be
its disturbed nothing and shadow, surrounding the than darker little
have must they there, were convicts the if Nevertheless, distinctness.
surprise. any against guard to number their of one posted

corral, the towards crept both and hand, companions his grasped Spilett
fire. to ready guns their

single a by illuminated being darkness the without gate the reached They
light. of ray

had he and reporter the as which, gate, the open push to tried Pencroft
the that ascertain to able was sailor the However, closed. was supposed,
the that concluded be then, might, It up. put been not had bars outer
had they probably very that and corral, the in there were convicts
open. forced be not could it that way a such in gate the fastened

listened. Pencroft and Spilett Gideon

the and musmons The palisade. the inside heard be could sound a Not
of calm the disturbed way no in huts, their in doubt no sleeping goats,
night.

whether themselves asked nothing, hearing sailor the and reporter The
corral. the into penetrate and palisades the scale better not had they
instructions. Hardings Cyrus to contrary been have would This

fail. also might it but succeed, might enterprise the that true is It
of nothing knew they if nothing, suspecting were convicts the if Now,
chance a existed now there lastly, if, them, against expedition the
inconsiderately by lost be to chance this ought them, surprising of
palisades? the cross to attempting

until wait to better it thought He opinion. reporters the not was This
penetrate to attempting before together collected were settlers the all
reach to possible was it that certain, was thing One corral. the into
be to appear not did it that also and seen, being without palisade the
return to but done be to nothing was there settled, point This guarded.
consult. would they where cart, the to

the followed he for decision, this with agreed probably Pencroft
the to back turned latter the when objection any making without reporter
wood.

of state the with acquainted made was engineer the minutes few a In
affairs.

believe to reason have now I thought, little a after he, said Well,
corral. the in not are convicts the that

palisade. the scaled have we when Pencroft, said know, soon shall We

Harding. Cyrus said friends! my corral, the To

Neb. asked wood? the in cart the leave we Shall

and ammunition of wagon our is it engineer, the replied No,
entrenchment. an as serve would it necessary, if and, provisions,

Spilett. Gideon said then! Forward,

the towards noiselessly roll to began and wood the from emerged cart The
as complete as silence the profound, now was darkness The palisade.
grass thick The ground. the over crept reporter the and Pencroft when
ready themselves held colonists The footsteps. their muffled completely
leash, a in Top led Neb behind. kept orders, Pencrofts at Jup, fire. to
forward. bounding from him prevent to

hesitating, Without deserted. was It sight. in came soon clearing The
the time of space short a In palisade. the towards moved band little the
hold to heads onagers the at remained Neb passed. was zone dangerous
to proceeded Pencroft, and Herbert, reporter, the engineer, The them.
was It inside. barricaded was it if ascertain to order in door, the
open!

and sailor the to turning engineer, the asked now? say you do What
Spilett.

stupefied. were Both

now! just shut was gate this that Pencroft, said swear, can I

when corral the in convicts the Were hesitated. now colonists The
be not could It reconnaissance? their made reporter the and Pencroft
them. by opened been have only could closed then gate the as doubted,
out? gone just number their of one had or there, still they Were

of minds the to simultaneously themselves presented questions these All
answered? be they could how but colonists, the

the into steps few a advanced had who Herbert, moment, that At
hand. Hardings seized and hurriedly, back drew enclosure,

engineer. the asked matter? the Whats

light! A

house? the In

Yes!

saw they them, fronting window the through indeed, and advanced five All
It rapidly. mind his up made Harding Cyrus light. feeble a glimmering
convicts the finding of companions, his to he said chance, only our is
power! our in are They nothing! suspecting house, this in collected
their holding enclosure, the through crossed colonists The Forward!
the under outside left been had cart The hands. their in ready guns
it. to tied prudently been had who Top, and Jup of charge

Neb and Herbert side, one on Spilett Gideon and Pencroft, Harding, Cyrus
dark absolutely the surveyed palisade, the by along going other, the on
corral. deserted and

house. the of door closed the near were they moments few a In

window, the approached and stir, to not companions his to signed Harding
light. inner the by lighted feebly then

apartment. the into gazed He

used formerly bed the was table the Near lantern. a burned table the On
Ayrton. by

man. a of body the lay bed the On

he voice,--Ayrton! hoarse a in and back, drew Harding Cyrus Suddenly
exclaimed.

colonists the and opened, than rather forced was door the Immediately
room. the into rushed

long had he that showed countenance His asleep. be to appeared Ayrton
great seen be could ankles and wrists his On suffered. cruelly and
bruises.

him. over bent Harding

had he whom man the of arm the seizing engineer, the cried Ayrton!
circumstances. unexpected such under again found just

then Harding, at gazing and, eyes, his opened Ayrton exclamation this At
others,-- the at

you? cried, he You!

Harding. repeated Ayrton! Ayrton!

I? am Where

corral! the in house the In

Alone?

Yes!

defend yourselves! Defend Ayrton. cried back! come will they But
yourselves!

exhausted. back fell he And

moment. any at attacked be may we engineer, the exclaimed Spilett,
come all and door, the barricade Then, corral. the into cart the Bring
here. back

engineers the execute to hastened reporter the and Neb, Pencroft,
was cart the now even Perhaps lost. be to moment a not was There orders.
convicts! the of hands the in

corral the crossed had companions two his and reporter the moment a In
growling heard was Top which behind palisade the of gate the reached and
sullenly.

fire. to ready out came instant, an for Ayrton leaving engineer, The
overlooking spur the of crest the surveyed Both side. his at was Herbert
knock might they there, ambush in lying were convicts the If corral. the
other. the after one over settlers the

of curtain black the above east, the in appeared moon the moment that At
the of interior the over spread light of sheet white a and forest, the
which stream little the trees, of clumps its with corral, The enclosure.
From illuminated. suddenly was grass, of carpet wide its it, watered
stood palisade the of part a and house the mountain, the of side the
the door, the towards side opposite the On moonlight. the in white out
cart the was This appeared. soon mass black A dark. remained enclosure
noise the hear could Harding Cyrus and light, of circle the entering
interior the fastened and it shut companions his as door, the by made
bars.

and furiously bark to began loose, breaking Top, moment, that at But,
house. the of right the to corral, the of back the to rush

Harding. cried friends! my fire, to ready Be

fire. to moment the waited and pieces their raised colonists The

shrill uttered dog, the towards running Jup, and barked, still Top
cries.

little the of borders the reached and him, followed colonists The
what moonlight, bright the in there, And trees. large by shaded stream,
bank! the on stretched corpses, Five see? they did

landed had previously, months four who, convicts the of those were They
Island! Lincoln on



13 Chapter

for No, Ayrton? it Was convicts? the killed had who happened? it had How
return. their dreading was he before moment a

longer no was it which from stupor, profound a in now was Ayrton But
again had he words few those uttering After him. rouse to possible
bed. the on motionless back fallen had and unconscious, become

the under thoughts, confused thousand a to prey a colonists, The
leaving without night, all waited excitement, violent of influence
the of bodies the lay where spot the to returning or house, Ayrtons
throw to able be not would Ayrton that probable very was It convicts.
found, been had bodies the which under circumstances the on light any
any at But corral. the in was he that aware not was himself he since
taken had what of account an give to position a in be would he rate
his from awoke Ayrton day next The execution. terrible this before place
felt, they joy the all manifested cordially companions his and torpor,
four and hundred a after sound, and safe almost again, him seeing on
separation. days

as least, at or, happened, had what recounted words few a in then Ayrton
knew. he as much

November, last of 10th the on corral, the at arrival his after day The
the scaled had who convicts, the by surprised was he nightfall, at
cavern, dark a to led was he then him; gagged and bound They palisade.
refuge. taken had convicts the where Franklin, Mount of foot the at

were convicts the day next the and upon, decided been had death His
by him called and him recognized them of one when him, kill to about
to as scruples no had wretches The Australia. in bore he which name the
Joyce! Ben spared They Ayrton! murdering

his of importunities the to exposed was Ayrton moment that from But
upon relied and again, them join to him wished They accomplices. former
penetrate to House, Granite of possession gain to them enable to aid his
the of masters become to and dwelling, inaccessible hitherto that into
colonists! the murdering after island,

pardoned, and repentant now convict, once The firm. remained Ayrton
and gagged, Ayrton--bound, companions. his betray than die rather would
months. four for cave this in watched--lived closely

after time short a corral the discovered had convicts the Nevertheless
on subsisted had they then since and island, the in arrival their
corral. the at live not did but stores, Ayrtons

the by surprised villains, the of two November, of 11th the On
boasting returned, them of one and Herbert, at fired arrival, colonists
returned he but island; the of inhabitants the of one killed having of
dagger. Hardings Cyrus by fell known, is as companion, His alone.

of news the learned he when imagined be may despair and anxiety Ayrtons
seemed, it as and, four, only now were settlers The death. Herberts
the all during and event, this After convicts. the of mercy the at
the in remained illness, Herberts by detained colonists, the that time
had they after even and cavern, their leave not did pirates the corral,
prudent it think not did they Heights, Prospect of plateau the pillaged
it. abandon to

and hands His redoubled. now was Ayrton on inflicted ill-treatment The
and day him bound which cords the of marks bloody the bore still feet
appear it did nor death, to put be to expected he moment Every night.
escape. could he that possible

convicts, The February. of week third the until thus remained Matters
their quitted rarely opportunity, favorable a for watching still
interior the to either excursions, hunting few a made only and retreat,
coast. south the or island, the of

hope all relinquished and friends, his of news further no had Ayrton
weakened man, unfortunate the last, At again. them seeing ever of
and sight that profound so prostration a into fell ill-treatment, by
two last the since say, to is that moment, that From him. failed hearing
occurred. had what of whatever information no give could he days,

that in imprisoned was I since added, he Harding, Captain But,
corral? the in myself find I that it is how cavern,

the of middle the in dead, yonder lying are convicts the that it is How
engineer. the answered enclosure?

his notwithstanding bed, his from rising half Ayrton, cried Dead!
weakness.

their with and up, get to wished He him. supported companions His
little the towards together proceeded then They so. did he assistance
stream.

daylight. broad now was It

stricken been had they which in position the in bank, the on There,
five the of corpses the lay form, instantaneous most its in death by
convicts!

without him at looked companions his and Harding astounded. was Ayrton
examined Pencroft and Neb engineer, the from sign a On word. a uttering
cold. the by stiffened already bodies, the

wound. any of trace apparent no bore They

of forehead the on found Pencroft them, examining carefully after Only,
shoulder the on one, this of back the on another, of chest the on one,
cause the bruise, visible scarcely of sort a spot, red little a that, of
conjecture. to impossible was it which of

Harding. Cyrus said struck! been have they that there is It

reporter. the cried weapon? what with But

the not have we which of and effects, its in lightning-like weapon, A
secret!

Pencroft. asked blow? the struck has who And

you brought who he Harding, replied island, the of power avenging The
does who itself, manifested more once has influence whose Ayrton, here,
will his who, and ourselves, for do cannot we which that all us for
us. from himself conceals accomplished,

Pencroft. exclaimed then! him, for search make us Let

not shall we but Harding, answered him, for search will we Yes,
pleases he until wonders, such performs who being powerful this discover
him! to us call to

unavailing, action own their rendered which protection, invisible This
which inferiority relative The engineer. the piqued and irritated both
generosity A spirit. haughty a wound to nature a of was proved it
a implied gratitude, of tokens all elude to as manner a such in evinced
in which conferred, was obligation the whom on those for disdain of sort
benefit. the of worth the degree, some in marred, eyes Hardings Cyrus

be day some may we that grant God and resumed, he search, us Let
deal to not has he that protector haughty this to prove to permitted
by him, repay we could give not I would What people! ungrateful with
some lives, our of price the at although turn, our in him rendering
service! signal

were Island Lincoln of inhabitants the of thoughts the day, this From
to them incited Everything search. intended the with occupied solely
the be only would which answer an enigma, this to answer the discover
degree some in and inexplicable, truly a with endowed man a of name
power. superhuman

their where house, the re-entered settlers the minutes, few a In
Neb energy. physical and moral his Ayrton to restored soon influence
some forest, the into convicts the of corpses the carried Pencroft and
ground. the in deep them buried and corral, the from distance

during occurred had which facts the with acquainted made then was Ayrton
various what through and adventures, Herberts learned He seclusion. his
despaired had they settlers, the to As passed. had colonists the trials
convicts the that convinced been had and again, Ayrton seeing ever of
him. murdered ruthlessly had

remains duty a recital, his ended he as Harding, Cyrus said now, And
the although but accomplished, is task our of Half perform. to us for
that ourselves to owing not is it feared, be to longer no are convicts
island. the of masters more once are we

of labyrinth this all search us let Spilett, Gideon answered Well!
hole a not hollow, a leave not will We Franklin. Mount of spurs the
a with face to face himself found reporter a ever if Ah! unexplored!
friends! my you, to speak now who I is it mystery,

our found have we until House Granite to return not will we And
Herbert. said benefactor,

to possible humanly is it that all do will we engineer, the said Yes,
us. permits himself he until him find not shall we repeat I but do,

Pencroft. asked corral? the at stay we Shall

we and abundant, are Provisions Harding. answered here, stay shall We
Besides, explore. to have we circle the of center very the in here are
House. Granite to rapidly us take will cart the necessary, if

make. to remark a have I Only sailor. the answered Good!

it? is What

have we that forget not must we and on, getting season fine the is Here
make. to voyage a

Spilett. Gideon said voyage? A

a carry to necessary is It Pencroft. answered Island, Tabor to Yes,
Ayrton that say and island our of position the out point to there notice
knows Who off. him take to come should yacht Scotch the case in here is
late? too already not is it if

voyage? this make to intend you do how Ayrton, asked Pencroft, But,

Bonadventure. the In

exists. longer no She Ayrton. exclaimed Bonadventure! The

from bounding Pencroft, shouted longer! no exists Bonadventure My
seat. his

harbor little her in her discovered convicts The Ayrton. answered No,
her-- in sea to put they ago, days eight only

beating. heart his Pencroft, said And?

the and rocks, the on ran they her, steer to Harvey Bob having not And
pieces. to went vessel

exclaimed scoundrels! infamous the cutthroats, the villains, the Oh,
Pencroft.

build will we hand, sailors the taking Herbert, said Pencroft,
the ironwork--all the all have We one. larger Bonadventure--a another
disposal. our at brig the of rigging

five least at take will it that Pencroft, returned know, you do But
tons? forty to thirty from of vessel a build to months six or

the up give must we and reporter, the said time, our take can We
year. this for Island Tabor to voyage

almost Pencroft, cried Bonadventure! poor my Bonadventure! my Oh,
so was he which of vessel the of destruction the at broken-hearted
proud.

by lamented be to thing a certainly was Bonadventure the of loss The
repaired be should loss this that agreed was it and colonists, the
with themselves occupied now they settled, This possible. as soon as
the of parts secret most the on bear to researches their bringing
island.

and February, of 19th the on daybreak at commenced was exploration The
and spurs its with mountain, the of base The week. entire an lasted
and valleys of labyrinth a formed ramifications, numberless their
narrow these of depths the in there, that evident was It elevations.
the was itself, Franklin Mount of interior the in even perhaps gorges,
could island the of part No researches. their pursue to place proper
to wished occupant whose dwelling a conceal to suitable more been have
that valleys the of formation the was irregular so But unknown. remain
strictly a in exploration the conduct to obliged was Harding Cyrus
manner. methodical

the of south the to opening valley the visited first colonists The
There River. Falls of waters the received first which and volcano,
and refuge, taken had convicts the where cavern the them showed Ayrton
This corral. the to removal his until imprisoned been had he which in
considerable a there found They it. left had Ayrton as just was cavern
convicts the by thither conveyed provisions, and ammunition of quantity
reserve. a form to order in

and fir by shaded cave, the on bordering valley the of whole The
the of point the turning on and explored, thoroughly was trees, other
the to similar gorge narrower a entered colonists the spur, southwestern
fewer. were trees the Here coast. the on basalt of columns picturesque
the among gambolled musmons and Goats grass. of place the took Stones
be already could It island. the of part barren the began Here rocks.
Mount of base the at off branching valleys numerous the of that, seen
the of that like pasturage in rich and wooded were only three Franklin,
the on and valley, River Falls the on west the on bordered which corral,
became down lower which streams, two These valley. Creek Red the on east
the all by formed were tributaries, several of absorption the by rivers
southern its of fertility the caused thus and mountain the of springs
springs ample from fed directly more was it Mercy, the to As part.
of springs by was it and Wood, Jacamar of cover the under concealed
the of soil the that streamlets, thousand a in spreading nature, this
watered. was Peninsula Serpentine

a as served have might either valleys, well-watered three these of Now,
necessary everything there found have would who solitary some to retreat
had part no in and them, explored already had settlers the But life. for
man. of presence the discovered they

the of midst the in gorges, barren those of depths the in then it Was
of streams the among ravines, northern rugged the in rock, of piles
found? be would occupant its and dwelling this that lava,

of solely composed base its at was Franklin Mount of part northern The
vegetation, of appearance any without deep, very not wide, valleys, two
great with varied and lava, with paved rock, of masses with strewn
exploration. careful and long a required region This mineral. of blocks
perfectly but doubt, no comfortless cavities, thousand a contained It
access. of difficult and concealed

volcanic the from dating tunnels, dark visited even colonists The
into penetrated and fire, the of passage the from black still period,
galleries, somber these traversed They mountain. the of depths the
they excavations; smallest the examined they torches; lighted waving
did It silent. and dark was all but depths, shallowest the sounded
ancient these trodden before ever had man of foot the that appear not
which blocks, these of one displaced ever had arm his that or passages,
time the at waters, the above up them cast had volcano the as remained
island. the of submersion the of

and deserted, absolutely be to appeared passages these although However,
that confess to obliged was Harding Cyrus complete, was obscurity the
there. reign not did silence absolute

several extending caverns, gloomy these of one of end the at arriving On
hear to surprised was he mountain, the of interior the into feet hundred
the of sonorousness the by intensity in increased noise, rumbling deep a
rocks.

distant these heard also him, accompanied who Spilett, Gideon
fires. subterranean the of revivification a indicated which mutterings,
process chemical some that agreed they and listened, both times Several
earth. the of bowels the in place taking was

reporter. the said extinct? totally not is volcano the Then

Cyrus replied crater, the of exploration our since that possible is It
considered although volcano, Any occurred. has change some Harding,
forth. burst again evidently may extinct,

would Spilett, asked occurred, Franklin Mount of eruption an if But
Island? Lincoln to danger some be not there

to is that crater, The reporter. the answered so, think not do I
would lava, and smoke of overflow the and exists, safety-valve, the say,
outlet. customary this by formerly, did it as escape,

parts fertile the towards itself for way new a opened lava the Unless
island! the of

not it should Harding, Cyrus answered Spilett, dear my why, And
it? for out traced naturally road the follow

reporter. the returned capricious, are volcanoes Well,

Franklin Mount of inclination the that engineer, the answered Notice,
just exploring are we which valleys the towards water of flow the favors
change to necessary be would earthquake an flow, this aside turn To now.
gravity. of center mountains the

observed times, these at feared be to always is earthquake an But
Spilett. Gideon

forces subterranean the when especially engineer, the replied Always,
long a after obstruction, some with meeting risk they as awake, to begin
thing serious a be would eruption an Spilett, dear my Thus, rest.
the have not should volcano the that better be would it and us, for
At we? could it, prevent not could we But up. wake to desire slightest
would Heights Prospect think not do I occur, should it if even rate, any
ground the mountain, the and them Between threatened. seriously be
course a take ever should lava the if and depressed, considerably is
neighboring the and downs the on cast be would it lake, the towards
Gulf. Shark of parts

indicate to mountain, the of top the at smoke any seen yet not have We
Spilett. Gideon said eruption, approaching an

it for crater, the from escapes vapor a not Harding, answered No,
it But summit. the surveyed attentively I that yesterday only was
have may time chimney, the of part lower the at that probable is
which of valve this that and lava, hardened cinders, rocks, accumulated
serious first the at But overcharged. become time any at may spoke, I
dear my certain, be may you and disappear, will obstacle every effort,
the nor boiler, the is which island, the neither that Spilett,
gas. of pressure the under burst will chimney, the is which volcano,
an be not should there that better be would it repeat, I Nevertheless,
eruption.

be can Mutterings reporter. the remarked mistaken, not are we yet And
volcano! the of bowels very the in heard distinctly

There attentively. listening again engineer, the said right, are You
can we which of there, on going is commotion A it. of doubt no be can
result. ultimate the nor importance the estimate neither

to companions, their rejoined out, coming on Spilett, and Harding Cyrus
affairs. of state the known made they whom

Let pranks! his play to wants volcano The Pencroft, cried well! Very
master! his find will He likes! he if try, him

Neb. asked Who?

him, for mouth his shut will who genius, good our Neb, genius, good Our
it! open to pretends as much so he if

his of deity tutelary the in confidence sailors the seen, be may As
until manifested power, occult the certainly, and, absolute, was island
it also but unlimited; be to appeared ways, inexplicable many so in now
in for, researches, minute most colonists the escape to how knew
zeal,--the than more the of spite in efforts, their all of spite
of retreat the exploration, their on carried they which obstinacy,--with
discovered. be not could being mysterious the

was investigation of circle the February of 20th the to 19th the From
secret most whose Island, Lincoln of region northern the all to extended
every tapping of length the went even colonists The explored. were nooks
It mountain. the of verge extreme the to extended was search The rock.
terminating cone truncated the of summit very the to thus explored was
at hat, enormous the of ridge upper the to then rocks, of row first the
crater. the opened which of bottom the

depths whose in but extinct, now gulf, the visited they more; did They
or smoke of sign no However, heard. distinctly be could rumbling the
eruption. approaching an indicated rock, the of heating no vapor,
the did Franklin, Mount of part other any in nor there, neither But
search. in were they whom of him of traces any find colonists

carefully They downs. the to directed then were investigations Their
crest, the to base the from Gulf Shark of lava-cliffs high the examined
gulf. the of level the even reach to difficult extremely was it although
one!--nothing! No

uselessly fatigue much so up summed was words three these in Indeed,
anger of somewhat that results, no producing energy much so expended,
companions. his and Harding Cyrus of discomfiture the with mingled

be not could researches these for returning, of think to time now was It
believing in right certainly were colonists The indefinitely. prolonged
island, the of surface the on reside not did being mysterious the that
Pencroft imaginations. excited their haunted fancies wildest the and
allowed but mystery, the with contented not were particularly, Neb, and
supernatural. the of domain the into wander to imaginations their

by and House, Granite re-entered colonists the February of 25th the On
the of threshold the to arrow an by carried cord, double the of means
the and habitation their between communication re-established they door,
ground.

third the March, of 25th the on commemorated, they later month A
Island. Lincoln on arrival their of anniversary



14 Chapter

from prisoners the of escape the since away passed had years Three
of spoken they had years three those during often how and Richmond,
thoughts! their in present always country, their

it them to and end, an at was war civil the that doubt no had They
triumphed. not had North the of cause just the that impossible appeared
had blood much How war? terrible this of incidents the been had what But
struggle? the in fallen have must friends their of many How cost? not it
foresee to able being yet as without things, these of spoke often They
country. their see to more once permitted be would they when day the
link social the renew to days, few a for but it were thither, return To
their between communication a establish to world, inhabited the with
the perhaps longest, the pass to then island, their and land native
them, by founded colony, this in existence their of portion best,
dream a this was country, their on dependent be then would which and
realize? to impossible

appear must ship a it--either accomplishing of ways two only were There
vessel a build themselves must colonists the or Island, Lincoln off
land. nearest the to sail to enough strong

the with us provides himself genius, good our Pencroft, said Unless,
country. our to returning of means

tons 300 of ship a that Neb and Pencroft told one any had really, And,
not would they Balloon, Port at or Gulf Shark in them for waiting was
nothing mind of state their In surprise. of gesture a made have even
improbable. appeared

to themselves confine to them advised confident, less Harding, Cyrus But
vessel--a a of building the to regard with so especially more and fact,
as depositing, of purpose the for was it since work, urgent really
new Ayrtons indicating document a Island Tabor at possible, as soon
residence.

would least at months six existed, longer no Bonadventure the As
was winter Now vessel. new a of construction the for required be
following the before made be not would voyage the and approaching,
spring.

remarked season, fine the for ready everything get to time have We
I matters. these about Pencroft with consulting was who engineer, the
vessel our rebuild to have we since that friend, my therefore, think,
Scotch the of arrival The dimensions. larger her give to best be will it
having that, be even may It uncertain. very is Island Tabor at yacht
vainly having after sailed again has she ago, months several arrived
build to best be then not it Will Ayrton. of trace some for searched
Polynesian the to either us take could necessary, if which, ship a
think? you do What Zealand? New to or Archipelago

as are you that think I sailor; the answered captain, think, I
nor wood the Neither one. small a as vessel large a building of capable
time. of question a only is It wanting. are tools the

to 250 from of vessel a build to required be would months many how And
Harding. asked tons? 300

be not must it But Pencroft. replied least, at months eight or Seven
is wood frost severe in that and near, drawing is winter that forgotten
our if and delay, weeks several on calculate must We work. to difficult
lucky. very ourselves think may we November next by ready is vessel

favorable most the exactly be will that Harding, Cyrus replied Well,
Island Tabor to either importance, any of voyage a undertaking for time
land. distant more a to or

then; plans your out Make sailor. the answered captain, will, it So
good a us lend can Ayrton that imagine I and ready, are workmen the
hand. helping

plan, engineers the approved consulted, been having colonists, The
the that true is It done. be to thing best the indeed, was, it and
great be would tons hundred three to two from of ship a of construction
by justified themselves, in confidence had colonists the but labor,
success. previous their

and vessel the of plan the drawing in himself busied then Harding Cyrus
in themselves employed companions his time this During model. the making
planks. and timbers, ribs, the furnish to trees carting and felling
took They elms. and oaks best the supplied West Far the of forest The
a form to excursion last their on made already opening the of advantage
were trees the and Road, West Far the named they which road, practicable
to As established. was dockyard the where Chimneys, the to carried
direction its rendered had trees of choice the question, in road the
a to access the facilitated it time same the at but capricious, somewhat
Peninsula. Serpentine the of part large

for up, cut and felled quickly be should trees the that important was It
to necessary was time some and green, yet while used be not could they
vigorously worked therefore, carpenters, The seasoned. get to them allow
equinoctial few a by only troubled was which April, of month the during
by either dexterously, them aided Jup Master violence. some of gales
his lending by or ropes the fasten to tree a of top the to climbing
trunks. lopped the carry to shoulders stout

the near built shed, large a under up piled was timber this All
use. for time the awaited there and Chimneys,

the in is often October as fine, tolerably was April of month The
and continued, actively was work other time same the At zone. northern
of plateau the from disappeared devastation of trace all soon
the in rose buildings new and rebuilt, was mill The Heights. Prospect
dimensions, their enlarge to necessary appeared had It poultry-yard.
stable The considerably. increased had population feathered the for
allowed and broken, well were which of four onagers, five contained now
colony The colt. little a and ridden, or driven either be to themselves
regular like yoked were onagers the which to plow, a possessed now
their and work, their divided colonists The oxen. Kentucky or Yorkshire
these than health better enjoyed have could who Then tired. never arms
as House Granite in evenings the enlivened humor good what and workers,
future! the for plans thousand a formed they

respect, every in lot common the shared Ayrton course of matter a As
corral. the at live to going his of talk any longer no was there and
work the in more joined and reserved, and sad still was he Nevertheless
workman valuable a was he But companions. his of pleasures the in than
and esteemed was He intelligent. ingenious, skilful, need--strong, at
it. of ignorant be not could he and all, by loved

of one day other Every abandoned. not was corral the meanwhile the In
look to went onager, an on mounted or cart the driving settlers, the
of supply the back bring and goats and musmons of flock the after
afforded time same the at excursions These Neb. by required milk
with Spilett, Gideon and Herbert Therefore hunting. for opportunities
to road the companions their than often more traversed front, in Top
capybaras, carried, they which guns capital the with and corral, the
grouse, ducks, game, large for pigs wild and kangaroos, agouties,
house. the in wanting never were game, small for snipe and jacamars,
were which turtles several oyster-bed, the of warren, the of produce The
the from vegetables Mercy, the up came which salmon excellent taken,
Neb, and riches, upon riches were forest, the from fruit wild plateau,
away. them store himself by scarcely could cook, head the

course of had House Granite and corral the between wire telegraphic The
settlers the of other or one whenever worked was it and repaired, been
there. night the spend to necessary it found and corral the at was
at feared, be to were attacks no and now safe was island the Besides,
men. from rate any

of descent A again. happen might happened had which that However,
was It feared. be to always was convicts, escaped of even or pirates,
the in been had Harvey Bob of accomplices or companions that possible
colonists, The him. imitate to tempted be might and plans, his of secret
every and island, the around sea the observe to careful were therefore,
Washington and Union by enclosed horizon the covered telescope their day
west the to sea the examined they corral the to went they When Bays.
extended gaze their spur the climbing by and attention, less no with
horizon. western the of section large a over

to them for necessary was it still but discerned, was suspicious Nothing
guard. their on be

had he which plan a friends his to imparted evening one engineer The
to him to prudent appeared It corral. the fortifying for conceived
which, blockhouse, of sort a with it flank to and palisade the heighten
House Granite enemy. the against hold could settlers the necessary, if
the therefore impregnable; considered be position, very its by might,
contained, it animals the and stores, its buildings, its with corral
land might who were, they whoever pirates, of object the be always would
themselves shut to obliged be colonists the should and island, the on
any without themselves defend to able be to also ought they there up
consideration, for left be might which project a was This disadvantage.
next the until execution its off put to obliged besides, were, they and
spring.

dockyard, the along lay vessel new the of keel the May of 15th the About
extremities, its of each at mortised stern-post, and stem the soon and
feet 110 measured oak, good of keel, The perpendicularly. almost rose
midship the to feet five-and-twenty of width a allowing this length, in
the of arrival the before do could carpenters the all was this But beam.
first the fixed they week following the During weather. bad and frosts
work. suspend to obliged then were but timbers, stern the of

The bad. extremely was weather the month the of days last the During
The tempest. a of violence the with sometimes east, the from blew wind
shed--which dockyard the of account on uneasy somewhat was engineer
to near place other any in established have not could he besides,
from shore the sheltered imperfectly only islet the House--for Granite
the against beat waves the storms great in and sea, open the of fury the
cliff. granite the of foot very

shifted wind The realized. not were fears these fortunately, very But,
completely was House Granite of beach the there and southeast, the to
Point. Flotsam by covered

pursued vessel, new the at workmen zealous most the Ayrton, and Pencroft
wind the mind to men not were They could. they as long as labor their
blow a and skin, the to them wetting rain the nor hair, their at tearing
when But weather. fine in as bad in much as just worth is hammer a from
acquiring fibers its wood, the period, wet this succeeded frost severe a
the about and work, to difficult extremely became iron, of hardness the
discontinued. entirely be to obliged was shipbuilding June of 10th

severe how observe to omitted not had companions his and Harding Cyrus
was cold The Island. Lincoln of winters the during temperature the was
at situated England, New of States the in experienced that to comparable
hemisphere, northern the In equator. the from distance same the almost
of north the and America British by occupied part the in rate any at or
conformation flat the by explained is phenomenon this States, United the
no is there which on and pole, the on bordering territories the of
winds; north the to obstacle any oppose to soil the of intumescence
suffice. not would explanation this Island, Lincoln in here,

companions, his to day one Harding remarked observed, been even has It
by tried less are regions coast and islands the latitudes equal in that
the that asserted it heard often have I countries. inland than cold the
of those than rigorous less not are example, for Lombardy, of winters
the winter the during restoring sea the from results which Scotland,
a in therefore, are, Islands summer. the during received it which heat
restitution. this by benefiting for situation better

Island Lincoln does why Herbert, asked Harding, Captain then, But
law? common the escape to appear

I However, engineer. the answered explain, to difficult is That
the from results peculiarity this that conjecture to disposed be should
know, you as which, Hemisphere, Southern the in island the of situation
Hemisphere. Northern the than colder is boy, my

in latitudes lower in with met are icebergs and Herbert, said Yes,
Pacific. the of north the in than south the

on serving been have I when and Pencroft, remarked true, is That
Horn. Cape off icebergs seen have I whalers board

Spilett, Gideon said Island, Lincoln in experienced cold severe The
icebergs or floes of presence the by explained be perhaps then may
Island. Lincoln to near comparatively

answered Spilett, dear my indeed, admissible very is opinion Your
that icebergs of proximity the to evidently is it and Harding, Cyrus
an to also attention your draw would I winters. rigorous our owe we
the than colder Southern the renders which cause, physical entirely
hemisphere this to nearer is sun the since fact, In Hemisphere. Northern
winter. the during distant more necessarily is it summer, the during
if for, seasons, two the in temperature of excess the then explains This
that forget not must we Island, Lincoln in cold very winters the find we
hot. very are contrary, the on here, summers the

brows, his knitting Pencroft, asked captain, please, you if why, But
isnt It divided? badly so be say, you as hemisphere, our should why
that! just,

just whether laughing, engineer, the answered Pencroft, Friend
this for reason the lies here and it, to submit must we not, or
but sun, the around circle a describe not does earth The peculiarity.
earth the Now, mechanics. rational of laws the by must it as ellipse, an
its in point one at so and ellipse, the of foci the of one occupies
and sun, the from farthest its at is, that apogee, its at is course
it Now sun. the to nearest or perigee, its at is it point another at
that countries southern the of winter the during is it that happens
a in consequently, and sun, the from point distant most its at is it
be can Nothing cold. greatest the feel to regions those for situation
be, may they learned however Pencroft, men, and that, prevent to done
God by established order cosmographical the of anything change never can
Himself.

book, big a What learned. very is world the Pencroft, added yet, And
known! is that all with made be might captain,

answered known! not is that all with still book bigger much a what And
Harding.

cold the brought June of month the another, or reason one for last, At
to confined often were settlers the and intensity, accustomed its with
more and them, to was imprisonment this wearisome how Ah! House. Granite
Spilett. Gideon to particularly

notarial by you give would I day, one Neb to he said here, Look
good a were you if day, some me to come will which estates the all deed
newspaper some to subscribe and where, matter no go, to fellow enough
is happiness my to essential most is that thing the Decidedly me! for
other in before day the happened has what morning every knowing the
this! than places

laugh. to began Neb

daily my is about think I thing only the replied, he word, my Pon
work!

work. of want no was there out as well as indoors that was truth The

prosperity, of point highest its at now was Island Lincoln of colony The
the of destruction The work. hard continued of years three by achieved
complete the of speaking Without riches. of source new a been had brig
and utensils stocks, the on now vessel the for serve would which rig
instruments, and clothes ammunition, and weapons sorts, all of tools
even not had It House. Granite of storerooms the in piled now were
felt coarse the of manufacture the to again resort to necessary been
their during cold from suffered had colonists the Though materials.
any having their without come now might season bad the winter, first
besides, and also, plentiful was Linen severity. its dread to reason
is which sodium, of chloride From care. extreme with it kept they
and soda the extracted easily Harding Cyrus salt, sea than else nothing
soda, of carbonate into change to easy was it which soda, The chlorine.
for employed were lime, of chloride made he which of chlorine, the and
Besides, linen. bleaching in especially and purposes, domestic various
families by done was as year, a times four than more wash not did they
Gideon and Pencroft that added, be may it and times, olden the in
newspaper, his him bring to postman the for waiting while Spilett,
washermen. as themselves distinguished

severe, were They August. and July, June, months, winter the passed So
than more give not did thermometer the of observations average the and
than temperature in lower therefore was It Fahrenheit. of degrees eight
continually blazed fires splendid what then, But winter. preceding the
with wall granite the marking smoke the House, Granite of hearths the on
a naturally grew it as spared, not was Fuel streaks! zebra-like long,
the for destined wood the of chips the Besides, them. from steps few
which coal, the economize to them enabled ship the of construction
transport. to trouble more required

must it chilly, little a was Jup Master well. all were animals and Men
necessary was it and weakness, only his perhaps was This confessed. be
was, he servant a what But dressing-gown. well-padded a him make to
and talkative, not indiscreet, not indefatigable, zealous, clever,
biped his all for model a as proposed reason with been have might he
Worlds! New and Old the in brothers

service, ones at hands four has one when Pencroft, said that, for As
better! the much so done be to ought work ones course of

well. it did creature intelligent the indeed And

made researches last the since passed had which months seven the During
brought which September, of month the during and mountain, the round
His island. the of genius the of heard was nothing weather, fine back
have would it that true is It way. any in manifested not was power
any to colonists the put to occurred incident no for superfluous, been
trial. painful

between communication the chance by if that observed even Harding Cyrus
established been ever had House Granite of tenants the and unknown the
there it, felt were it as had instinct Tops if and granite, the through
growling dogs The period. this during it of sign further no was
two The orang. the of uneasiness the as well as ceased, entirely had
the of opening the round prowled longer such--no were they friends--for
from which way singular that in whine or bark they did nor well, inner
was this that sure be he could But noticed. had engineer the first the
never should he that and enigma, this about said be to was that all
would conjuncture some that certain be he Could solution? a at arrive
who scene? the on personage mysterious the bring would which occur not
reserve? in have might future the what tell could

which of consequences the event, an but ended, was winter the last At
spring. returning the of days first the in occurred serious be might

saw crater, the observed having Harding, Cyrus September, of 7th the On
rising vapors first its mountain, the of summit the round curling smoke
air. the in



15 Chapter

in gazed and work their left engineer, the by warned colonists, The
Franklin. Mount of summit the at silence

layer mineral the penetrated had vapor the and awoke, had volcano The
fires subterranean the would But crater. the of bottom the at heaped
be not could which event an was This eruption? violent any provoke
eruption, an of possibility the admitting while even However, foreseen.
from suffer would Island Lincoln of whole the that probable not was it
island the and disastrous, always not is matter volcanic of flow The it.
lava of streams the by shown was as trial, this undergone already had
shape the from Besides, mountain. the of slopes northern the on hardened
be would matter edge--the upper the in broken opening crater--the the of
island. the of regions fertile the opposite side the to thrown

at Often, future. the for answer necessarily not did past the However,
open. ones new and close craters old the volcanoes, of summit the
at Popocatepetl, Etna, hemispheres--at two the in occurred had This
feared. be to everything is there eruption an of eve the on Orizabaand
volcanic accompanies often which phenomenon earthquake--a an fact, In
mountain, a of arrangement interior the change to enough eruption--is
lava. burning the for outlets new open to and

without and, companions, his to things these explained Harding Cyrus
cons. and pros the all them told he things, of state the exaggerating
that likely appear not did It it. prevent not could they all, After
an by shaken was ground the unless threatened be would House Granite
crater new a should danger great in be would corral the But earthquake.
Franklin. Mount of side southern the in open

mountain, the of top the from disappeared never smoke the day that From
and height in increased it that perceived be even could it and
The volumes. heavy its in mingling flame any without thickness,
central the of part lower the in concentrated still was phenomenon
crater.

the of building The continued. been had work days fine the with However,
waterfall the of means by and, possible, as much as hastened was vessel
sawmill, hydraulic an establish to managed Harding Cyrus shore, the on
The joists. and planks into trees of trunks the up cut rapidly which
rustic the in used those as simple as was apparatus this of mechanism
of piece the move to movement horizontal first A Norway. of sawmills
was that all was saw--this the move to movement vertical second a wood,
cylinders, two wheel, a of means by succeeded engineer the and wanted;
September of month the of end the Towards arranged. properly pulleys and
lay schooner, a as rigged be to was which vessel, the of skeleton the
the all and, completed, entirely almost were ribs The dockyard. the in
the of shape the band, provisional a by sustained been having timbers
very bows, the in sharp schooner, The seen. be already could vessel
long a for suitable be evidently would after-part, the in slender
a take still would planking the laying but wanted; if voyage,
brig pirate the of work iron the fortunately, Very time. considerable
ribs injured and planks the From explosion. the after saved been had
quantity large a and bolts the extracted had Ayrton and Pencroft
the but smiths, the for saved work much so was It nails. copper of
do. to much had carpenters

haymaking, the harvest, the for week a for interrupted was Shipbuilding
work This plateau. the on crops different the of in gathering the and
night When schooner. the finishing to devoted was moment every finished,
any lose to not as So exhausted. quite really were workmen the came
twelve at dined they meals; their for hours the changed had they time
then They them. failed daylight when supper their had only and oclock,
bed. to go to ready always were they when House, Granite to ascended

interesting some on bore conversation the when however, Sometimes,
then colonists The time. a for delayed was sleep for hour the subject
voyage a which changes the of willingly talked and future, the of spoke
situation. their in make would lands inhabited to schooner the in
a of thought the prevailed plans, these of midst the in always, But
this abandon they would Never Island. Lincoln to return subsequent
which to and success, such with and labor much so with founded colony,
and Pencroft impetus. fresh a afford would America with communication a
there. days their end to hoped especially Neb

Island? Lincoln abandon never will you sailor, the said Herbert,

stay to mind your up make you if especially and Pencroft, Never,
there.

expect shall I Pencroft. answered boy, my ago, long up made was That
jolly make shall I and children, and wife your me bring will You you.
youngsters! your of chaps

same the at blushing and laughing Herbert, replied agreed, Thats
time.

will you enthusiastically, Pencroft resumed Harding, Captain you, And
it could inhabitants many how Ah, island! the of governor the still be
least! at thousand Ten support?

the last at and on, run to Pencroft allowing way, this in talked They
Herald! Lincoln New newspaper--the a started actually reporter

which endure, will which work a perform to desire The heart. mans is So
living other all over superiority his of origin the is him, survive will
and dominion, his established has which this is It below. here creatures
world. the all over it, justifies which is it this

little their themselves not had Top and Jup if knows who that, After
future. the of dream

Glenarvan Lord see to like would he that himself to said silently Ayrton
restored. all to himself show and again

prolonged was conversation the October, of 15th the on evening, One
concealed badly long Already, oclock. nine was It usual. than later
proceeding was Pencroft and rest, of hour the of warning gave yawns
dining-room, the in placed bell, electric the when bed, his towards
rang. suddenly

Ayrton, Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus there, were All
corral. the at were colonists the of none Therefore Neb. Pencroft,

scarcely other, each at stared companions His rose. Harding Cyrus
ears. their believing

it? rang who devil the it Was Neb. cried mean? that does What

answered. one No

of influence its not Might Herbert. observed stormy, is weather The
electricity--

eyes all whom towards engineer, The phrase. his finish not did Herbert
negatively. head his shook turned, were

may it whoever signal, a is it If Spilett. Gideon said wait, must We
it. renew will he it, made has who be

Neb. cried is? it think you do who But

he-- but Pencroft, answered Who?

bell. the of tinkle new a by short cut was sentence sailors The

corral:-- the to question this sent and apparatus, the to went Harding

want? you do What

this gave dial, alphabetic the on moving needle, the later moments few A
House:-- Granite of tenants the to reply

immediately. corral the to Come

Harding. exclaimed last! At

colonists The unveiled. be to about was mystery The last! At Yes!
about was which interest tremendous the before disappeared had fatigue
Without ceased. had rest for wish all and corral, the to them urge to
House, Granite left had they moments few a in word, a uttered having
They behind. left were alone Top and Jup beach. the on standing were and
them. without do could

as time same the at disappeared had moon new The black. was night The
lowering a formed clouds stormy great observed, had Herbert As sun. the
flashes, lightning few A rays. star any preventing vault, heavy and
horizon. the illuminated storm, distant a from reflections

the over roll would thunder the later hours few a that possible was It
threatening. very was night The itself. island

from them prevent not would it was, darkness the deep however But
corral. the to road familiar the finding

passed plateau, the reached Mercy, the of bank left the ascended They
forest. the through advanced and Glycerine, Creek over bridge the

was There emotions. liveliest the to prey a pace, good a at walked They
long-searched-for the learn to going now were they that but doubt no
deeply so being, mysterious that of name the enigma, the to answer
powerful so influence, his in generous so life, their in concerned
their with mingled indeed have stranger this not Must action! his in
said was that all heard have details, smallest the known have existence,
of nick very the in act to always able been have to House, Granite in
time?

the Under forward. pressed reflections, own his in up wrapped one, Every
road the of edge the even that such was darkness the trees of arch
birds, and animals Both forest. the in sound a Not seen. be not could
motionless remained atmosphere, the of heaviness the by influenced
the of footsteps The leaves. the disturbed breath a Not silent. and
ground. hardened the on resounded alone colonists

by interrupted only was silence the hour an of quarter first the During
Pencroft:-- from remark this

torch. a brought have to ought We

engineer:-- the from reply this by And

corral. the at one find shall We

past minutes twelve at House Granite left had companions his and Harding
of out three traversed had they nine past minutes forty-seven At nine.
corral. the from Mercy the of mouth the separated which miles five the

illumined and island the over spread lightning of sheets moment that At
Evidently them. blinded almost and dazzled flashes The trees. dark the
forth. bursting in long be not would storm the

thunder Distant rapid. more and brighter became gradually flashes The
stifling. was atmosphere The sky. the in growled

some by onwards urged were they if as proceeded colonists The
force. irresistible

they as and palisade, the them showed flash vivid a oclock ten At
fury. tremendous with forth burst storm the gate the reached

hut. the before stood Harding and crossed, was corral the minute a In

from was it since stranger, the by occupied was house the Probably
through shone light no However, sent. been had telegram the that thence
window. the

door. the at knocked engineer The

answer. No

which room, the entered settlers the and door, the opened Harding Cyrus
the moments few a in and Neb, by struck was light A dark. perfectly was
room. the of corner every into thrown light the and lighted was lantern

been had it which in state the in was Everything there. one no was There
left.

Harding. Cyrus murmured illusion? an by deceived been we Have

said,-- clearly had telegram The possible! not was that No!

immediately. corral the to Come

wire. the of use the to devoted specially table the approached They
as well as it, containing box the on pile order--the in was Everything
apparatus. the all

engineer. the asked time? last the here came Who

Ayrton. answered captain, did, I

was-- that And

ago. days Four

table. the on lying paper a to pointing Herbert, cried note! a Ah!

English:-- in words these written were paper this On

wire. new the Follow

been not had despatch the that understood who Harding, cried Forward!
communicating retreat, mysterious the from but corral, the from sent
to joined wire supplementary a of means by House Granite with directly
one. old the

storm The corral. the left all and lantern, lighted the took Neb
each between interval The violence. tremendous with forth burst then
summit The rapidly. diminished thunder-clap each and lightning-flash
occasional by seen be could vapor, of plume its with volcano, the of
flashes.

between corral the of part any in communication telegraphic no was There
the to straight running engineer, the but palisade; the and house the
the from hanging wire new a flash a of light the by saw post, first
ground. the to isolator

he. said is! it There

isolating an with surrounded was and ground, the along lay wire This
transmission free the assure to as so cable, submarine a like substance
southern the and wood the through pass to appeared It current. the of
west. the towards ran it consequently and mountain, the of spurs

Harding. Cyrus said it! Follow

wire. the by guided forward, pressed immediately settlers the And

could word a not that violence such with roar to continued thunder The
get to but speaking, for occasion no was there However, heard. be
possible. as fast as forward

between rising spur the climbed then companions his and Harding Cyrus
its at crossed they which River, Falls of that and valley corral the
branches lower the over stretched sometimes wire, The part. narrowest
The surely. them guided ground, the on lying sometimes trees, the of
of bottom the at stop perhaps would wire the that supposed had engineer
there. be would retreat strangers the that and valley, the

spur, south-western the ascend to obliged were They sort. the of Nothing
strangely-wild the by terminated plateau arid that on re-descend and
and down stooped colonists the of one time to time From cliff. basalt
the that doubt no now was there but hands; his with wire the for felt
the in certainty, a to There, sea. the towards directly running was wire
vain. in for sought long so dwelling the was rocks, those of depths

the struck Several flash. succeeded Flash fire. on literally was sky The
there appeared It smoke. thick the of midst the in volcano the of summit
the eleven to minutes few a At flame. vomiting was mountain the if as
west. the to ocean the overlooking cliff high the on arrived colonists
below. feet 500 roared surf The risen. had wind The

corral. the from half a and mile a gone had they that calculated Harding

side steep the following rocks, the among entered wire the point this At
occasioning of risk the at it followed settlers The ravine. narrow a of
sea. the into dashed being and rocks, slightly-balanced the of fall a
the of think not did they but perilous, extremely was descent The
irresistible an and themselves, of masters longer no were they danger;
draws magnet the as place mysterious this towards them drew attraction
iron.

in even which ravine, this descended unconsciously almost they Thus
impracticable. considered been have would daylight broad

crossed they when balls fiery like sparkled and rolled stones The
they On last. first--Ayrton was Harding light. of gleams the through
they then rock; slippery the over slid they Now step. by step went,
on. scrambled and feet their to struggled

had colonists The beach. the on rocks the touched wire the last At
cliff. basalt the of bottom the reached

with parallel and horizontally running ridge, narrow a appeared There
a gone not had They it. along wire the followed settlers The sea. the
the to down sloped incline moderate a by ridge the when paces hundred
sea. the of level

the beneath disappeared it that found and wire the seized engineer The
waves.

stupefied. were companions His

Must them! escaped despair, of cry a almost disappointment, of cry A
submarine some for there seek and water the beneath plunge then they
it. do to hesitated have not would they state excited their In cavern?

them. stopped engineer The

there-- and rocks, the in hollow a to companions his led He

be will way the water low At high. is tide The he. said wait, must We
open.

Pencroft. asked think- you make can what But

us enable to wanting been had means the if us called have not would He
him! reach to

no that conviction thorough such of tone a in spoke Harding Cyrus
quite was It logical. was besides, remark, His raised. was objection
by now hidden though water, low at practicable opening, an that possible
cliff. the of foot the at opened tide, high the

crouching silently remained colonists The wait. to time some was There
was thunder The torrents. in fall to began now Rain hollow. deep a in
sonorousness. grand a with rocks the among re-echoed

extraordinary and strange thousand A great. was emotion colonists The
superhuman and grand some expected they and brains, their crossed ideas
of formed had they notion the to up come could alone which apparition,
island. the of genius mysterious the

to beach the to descended lantern, the carrying Harding midnight, At
reconnoiter.

excavation immense an of beginning The mistaken. not was engineer The
angle, right a at bending wire, the There water. the under seen be could
gulf. yawning the entered

simply,-- said and companions, his to returned Harding Cyrus

practicable. be will opening the hour an In

Pencroft. said then? there, is It

Harding. returned it? doubt you Did

height, certain a to water with filled be must cavern this But
Herbert. observed

in and Harding, replied dry, completely be will cavern the Either
some and dry, be not will it or foot, on it traverse can we case that
disposal. our at put be will transport of means

the of level the to rain the through down climbed All passed. hour An
was It water. the above opening the of feet eight now was There sea.
water. foaming the rushed which under bridge, a of arch the like

the on floating object black a saw engineer the forward, Leaning
interior some to moored boat, a was It him. towards it drew He water.
the at lay oars Two iron-plated. was boat This cave. the of projection
bottom.

Harding. said in! Jump

the took Ayrton and Neb boat. the in were settlers the moment a In
lantern, the with bows, the in Harding Cyrus rudder. the Pencroft oars,
way. the lighted

suddenly passed, first at boat the which under roof, elliptical The
too lantern the of light the and deep, too was darkness the but rose;
to cave the of depth or height, length, extent, the either for slight,
a Not cavern. basaltic this in reigned silence Solemn ascertained. be
pierce not could peals thunder the even it, into penetrate could sound
sides. thick its

crypts natural world, the of parts various in exist caves immense Such
the by filled are Some globe. the of epoch geological the from dating
Cave, Fingals is Such sides. their in lakes entire contain others sea;
of caves the are such Hebrides; the of one Staffa, of island the in
Bonifacio, of caves the Brittany, in Douarnenez, of bay the in Morgat,
Mammoth immense the are such Norway; in Lyse-Fjord, of those Corsica, in
in miles twenty than more and height, in feet 500 Kentucky, in caverns
caverns, these excavated has nature globe, the of parts many In length!
man. of admiration the for them preserved and

the to extend exploring now were settlers the which cavern the Did
been had boat the hour an of quarter a For island? the of center
in engineer the by Pencroft to indicated detours, making advancing,
once,-- at all when sentences, short

commanded. he right! the to More

The wall. right the alongside up came course, its altering boat, The
side. the along ran still wire the if see to wished engineer

rock. the to fastened there was wire The

Harding. said Forward!

onwards. boat the urged waters, dark the into plunging oars, two the And

of distance a and hour, an of quarter another for went they On
when cave, the of mouth the from cleared been have must half-a-mile
heard. again was voice Hardings

he. said Stop!

light bright a perceived colonists the and stopped, boat The
the of bowels the in excavated deeply so cavern, vast the illuminating
existence. the suspect to them led ever had nothing which of island,

basalt on supported roof, vaulted the rose feet hundred a of height a At
columns the on appeared moldings, strange arches, Irregular shafts.
of formation the of epochs first the from thousands in nature by erected
measured other, the into one fitted pillars, basalt The globe. the
the of spite in calm water, the and height, in feet fifty to forty from
pointed light, of focus brilliant The base. their washed outside, tumult
walls the flooded and rocks, of point every touched engineer, the by out
light. with

the that so sparkles, brilliant the reproduced water the reflection By
could They zones. glittering two between floating be to appeared boat
glowing the from thrown irradiation the of nature the in mistaken be not
the all angles, the all by shattered were rays clear whose nucleus,
source, electric an from proceeded light This cavern. the of projections
cave, this of sun the was It origin. its betrayed color white its and
entirely. it filled it and

water, the into plunged again oars the Harding Cyrus from sign a At
towards forward urged was boat the and gems, of shower regular a causing
distant. length cables a half than more not now was which light, the

350 nearly measured water of sheet the of breadth the place this At
basaltic enormous an seen be could center dazzling the beyond and feet,
here widened cavern The side. that on issue any up blocking wall,
side the roof, the But lake. little a forming sea the considerably,
with flooded were peaks, the all prisms, the all cliff, end the walls,
if as and them, to belonged brilliancy the that so fluid, electric the
them. from issued light the

the on floated object cigar-shaped long a lake the of center the In
issued which brilliancy The motionless. silent, water, the of surface
heat. white a to heated kilns two from as sides its from escaped it from
250 about was whale, enormous an to shape in similar apparatus, This
water. the above twelve or ten about rose and long, feet

He bows. the in up stood Harding Cyrus it, approached slowly boat The
the seizing once, at all Then, excitement. violent to prey a gazed,
arm,-- reporters

he!-- cried, he he! be only can It he! is It

Spilett Gideon which name a murmured he seat, the on back falling Then,
hear. could alone

effect wonderful a had it for name, this knew evidently reporter The
voice,-- hoarse a in answered he and him, upon

man! outlawed an He!

Harding. said He!

floating singular this approached boat the command engineers the At
of ray a escaped which from side, left the touched boat The apparatus.
glass. thick a through light

was hatchway open An platform. the on mounted companions his and Harding
opening. the down darted All there.

the At electricity. by lighted deck, a was ladder the of bottom the At
opened. Harding which door, a was deck this of end

joined was colonists, the by traversed quickly room, richly-ornamented A
light. of flood a shed ceiling luminous a which over library, a to

the by opened was shut, also door, large a library the of end the At
engineer.

with up, heaped were which in museum, of sort saloon--a immense An
of marvels art, of works world, mineral the of treasures the all
thought almost who colonists, the of eyes the before industry--appeared
enchantment. of land a into transported suddenly themselves

notice to appear not did who man, a saw they sofa rich a on Stretched
presence. their

his of surprise extreme the to and voice, his raised Harding Then
words,-- these uttered he companions,

here.-- are We us! for asked you Nemo, Captain



16 Chapter

fell light electric the and rose, figure reclining the words these At
glance the high, forehead the head, magnificent a countenance; his upon
shoulders. the over falling and abundant hair white, beard commanding,

just had he which from divan the of cushion the upon rested hand His
had strength his that evident was It calm. perfectly appeared He risen.
powerful, yet seemed voice his but illness, by undermined gradually been
surprise,-- extreme evinced which tone a in and English, in said he as

name. no have I Sir,

Harding. Cyrus replied you! know I Nevertheless,

he though as engineer, the upon gaze penetrating his fixed Nemo Captain
him. annihilate to about were

divan,-- the of pillows the amid back falling Then,

dying! am I murmured; he now? matters what all, After

his took Spilett Gideon and captain, the near drew Harding Cyrus
Neb and Herbert, Pencroft, Ayrton, heat. feverish a of was hand--it
whose saloon, magnificent the of angle an in apart respectfully stood
fluid. electric the with saturated was atmosphere

and engineer the motioned and hand, his withdrew Nemo Captain Meanwhile
seated. be to reporter the

that beheld they them Before emotion. profound with him regarded All
powerful the island, the of genius the styled had they whom being
so been had circumstances, many so in intervention, whose protector
gratitude! of debt a such owed they whom to benefactor the efficacious,
where death, of point the at man a and only, man a beheld eyes Their
being! supernatural almost an find to expected had Neb and Pencroft

why Nemo? Captain recognized had Harding Cyrus that it happened how But
name a uttered, name this hearing on risen suddenly so latter the had
none?-- to known believed had he which

his on leaning and divan, the on position his resumed had captain The
him. near seated engineer, the regarded he arm,

asked. he sir? bore, formerly I name the know You

wonderful this of that also and Harding, Cyrus answered do, I
vessel-- submarine

smile. faint a with captain, the said Nautilus? The

Nautilus. The

am? I who know you you--do do But

do. I

with communication any held have I since years many nevertheless is It
of depth the in passed I have years long three world; inhabited the
have can then Who liberty! found have I where place only the sea, the
secret? my betrayed

who, and Nemo, Captain tie, no by you to bound was who man A
treachery. of accused be cannot consequently,

years sixteen chance by vessel my board on cast was who Frenchman The
since?

same. The

the in maelstrom, the in perish then not did companions two his and He
struggling? was Nautilus the which of midst

Twenty of title the under appeared has book a and escaped, They
history. your contains which Sea, the Under Leagues Thousand

captain the interrupted life! my of only months few a of history The
impetuously.

strange that of months few a but Harding, Cyrus answered true, is It
known. you make to sufficed have life

smile haughty a Nemo, Captain said doubtless! criminal, great a As
humanity! against outlaw an perhaps rebel, a Yes, lips. his curling

silent. was engineer The

sir? Well,

Harding, Cyrus answered Nemo, Captain you, judge to me for not is It
the of rest the with am, I life. past your regards as rate any at
strange this adopt to you induced which motives the of ignorant world,
their knowing without effects of judge cannot I and existence, of mode
constantly has hand beneficent a that is, know do I what but causes;
our owe all we that Island, Lincoln on arrival our since us protected
so being this that and being, powerful and generous, good, a to lives
yourself! is Nemo, Captain generous, and good powerful,

simply. captain the answered I, is It

and near, drawn had companions Their rose. reporter the and engineer The
express to about was charged were hearts their which with gratitude the
words. and gestures their in itself

more betrayed which voice a in and sign, a by them stopped Nemo Captain
show. to intended doubtless he than emotion

said. he all, heard have you till Wait

his of events the over ran sentences, concise few a in captain, the And
life.

whole his up summon to obliged was he yet short, was narrative His
contending evidently was He end. the at arrive to energy remaining
to him entreated Harding Cyrus times Several weakness. extreme against
morrow the whom to man a as head his shook he but while, a for repose
assistance,-- his offered reporter the when and come, never may

numbered. are hours my said; he useless, is It

the of rajah a of son Dakkar, Prince the Indian, an was Nemo Captain
ten when him, sent father His Bundelkund. of territory independent then
education an receive might he that order in Europe, to age, of years
and talents his by that hopes the in and complete, respects all in
long his raising in part leading a take day one might he knowledge
Europe. of nations the with level a to country heathen and degraded

by endowed Dakkar, Prince thirty of that to years ten of age the From
of knowledge accumulated intellect, of gifts richest her with Nature
were researches his art and literature, science, in and kind, every
profound. and extensive

to him caused fortune and rank His Europe. of whole the over traveled He
him for had world the of pleasures the but after; sought everywhere be
advantage, personal every of possessed and young Though attractions. no
for thirst unquenchable an by even--devoured grave--somber ever was he
that hope the heart his of recesses the in cherishing and knowledge,
enlightened and free a of ruler powerful and great a become might he
people.

feelings. other all over triumphed science of love the long for Still,
a art, of marvels the by impressed deeply artist an became He
a unknown, was sciences higher the of one no whom to philosopher
those of eyes the To courts. European of policy the in versed statesman
those of one for passed have might he superficially him observed who
those of one action; disdaining but knowledge, of curious cosmopolitans,
place from incessantly move who cynical, and haughty travelers, opulent
country. no of are and place, to

title the under published been fact, in has, Nemo Captain of history The
apply will therefore, Here, Sea. the Under Leagues Thousand Twenty of
regard with Ayrton of adventures the to as made already observation the
note the to refer therefore should Readers dates. of discrepancy the to
point. this on published already

cherishing still however, was, man this philosopher, this artist, This
days. earliest his from him into instilled hope the

a married He 1849. year the in Bundelkund to returned Dakkar Prince
than ardent less not ambition an with imbued was who lady, Indian noble
they whom them, to born were children Two inspired. was he which by that
seeking from him prevent not did happiness domestic But loved. tenderly
At opportunity. an waited He aimed. he which at object the out carry to
itself. presented it fancied, vainly he as length,

more and sagacious less and ambitious equally princes by Instigated
they that persuaded were India of people the was, he than unscrupulous
brought had who rulers, English their against rise successfully might
had and misery, and warfare constant and anarchy of state a of out them
and ignorance Their country. their in prosperity and peace established
chiefs. designing their of tools facile the them made superstition gross

the under Dakkar, Prince out. broke revolt sepoy great the 1857 In
the attaining of opportunity the have thereby should he that belief
He it. into drawn easily was ambition, long-cherished his of object
cause. this of service the to wealth and talents his devoted forthwith
life his risked he ranks; front the in fought he person; in it aided He
was he fanatics; misguided and wretched the of humblest the with equally
it finding but death seeking engagements, twenty in wounded times ten
the and defeated, utterly were rebels sanguinary the length at but not,
end. an to brought was mutiny atrocious

danger, such to exposed been India in power British the had before Never
from assistance received had sepoys the hoped, had they as if, and
would Kingdom United the of Asia in supremacy and influence the without,
past. the of thing a been have

fought had He known. well time that at was Dakkar Prince of name The
he but head, his upon set was price A concealment. without and openly
pursuers. his from escape to managed

onwards. it forces ever necessity of law the recedes; never Civilization
again fell old of rajahs the of land the and vanquished, were sepoys The
England. of rule the under

the to returned courted, he death that find to unable Dakkar, Prince
overcome world, the in alone There, Bundelkund. of fastnesses mountain
prey a hopes, vain his all of destruction the at disappointment by
the of hatred with filled beings, human all for disgust profound to
some assembled fortune, his of wreck the realized he world, civilized
leaving disappeared, day one and companions, faithful most his of score
behind. trace no

inhabited the upon him denied liberty that seek he did then, Where,
could none where ocean, the of depths the in waves, the Under earth?
follow.

the of island deserted a Upon science. of man the became warrior The
was vessel submarine a there and dockyard, his established he Pacific
future some at will which methods By designs. his from constructed
of forces illimitable the subservient rendered had he revealed be day
employed was sources, inexhaustible from extracted which, electricity,
moving, a as equipage, floating his of requirements the all for
its treasures, countless its with sea, The agent. heating and lighting,
not and mammalia, enormous its wrecks, numberless its fish, of myriads
its in lost had man that all also but supplied, nature that all only
was thus crew--and his and prince the of want every for sufficed depths,
communication hold to again never accomplished, desire ardent most his
called Nautilus, the vessel submarine his named He earth. the with
seas. the beneath disappeared and Nemo, Captain simply himself

to pole from ocean, every visited being strange this years many During
gathered he worlds unknown these in earth inhabited the of Outcast pole.
1702, in Vigo, of Bay the in lost millions The treasures. incalculable
inexhaustible of mine a with him furnished Spain, of galleons the by
nations those of favor in anonymously, always, devoted he which riches
country. their of independence the for fought who

in were, who Candiotes, the of resurrection the to refers (This
Nemo.) Captain by assisted largely fact,

his with communication no held had he however, long, For
1866, November, of 6th the of night the during when, fellow-creatures,
professor, French a were They vessel. his board on cast were men three
hurled been had men three These fisherman. Canadian a and servant, his
Nautilus the between place taken had which collision a by overboard
her. chased had which Lincoln, Abraham frigate States United the and

now taken Nautilus, the that professor this from learned Nemo Captain
vessel submarine a for now species, whale the of mammal gigantic a for
sea. every in for sought was pirates, of crew a carrying

chance whence from ocean, the to men three these returned have might He
of Instead existence. mysterious his with contact in them brought had
were they months seven during and prisoners, them kept he this doing
leagues thousand twenty of voyage a of wonders the all behold to enabled
sea. the under

of nothing knew who men, three these 1867, June, of 22nd the day, One
the of one in escaping in succeeded Nemo, Captain of history past the
into drawn was Nautilus the time this at as But boats. Nautiluss
captain the Norway, of coast the off maelstrom, the of vortex the
frightful that in engulfed fugitives, the that believed naturally
unaware was He abyss. the of bottom the at death their found whirlpool,
cast miraculously been had companions two his and Frenchman the that
rendered had Islands Lofoten the of fishermen the that shore, on
had France, to return his on professor, the that and assistance, them
eventful and strange the of months seven which in work that published
curiosity the to exposed and narrated were Nautilus the of navigation
public. the of

thus, live to continued Nemo Captain this, after time long a For
found and died, companions his one by one But sea. every traversing
the of bed the in coral, of cemetery their in resting-place last their
all of survivor solitary the remained Nemo Captain last At Pacific.
ocean. the of depths the in him with refuge taken had who those

in succeeded he alone, Although age. of years sixty now was He
which caverns submarine those of one towards Nautilus the navigating
harbor. a as him served sometimes had

this at and Island, Lincoln beneath hollowed was ports these of One
Nautilus. the to asylum an furnished moment

no ocean the navigating years, six there remained now had captain The
his rejoin should he when moment that and death, awaiting but longer,
balloon the of descent the observed he chance by when companions, former
diving his in Clad Confederates. the of prisoners the carried which
the from length cables few a at water the beneath walking was he dress
sea. the into thrown been had engineer the when island, the of shore
Harding. Cyrus saved captain the compassion of feeling a by Moved

castaways; five the of vicinity the from fly to was impulse first His
of elevation an of consequence in for closed, was refuge harbor his but
could he action, volcanic of influence the by produced basalt, the
was there Though vault. the of entrance the through pass longer no
bar, the pass to craft light a allow to water of depth sufficient
was water of draught whose Nautilus, the for enough not was there
considerable.

men these observed He remain. to therefore, compelled, was Nemo Captain
be to wish no had but island, desert a upon resources without thrown
their in interested became he degrees By them. by discovered himself
by other each to bound and energetic, honest, them saw he when efforts
the all penetrated he wishes, his despite if As friendship. of ties the
easily could he dress diving the of means By existence. their of secrets
the by climbing and House, Granite of interior the in well the reach
they as colonists the heard he orifice upper its to rock of projections
from learned He future. and present the studied and past, the recounted
the for itself, America with America of conflict tremendous the them
Captain reconcile to worthy were men these Yes, slavery. of abolition
island. the in nobly so represented they which humanity that with Nemo

brought had who also he was It Harding. Cyrus saved had Nemo Captain
the of waters the from Top rescued who Chimneys, the to dog the back
many so containing case the Point Flotsam at fall to caused who lake,
the into back canoe the conveyed who colonists, the to useful things
at House Granite of top the from cord the cast who Mercy, the of stream
presence the known made who baboons, the by attack the of time the
the in enclosed document the of means by Island, Tabor upon Ayrton of
torpedo a of shock the by brig the of explosion the caused who bottle,
death certain from Herbert saved who canal, the of bottom the at placed
had who he was it finally, and quinine; of sulphate the bringing by
the possessed he which of balls, electric the with convicts the killed
Thus creatures. submarine of chase the in employed he which and secret,
which and occurrences, supernatural apparently many so explained were
captain. the of power and generosity the proved all

proteges his benefit to longed misanthrope noble this Nevertheless,
and, them, give to advice useful much remained yet There further. still
are we as invited, he death, of approach the by softened being heart his
means by Nautilus, the visit to House Granite of colonists the aware,
not would he Possibly corral. the with it connected which wire a of
sufficiently was Harding Cyrus that aware been he had this done have
Nemo. of name the by him address to history his with acquainted

then Harding Cyrus life. his of narrative the concluded captain The
beneficent so exercised had which incidents the all recalled he spoke;
and companions his of names the in and colony, the upon influence an
much. so owed they whom to being generous the thanked himself

absorbed be to appeared mind his attention; little paid Nemo Captain But
engineer,-- the of hand proffered the taking without and idea, one by

judgment! your history, my know you that now he, said sir, Now,

incident important an to alluded evidently captain the this, saying In
which and vessel, his board on thrown strangers three the by witnessed
and profound a causing work, his in related had professor French the
professor the of flight the to previous days Some sensation. terrible
the in frigate a by chased being Nautilus, the companions, two his and
and frigate, this upon ram a as herself hurled had Atlantic the of north
mercy. without her sunk

silent. was and allusion, captains the understood Harding Cyrus

for transformed Nemo, Captain exclaimed frigate, enemys an was It
who she was It frigate! enemys an Dakkar, Prince the into instant an
my barred frigate bay--the shallow and narrow a in was me--I attacked
her! sank I way--and

demanded,-- captain the then ensued; silence of moments few A

gentlemen? life, my of you think What

replied and prince ci-devant the to hand his extended Harding Cyrus
be can past the that supposing in was error your Sir, gravely,
one is It progress. inevitable against contending in and resuscitated,
can alone God which blame; others admire, some which errors those of
be to believes sincerely he which action an in mistaken is who He judge.
that one is error Your esteem. our retains but enemy, an be may right
of judgment the from fear to nothing has name your and admire, may we
results. its but folly, heroic condemn not does which history,

to hand his raising and emotion, with swelled breast mans old The
heaven,--

murmured. he right? the in or wrong, I Was

they whom from God, to return actions great All replied, Harding Cyrus
mourn ever shall succored, have you whom we, Nemo, Captain derived. are
loss. your

kissed and knees his on fell captain, the near drawn had who Herbert,
hand. his

may said, he child, My man. dying the of eyes the in glistened tear A
you! bless God



17 Chapter

the of profundity the into penetrated light of ray No returned. had Day
the But sea. the by closed was entrance the high-water, being It cavern.
of skylights the from streams long in escaped which light, artificial
shone water of sheet the and before, as vivid as was Nautilus the
vessel. floating the around

back fallen had who Nemo, Captain overcame now exhaustion extreme An
Granite to him removing contemplate to useless was It divan. the upon
those of midst the in remain to wish his expressed had he for House,
and purchased, have not could millions which Nautilus the of marvels
approaching. swiftly was which death that for there wait to

almost him rendered which prostration, of interval long a During
observed attentively Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus unconscious,
was strength his that apparent was It man. dying the of condition the
the but now was robust, so once frame, That diminishing. gradually
in concentrated was life of All soul. departing a of tenement fragile
head. and heart the

to possible it Was whispers. in consulted reporter and engineer The
be saved, not if life, his Might man? dying the to aid any render
could remedy no that said had himself He days? some for prolonged
no him for had which death that tranquillity with awaited he and avail,
terrors.

Spilett. Gideon said nothing, do can We

Pencroft. asked dying? he is what of But

reporter. the replied out, fading simply is Life

and air, open the into him move we if sailor, the said Nevertheless,
recover. perhaps might he sun, the of light the

it. attempt to useless is it engineer, the answered Pencroft, No,
He vessel. his leave to consent never would Nemo Captain Besides,
the board on and Nautilus, the board on years dozen a for lived has
die. to desires he Nautilus

raised he for reply, Hardings Cyrus heard Nemo Captain doubt Without
intelligible,-- always but feeble, more voice a in and slightly, himself

and wish; my is here--it die shall I said. he sir, right, are You
you. of make to request a have I therefore

now and divan, the near drawn had companions his and Harding Cyrus
dying the support better to as manner a such in cushions the arranged
man.

lighted saloon, this of marvels the all over wander eyes his saw They
luminous the of arabesques the from fell which rays electric the by
from hanging pictures the other, the after one surveyed, He ceiling.
the of chef-doeuvres the partitions, the of tapestries splendid the
and marble of statues the masters; Spanish and French, Flemish, Italian,
the against leaning organ, magnificent the pedestals; their on bronze
wonderful most the bloomed which in aquarium, the after-partition;
pearls of chaplets zoophytes, plants, sea--marine the of productions
device, this on rested eyes his finally, and, value; inestimable of
Nautilus-- the of motto museum--the the of pediment the over inscribed


mobile. in Mobilis


masterpieces these on time last the for fondly rest to seemed glance His
a during horizon his limited had he which to nature, of and art of
seas. the of abysses the in years many so of sojourn

should he till waited and silence, captains the respected Harding Cyrus
speak.

his review in passed he doubtless, which, during minutes, some After
said, and colonists the to turned Nemo Captain life, whole

me? to obligations some under gentlemen, yourselves, consider You

yours. prolong to lives our give would we that us believe Captain,

wishes, last my out carry to Nemo, Captain continued then, Promise,
you. for done have I all for repaid be shall I and

Harding. Cyrus said promise, We

companions. his and himself both bound he promise this by And

dead. be shall I to-morrow captain, the resumed Gentlemen,

captain the from sign a but exclamation, an utter to about was Herbert
him. arrested

Nautilus. the than tomb other no desire I and die, shall I To-morrow
their ocean; the of depths the in repose friends my All grave! my is It
mine. be shall resting-place

silence. profound with received were words These

is Nautilus The continued. he wishes, my to attention Pay
but, up; blocked is which of entrance the grotto, this in imprisoned
the in sink least at may vessel the impossible, is egress although
remains. my bury there and abyss,

man. dying the of words the to reverently listened colonists The

captain, the continued Harding, Mr. death, my after To-morrow,
the all for Nautilus, the leave will companions and yourself
remain will alone token One me. with perish must contains it treasures
acquainted. now are you history whose with Dakkar, Prince of you with
millions, many of value the of diamonds contains yonder coffer That
thought I father, and husband when, time the of mementoes them of most
my by gathered pearls of collection a and me, for possible happiness
a at treasure this Of ocean. the of depths the in myself and friends
yourself as men such of hands the In use. good make may you day, future
of source a be never will money Harding, Captain comrades, your and
and enterprises, your in participate still shall I high on From danger.
prosper. will they that but not fear I

weakness, extreme his by necessitated repose, moments few a After
continued,-- Nemo Captain

which of saloon, the leave will you coffer, the take will you To-morrow
the of deck the to on ascend will you then door; the close will you
the close to entirely as so mainhatch the lower will you and Nautilus,
vessel.

Harding. Cyrus answered captain, done, be shall It

but, hither; you brought which canoe the in embark then will You Good.
large two open there and stern the to go Nautilus, the leaving before
will water The water-line. the upon find will you which stop-cocks
sink gradually will Nautilus the and reservoirs, the into penetrate
abyss. the of bottom the at repose to water the beneath

added,-- captain the Harding, Cyrus of gesture a comprehending And

corpse! a bury but will You nothing! Fear

any offer to ventured companions his nor Harding Cyrus Neither
they and wishes, last his expressed had He Nemo. Captain to observation
them. to conform to but do to nothing had

Nemo. Captain added gentlemen? promise, your have I

engineer. the replied captain, have, You

leave to them requested and sign, a by colonists the thanked captain The
the in him, near remain to wished Spilett Gideon hours. some for him
shall I saying, refused, man dying the but on, coming crisis a of event
sir. to-morrow, until live

and dining-room, the and library the through passed saloon, the left All
was apparatus electrical the where machine-room the in forward, arrived
mechanical the but light, and heat only not supplied which established,
Nautilus. the of power

itself, within masterpieces containing masterpiece a was Nautilus The
astonishment. with struck was engineer the and

above feet eight or seven rose which platform, the mounted colonists The
which covering, lenticular glass thick a beheld they There water. the
Behind light. forth flashed which from eye, large of kind a protected
and rudder, the of wheels the containing cabin a apparently was eye this
Nautilus the navigated he when helmsman, the stationed was which in
light evidently would rays electric the which ocean, the of bed the over
distance. considerable a to up

they for silent, time a for remained companions his and Harding Cyrus
their and heard, and seen just had they what by impressed vividly were
often so had arm whose he that thought the by touched deeply were hearts
at was hours, few a but known had they whom protector the them, aided
death. of point the

events the upon posterity by pronounced judgment the be might Whatever
Prince of character the existence, extra-human speak, to so this, of
never can time memory whose those of one as remain ever would Dakkar
efface.

at lived have can he that possible it Is Pencroft. said man! a What
found not has he perhaps that me to seems it And sea? the of bottom the
elsewhere! than more any there peace

leave to us enabled have might Ayrton, observed Nautilus, The
country. inhabited some reach and Island Lincoln

myself risk never would one for I Pencroft, exclaimed Heavens! Good
never! seas, the under but good, seas, the on sail To craft. a such in

a of navigation the that reporter, the answered Pencroft, believe, I
that and easy, very be to ought Nautilus the as such vessel submarine
no storms, no be would There it. to accustomed become soon should we
the of waters the surface the beneath feet some At fear. to lee-shore
lake. a of those as calm as are ocean

on wind of gale a prefer I but sailor, the replied be, may That
not and sea, the on sail to built is vessel A craft. well-found a board
it. beneath

regards as rate any at useless, is it engineer, the said friends, My
The vessels. submarine of question the discuss to Nautilus, the
it. of dispose to right the not have we and ours, not is Nautilus
of Independently it. of ourselves avail case no in could we Moreover,
whose cavern, this of out it get to impossible be would it that fact the
Captain rocks, basaltic the of uprising the by closed now is entrance
law, our is wish His him. with buried be shall it that is wish Nemos
it. fulfil will we and

his and Harding Cyrus conversation, prolonged somewhat a After
they There Nautilus. the of interior the to descended again companions
saloon. the to returned and refreshment some took

had which prostration the from rallied somewhat had Nemo Captain
smile faint A fire. wonted their with shone eyes his and him, overcome
lips. his curled even

him. around drew colonists The

You men. honest and brave are you captain, the said Gentlemen,
observed I have Often weal. common the to yourselves devoted have
Mr. hand, Your still! you esteem you--I esteemed have I conduct. your
Harding.

it clasped who captain, the to hand his gave Harding Cyrus
affectionately.

murmured. he well! is It

resumed,-- He

this and yourselves, concerning speak to have I myself. of enough But
to desire now You refuge. taken have you which upon Island, Lincoln
it? leave

quickly. Pencroft answered captain! return, To

is it know, I smile. a with captain, the said Pencroft? return, To
now it what it make to helped have You island. this for love your true,
paradise! a you to seems it and is,

the to it annex to is Harding, Cyrus interposed captain, project, Our
fortunately so port a shipping our for establish to and States, United
Pacific. the of part this in situated

captain; the continued gentlemen, country, your with are thoughts Your
Ones right. are You glory. and prosperity her for are toils your
I all from far die I And die! there live! one should land!--there native
loved!

emotion, with engineer the said transmit, to wish last some have You
mountains the in left have you friends those to send to souvenir some
India? of

race, my of last the am I me! to remain friends no Harding; Captain No,
dead.--But the are as been long have I known have I whom all to and
and things, painful are isolation, Solitude, yourselves. to return to
live to possible it thought having of die I endurance. human beyond
Lincoln leave to attempt the in all dare therefore, should, You alone!
those that aware am I birth. your of land the more once see and Island,
built. have you vessel the destroyed have wretches

sufficiently Spilett, Gideon said vessel, a construct to propose We
sooner succeed, should we if but land; nearest the to us convey to large
too by it to attached are We Island. Lincoln to return shall we later or
it. forget to ever recollections many

Harding. Cyrus said Nemo, Captain known have we that here is It

Herbert. added home! our make can we that only here is It

the replied if-- eternity, of sleep the sleep I shall here And
captain.

said sentence, the completing of instead and, moment, a for paused He
simply,--

you--alone! with speak to wish I Harding, Mr.

retired. wish, the respecting companions, engineers The

and Nemo, Captain with alone minutes few a but remained Harding Cyrus
private the of them to nothing said he but companions; his recalled soon
him. to confided had man dying the which matters

evident was It care. extreme with captain the watched now Spilett Gideon
the lost had which energy, moral his by sustained longer no was he that
weakness. physical his against reaction of power

Nautilus the quit not did colonists The change. without closed day The
distinguish to impossible was it although arrived, Night moment. a for
cavern. the in day from it

noble His sinking. visibly was he but pain, no suffered Nemo Captain
Inaudible calm. perfectly were death, of approach the by paled features,
incidents various upon bearing lips, his from intervals at escaped words
his and slowly ebbing evidently was Life career. checkered his of
cold. already were extremities

and him, around stood who colonists the to spoke he more twice or Once
death. after continues which smile last that with them on smiled

effort supreme a by Nemo Captain midnight, after shortly length, At
that in wishing if as breast, his across arms his folding in succeeded
death. for himself compose to attitude

light dying A life. of signs showed alone glance his oclock one By
God words, the murmuring Then, brilliant. so once eyes those in gleamed
expired. quietly he country! my and

the been once had who him of eyes the closed low bending Harding, Cyrus
Nemo. Captain even not now was and Dakkar, Prince

Neb eyes. Ayrtons from fell Tears aloud. sobbed Pencroft and Herbert
statue. a as motionless side, reporters the by knees his on was

dead, the of forehead the over hand his extending Harding, Cyrus Then
he friends, his to Turning God! with be soul his May solemnly, said
lost! have we whom him for pray us Let added,


captain the to made promise the fulfilled colonists the later hours Some
wishes. dying his out carrying by

with taking Nautilus, the quitted companions his and Harding Cyrus
which coffer the benefactor, their by them left memento only the them
millions. to amounting wealth contained

carefully been had light, with flooded still saloon, marvelous The
in fastened securely then was deck on leading door iron The closed.
the to penetrating from water of drop a even prevent to as manner a such
Nautilus. the of interior

the to moored was which canoe, the into descended then colonists The
vessel. submarine the of side

water-line, the at There, stern. the to around brought now was canoe The
in employed reservoirs the with communicating stop-cocks large two were
vessel. the of submersion the

Nautilus, the and filled, reservoirs the opened, were stop-cocks The
lake. the of surface the beneath disappeared sinking, slowly

waves. the through descent its follow to able yet were colonists the But
while water, translucent the up lighted forth gave it light powerful The
of effusion vast this length At obscure. gradually became cavern the
tomb the now Nautilus, the after soon and away, faded light electric
bed. ocean its in reposed Nemo, Captain of



18 Chapter


the of entrance the silence in regained colonists the day of break At
of memory in Grotto, Dakkar of name the gave they which to cavern,
difficulty without passed they and low-water, now was It Nemo. Captain
sea. the by right the on washed arcade, the under

As waves. the from protected carefully here, left was canoe The
little a on up it drew Ayrton and Neb, Pencroft, precaution, additional
it where spot a in grotto, the of sides the of one bordered which beach
harm. of risk no run could

the of mutterings low last The night. the during ceased had storm The
yet was sky the but longer, no fell Rain west. the in away died thunder
of first the October, of month this whole, the On clouds. by obscured
the and tokens, satisfactory by in ushered not was spring, southern the
another, to compass the of point one from shift to tendency a had wind
weather. settled upon count to impossible it rendered which

taken had Grotto, Dakkar leaving on companions, his and Harding Cyrus
to careful were Herbert and Neb way their On corral. the to road the
the between captain the by down laid been had which wire the preserve
service. of be time future a at might which and grotto, the and corral

the of incidents various The road. the on little but spoke colonists The
The minds. their on impression profound a left had 15th October of night
the them, protected effectually so had influence whose being unknown
Captain powers, supernatural with endowed had imagination their whom man
of depths the in buried were he and Nautilus His more. no was Nemo,
isolated more even seemed existence their them of one each To abyss. the
of intervention the upon count to accustomed been had They before. than
Cyrus even and Spilett, Gideon and longer, no existed which power that
a maintained they Thus impression. this escape not could Harding,
corral. the to journey their during silence profound

House. Granite at arrived colonists the morning the in nine Towards

be should vessel the of construction the that agreed been had It
his devoted ever than more Harding Cyrus and forward, pushed actively
future what divine to impossible was It object. this to labor and time
great be would colonists the to advantage the Evidently them. before lay
the keeping of capable vessel, substantial a disposal their at having of
of case in attempt, to enough large and weather, heavy in even sea
be should vessel their when if, Even duration. some of voyage a need,
as Island Lincoln leave to resolve not should colonists the completed,
the of Archipelagoes Polynesian the of one either gain to order in yet,
or sooner least, at might they Zealand, New of shores the or Pacific
to relating notice the there leave to Island, Tabor to proceed later,
possibility the by indispensable rendered precaution a was This Ayrton.
highest the of was it and seas, those in reappearing yacht Scotch the of
point. this on neglected be should nothing that importance

Ayrton, and Pencroft, Harding, Cyrus resumed. then were works The
unavoidably when except Herbert, and Spilett, Gideon Neb, by assisted
It cessation. without worked occupations, necessary other by off called
months--that five in ready be should vessel new the that important was
Tabor visit to wished they March--if of beginning the by say, to is
impracticable. voyage the rendered gales equinoctial the before Island
unnecessary was it Moreover, moment. a not lost carpenters the Therefore
entire, saved been having Speedy the of that rigging, manufacture to
constructed. be to needed vessel the of only hull the that so

labors, important these by occupied them found 1868 year the of end The
months two of expiration the At others. all almost of exclusion the to
It adjusted. planks first the and up set been had ribs the half a and
admirable, were Harding Cyrus by made plans the that evident already was
sea. at well behave would vessel the that and

grumble even would and energy, devouring a task the to brought Pencroft
the of gun the for axe carpenters the abandoned other the or one when
Granite of stores the up keep to necessary nevertheless was It hunter.
satisfy not did this But winter. approaching the of view in House,
were workmen the when content not was sailor honest brave, The Pencroft.
by and, vigorously, grumbled he happened this When dockyard. the at not
men. six of work the did feelings, his venting of way

season. summer the of whole the during unfavorable very was weather The
saturated atmosphere, the and overpowering, was heat the days some For
that rarely was It storms. violent by cleared only was electricity, with
but low a like heard, be not could thunder the of growling distant the
the of regions equatorial the in produced is as such murmur, incessant
globe.

violence, extreme of storm a by signalized was 1869, January, of 1st The
were trees Large island. the over times several burst thunder the and
of one others among and shattered, and fluid electric the by struck
the at poultry-yard the shaded had which nettle-trees gigantic those
the to relation any meteor this Had lake. the of extremity southern
connection any there Was earth? the of bowels the in on going phenomena
the of interior the of that and atmosphere the of commotion the between
for case, the was such that think to inclined was Harding Cyrus earth?
volcanic of renewal the by attended was storms these of development the
symptoms.

daybreak at ascended having Herbert, that January of 3rd the on was It
onagers, the of one harness to Heights Prospect of plateau the to
the of summit the from rolling cloud hat-shaped enormous an perceived
volcano.

in him joined once at who colonists, the apprised immediately Herbert
Franklin. Mount of summit the watching

to seems It time! this vapors not are those Pencroft, exclaimed Ah!
smoke! must he breathing; with content not is giant the that me

the expressed exactly sailor the by employed speech of figure This
months three for Already volcano. the of mouth the at on going changes
yet as were which but dense, less or more vapors emitted crater the had
But substances. mineral of ebullition internal an by only produced
a of form the in rising smoke, thick a by replaced were vapors the now
and base, its at width in feet hundred three than more column, grayish
eight to seven from of height a to mushroom immense an like spread which
mountain. the of summit the above feet hundred

Spilett. Gideon observed chimney, the in is fire The

Herbert. replied out! it put cant we And

perfectly if as spoke who Neb, observed swept, be to ought volcano The
serious.

youll and laughter; of shout a with Pencroft, cried Neb! said, Well
doubt? no job, the undertake

Mount by emitted smoke dense the observed attentively Harding Cyrus
distant some hear to expecting if as listened, even and Franklin,
gone had he whom from companions, his towards turning Then, muttering.
said,-- he apart, somewhat

an that ourselves from conceal not must we friends, my is, truth The
longer no are substances volcanic The forward. going is change important
undoubtedly are we and fire, caught have they ebullition, of state a in
eruption. approaching an by menaced

if and eruption; the witness shall we Pencroft, said captain, Well,
concern need we that see dont I it. applaud well one, good a is it
matter. the about further ourselves

of track ancient the for Harding, Cyrus replied so, be may It
hitherto has crater the this, to thanks and open; still is lava the
yet-- And north. the towards overflowed

be might it eruption, an from advantage no derive can we as yet, And
reporter. the said place, take not should it better

valuable some be may there Perhaps sailor. the answered knows? Who
may we which and forth, spout will it which volcano, this in substance
account! good to turn

good no augured who man a of air the with head his shook Harding Cyrus
not did He sudden. so been had development whose phenomenon the from
lava, the If eruption. an of results the Pencroft as lightly so regard
menace directly not did crater, the of position the of consequence in
might complications other island, the of parts cultivated and wooded the
accompanied unfrequently not are eruptions fact, In themselves. present
of formed Island, Lincoln of nature the of island an and earthquakes; by
on lava other, the on granite side, one on basalt varied, so substances
could consequently which substances south, the on soil rich north, the
risk the to exposed be would other, each to attached firmly be not
volcanic the of spreading the therefore, Although, disintegration. of
the of movement any danger, serious a constitute not might matter
the entail might island the shake should which structure terrestrial
consequences. gravest

ear his place to as so reclined had who Ayrton, said me, to seems It
sound, rumbling dull, a hear can I that me to seems it ground, the to
iron. of bars with loaded wagon a of that like

convinced were and attention, greatest the with listened colonists The
a with mingled was rumbling The mistaken. not was Ayrton that
slowly died and rinforzando, of sort a formed which roar, subterranean
of profundities the through passed had storm violent some if as away,
might It heard. be could termed, so properly explosion no But globe. the
passage free a found smoke and vapors the that concluded be therefore
sufficiently being safety-valve the that and shaft; central the through
be to was explosion no produced, be would convulsion no large,
apprehended.

Mount Let work? to back going not we are Pencroft, said then! Well,
as much as flame and fire forth spout or bellow, groan, smoke, Franklin
Neb, Ayrton, Come, idle! be should we why reason no is that pleases, it
at to turn must us of one every Spilett, Mr. Harding, Captain Herbert,
pair dozen a and keelson, the place to going are We to-day! work our
new our want I months two Before many. too be not would hands of
float not?--to we shall name, old the keep shall we Bonadventure--for
lose! to hour an not is there Therefore Balloon! Port of waters the on

Pencroft, by requisitioned thus services their colonists, the All
thick a keelson, the place to proceeded and dockyard, the to descended
firmly unites and ship a of portion lower the forms which wood of mass
all which in undertaking, arduous an was It hull. the of timbers the
part. took

of 3rd the day, this of whole the during labors their continued They
not, could which volcano, the of further thinking without January,
twice, or once But House. Granite of shore the from seen be besides,
through arc diurnal its described which sun, the veiling shadows, large
passed smoke of cloud thick a that indicated sky, clear extremely an
carried shore, the on blowing wind, The island. the and disc its between
Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus westward. the to vapors these all
discussed time to time from and appearances, somber these remarked
went work their but phenomena, volcanic the of progress evident the
from importance first the of besides, was, It interruption. without on
least the with finished be should vessel the that view, of point every
arise, might which eventualities the of presence In delay. possible
their by secured extent great a to be would colonists the of safety the
refuge? only their day some prove not might it that tell could Who ship.

Herbert and Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus supper, after evening, the In
and dark, already was It Heights. Prospect of plateau the ascended again
incandescent or flames if ascertain to them permit would obscurity the
smoke and vapor the with mingled were volcano the by up thrown matter
crater. the of mouth the at accumulated

his than active more who, Herbert, said fire! on is crater The
plateau. the reached first companion,

gigantic a like appeared now miles, six about distant Franklin, Mount
much So flames. fuliginous turned which of summit the around torch,
that them, with mingled were cinders and scoriae possibly and smoke,
kind a But night. the of gloom the amid faintly but gleamed light their
out stood which against island, the over spread brilliancy lurid of
vapor of whirlwinds Immense heights. the of masses wooded the confusedly
stars. few a glimmered which through sky, the obscured

engineer. the said rapid! is change The

the of reawakening The reporter. the answered surprising, not is That
that Cyrus, remember, may You time. some back dates already volcano
the of sides the searched we time the about appeared vapors first the
not, mistake I if was, It retreat. Nemos Captain discover to mountain
October. of 15th the about

ago! half a and months two Herbert, replied Yes,

weeks, ten for smoldering been therefore have fires subterranean The
now they that at wondered be to not is it and Spilett, Gideon resumed
violence! such with out break

Harding. Cyrus asked soil? the of vibration certain a feel you not Do

between difference great a is there but Spilett, Gideon replied Yes,
earthquake. an and that

Cyrus answered earthquake, an with menaced are we that affirm not do I
to due are vibrations these No; that! from us preserve God may Harding,
is earth the of crust The fire. central the of effervescence the
the under shell, a such that know you and boiler, a of shell the simply
effect this is It plate. sonorous a like vibrates steam, of pressure
moment. this at produced being is which

Herbert. exclaimed flames! magnificent What

crater, the from forth shot flames of bouquet of kind a instant this At
Thousands vapors. the through even visible was which of brilliancy the
various in cast were fire of tongues barbed and sheets luminous of
dissipated smoke, of dome the beyond extending Some, directions.
accompanied was This powder. incandescent an behind leaving it,
of battery a of discharge the resembling explosions, successive by
machine-guns.

the on hour an spending after Herbert, and reporter, the Harding, Cyrus
returned and beach, the to descended again Heights, Prospect of plateau
much so preoccupied, and thoughtful was engineer The House. Granite to
immediate any apprehended he if inquired Spilett Gideon that indeed, so,
cause. the be indirectly or directly might eruption the which of danger,

Harding. Cyrus answered no, and Yes,

greatest the not would reporter, the continued Nevertheless,
would which earthquake an be us to happen could which misfortune
feared, be to is this that suppose not do I Now, island? the overturn
outlet. free a found have lava and vapors the since

the in earthquake an fear not do I and Harding, Cyrus replied True,
soil the of convulsions to applied commonly is term the which in sense
may causes other But gases. subterranean of expansion the by provoked
disasters. great produce

Cyrus? dear my so, How

few a In mountain. the visit must I consider. must I certain. not am I
point. this on more learn shall I days

of explosions the of spite in soon, and more, no said Spilett Gideon
the by repeated were which and increased, intensity whose volcano, the
sleeping were House Granite of inhabitants the island, the of echoes
soundly.

construction The January. of 6th and 5th, 4th, by--the passed days Three
further offering without and continued, diligently was vessel the of
energy. his all with work the forward pushed engineer the explanations
and, aspect, sinister of cloud somber a by hooded now was Franklin Mount
fell which of some rocks, incandescent forth vomiting flames, the amid
look only would who Pencroft, caused This itself. crater the into back
exclaim,-- to joke, a of light the in matter the at

conjurer. a is he ball; and cup at playing is giant the Ah!

and abyss, the to in again back fell up thrown substances the fact, In
pressure, internal the by swollen though lava, the that seem not did it
on opening the rate, any At crater. the of orifice the to risen yet had
the upon torrent no out poured visible, partly was which northeast, the
mountain. the of slope northern

other vessel, the of construction the was pressing however Nevertheless,
the of portions various on colonists the of presence the demanded duties
where corral, the to go to necessary was it everything Before island.
the replenish and enclosed, were goats and musmons of flocks the
that arranged accordingly was It animals. those for forage of provision
as and January; of 7th the day, next the thither proceed should Ayrton
and Pencroft accustomed, was he which to task, the for sufficient was he
Ayrton-- to say engineer the hearing on surprised somewhat were rest the

you. accompany will I corral the to to-morrow going are you As

not will days working our sailor, the exclaimed Harding, Captain But,
short! hands of pair two be shall we also go you if and many, be

necessary is it but Harding, Cyrus replied to-morrow, return shall We
is eruption the how learn must I corral. the to go should I that
progressing.

of air an with Pencroft, answered eruption! the always eruption! The
myself trouble I eruption! this truly, thing, important An discontent.
it. about little very

the by projected expedition the opinion, sailors the be might Whatever
Cyrus accompany to wished Herbert day. next the for settled was engineer
absence. his by Pencroft vex not would he but Harding,

drawn cart the mounting Ayrton, and Harding Cyrus dawn, at day, next The
trot. round a at off set and corral the to road the took onagers, two by

Mount of crater the which to clouds, large passing were forest the Above
rolled which clouds, These matter. fuliginous added incessantly Franklin
substances. heterogeneous of composed evidently were air, the in heavily
strange their derived they that volcano the from alone not was It
powdered like dust, of state a in Scoriae, weight. and opacity
were feculae, finest the as small as ashes grayish and pumice-stone,
so are ashes These folds. thick their of midst the in suspension in held
After months. whole for air the in observed been have they that fine
was atmosphere the year a of upwards for Iceland in 1783 of eruption the
were sun the of rays the which through dust volcanic with charged thus
discernible. difficulty with only

the on happened this and falls, matter pulverized this often more But
the reached scarcely had Ayrton and Harding Cyrus occasion. present
instantly and fell, gunpowder fine like snow black of sort a when corral
disappeared all meadows, Trees, soil. the of appearance the changed
fortunately, very But, depth. in inches several covering a beneath
cloud the of part greater the and northeast, the from blew wind the
sea. the over itself dissolved

Ayrton. said Harding, Captain singular, very is This

pumice-stone, powdered This engineer. the replied serious, very is It
forward going convulsion the is grave how proves dust, mineral this all
volcano. the of depths lower the in

done? be nothing can But

you, Do phenomenon. the of progress the note to except Nothing,
the at work necessary the with yourself occupy Ayrton, therefore,
Red of source the beyond just ascend will I meantime the In corral.
northern its upon mountain the of condition the examine and Creek
Then-- aspect.

Harding? Captain Well,

any At it. inspect to wish I Grotto. Dakkar to visit a pay will we Then
hours. two in you for back come will I rate

the awaiting while and, corral, the enter to proceeded then Ayrton
which goats and musmons the with himself busied return, engineers
of signs first these of presence in uneasiness certain a feel to seemed
eruption. an

passed spur, eastern the of crest the ascended Harding Cyrus Meanwhile
had companions his and he where spot the at arrived and Creek, Red
exploration. first their of time the at spring sulphurous a discovered

he smoke of column single a of Instead everything! was changed How
by propelled violently if as soil the through forced thirteen, counted
subjected was earth the of crust the that evident was It piston. some
was atmosphere The pressure. frightful a to globe the of part this in
vapors. aqueous with mingled acid, carbonic and gases with saturated
strewn, was plain the which with tufa volcanic the felt Harding Cyrus
time, by blocks solid into hardened cinders pulverized but was which and
lava. fresh of traces no discover could he but him, beneath tremble

the all observed he when this of assured more became engineer The
from escaped flame and smoke of Pillars Franklin. Mount of part northern
of current no but ground; the on fell scoriae of hail a crater; the
volcanic the that proved which volcano, the of mouth the from burst lava
the of orifice superior the of level the attained yet not had matter
shaft. central

At himself. to Harding Cyrus said so, were it that prefer would I But
accustomed its followed had lava the that know then should I rate, any
danger the But course? new a take not may it that say can Who track.
the No, clearly! it foresaw Nemo Captain that! in consist not does
there! lie not does danger

prolongation whose causeway enormous the towards advanced Harding Cyrus
on examine sufficiently now could He Gulf. Shark narrow the enclosed
his in doubt no was There lava. the of channels ancient the side this
epoch. far-distant a at occurred had eruption recent most the that mind

the to attentively listening way, same the by returned then He
thunder, long-continued like rolled which mutterings subterranean
reached he morning the in nine At explosions. deafening by interrupted
corral. the

him. awaited Ayrton

Ayrton. said Harding, Captain for, cared are animals The

Ayrton. Good,

Harding. Captain uneasy, seem They

deceived. never is instinct and them, through speaks instinct Yes,

ready? you Are

once. at start will we engineer; the answered Ayrton, lamp, a Take

corral. the in roamed unharnessed, onagers, The desired. as did Ayrton
preceding Harding, Cyrus and outside, the on secured was gate The
shore. the to westward led which path narrow the took Ayrton,

fallen matter pulverized the with choked was upon walked they soil The
had birds the Even woods. the in appeared quadruped No cloud. the from
the and ashes, of covering the raised breeze passing a Sometimes fled.
each of sight lost dust, of whirlwind a in enveloped colonists, two
with mouths and eyes their cover to careful then were They other.
suffocated. and blinded being of risk the ran they for handkerchiefs,

impediments, these with Ayrton, and Harding Cyrus for impossible was It
the if as close, was atmosphere the Moreover, progress. rapid make to
respiration. for unfit become had and up, burned partly been had oxygen
was It breath. take to stop to obliged were they paces hundred every At
reached companion his and engineer the when oclock ten past therefore
which porphyry and basalt of rocks of mass enormous the of crest the
island. the of coast northwest the composed

declivity, abrupt this of descent the commenced Harding Cyrus and Ayrton
that during which, path difficult the step for step almost following
was descent the day open In Grotto. Dakkar to them led had night, stormy
polished the covered which ashes of bed the besides, and, perilous, less
secure. more footing their make to them enabled rock the of surface

soon was height, in feet forty about shore, the of end the at ridge The
sloped gradually elevation this that recollected Harding Cyrus reached.
no low, present at was tide the Although sea. the of level the towards
beat dust, volcanic the by thickened waves, the and seen, be could beach
rocks. basaltic the upon

Dakkar to entrance the difficulty without found Ayrton and Harding Cyrus
it. before rock last the at moment a for paused and Grotto,

engineer. the said there, be should boat iron The

the him towards drawing Ayrton, replied Harding, Captain here, is It
vault. the of arch the by protected was which craft, fragile

Ayrton! board, On

the of undulation slight A boat. the into stepped colonists two The
there and crypt, the of arch low the under farther it carried waves
took then He lamp. the lighted steel, and flint of aid the with Ayrton,
so boat, the of bow the in placed been having lamp the and oars, the
steered and helm the took Harding Cyrus them, before fell rays its that
grotto. the of shades the through

its with cavern the illuminate to longer no there was Nautilus The
ray no but extinguished, be yet not might it Possibly light. electric
was that all reposed which in abyss the of depths the from escaped
Nemo. Captain of mortal

enabled nevertheless feeble, although lamp, the by afforded light The
A cavern. the of wall the following slowly, advance to engineer the
the in least at or roof, vaulted the under reigned silence deathlike
rumbling the heard distinctly Harding Cyrus soon for portion, anterior
mountain. the of bowels the from proceeded which

said. he volcano, the from comes That

soon was combinations chemical of presence the sounds, these Besides
were companion his and engineer the and odor, powerful their by betrayed
vapors. sulphurous by suffocated almost

changing Harding, Cyrus murmured feared, Nemo Captain what is This
notwithstanding. end, the to go must We countenance.

boat the directing and oars his to bending Ayrton, replied Forward!
cavern. the of head the towards

boat the grotto the of mouth the entering after minutes Twenty-five
end. extreme the reached

the upon lamp the of light the cast up, standing then, Harding Cyrus
the of shaft central the from it separated which cavern the of walls
a or feet ten be might It wall? this of thickness the was What volcano.
were sounds subterranean the But say. to impossible was feet--it hundred
great any of was it that supposition the of allow to perceptible too
thickness.

height certain a at wall the explored having after engineer, The
surveyed again and oar, an of end the to lamp the fastened horizontally,
elevation. greater a at wall basaltic the

pungent a escaped joinings, and clefts visible scarcely through There,
broken was wall The cavern. the of atmosphere the infected which vapor,
of feet three or two within to extended which of some cracks, large by
edge. waters the

voice,-- low a in said he Then space. brief a for thought Harding Cyrus

terrible a and there, lies danger The right! was captain the Yes!
danger!

the resumed Harding, Cyrus from sign a upon but, word, a not said Ayrton
of entrance the reached he and engineer the later hour an half and oars,
Grotto. Dakkar



19 Chapter

passed night and day a after January, of day 8th the day, next The
Ayrton and Harding Cyrus order, in all left they where corral, the at
House. Granite at arrived

informed and together, companions his called immediately engineer The
from and Island, Lincoln threatened which danger imminent the of them
them. deliver could power human no which

emotion, his of depth the betrayed voice his and said, he friends, My
earth this while endure will which those among not is island our
of cause the destruction, speedy less or more to doomed is It endures.
it. save can nothing which from and itself, within bears it which

not did They engineer. the at then other, each at looked colonists The
him. comprehend clearly

Spilett. Gideon said Cyrus! yourself, Explain

simply will I rather or Harding, Cyrus replied so, do will I
private of minutes few our during which, explanation the you afford
Nemo. Captain by me given was conversation,

colonists. the exclaimed Nemo! Captain

his before us render to desired he service last the was it and Yes,
death!

see will You service! last the Pencroft, exclaimed service! last The
yet! others us render will he dead is he though that

reporter. the inquired say? captain the did what But

does Island Lincoln engineer. the said friends, my you, tell will I
which of fact a and Pacific, the of islands other the resemble not
the about bring later or sooner must cognizant me made has Nemo Captain
foundation. its of subversion

spite in who, Pencroft, cried be! cant it Island, Lincoln Nonsense!
of gesture a prevent not could Harding, Cyrus for felt he respect the of
incredulity.

Captain what you tell will I engineer, the resumed Pencroft, Listen,
during yesterday, confirmed myself I which and me, to communicated Nemo
Grotto. Dakkar of exploration the

is and volcano, the as far as island the under stretches cavern This
it. terminates which wall the by shaft central its from separated only
allow already which clefts and fissures with seamed is wall this Now,
to volcano the of interior the in generated gases sulphurous the
escape.

contracting. suddenly brow his Pencroft, said Well?

pressure internal the under widen fissures these that saw I then, Well,
that and way giving gradually is basalt of wall the that within, from
waters the to passage a afford will it period shorter or longer a after
cavern. the fill which lake the of

will sea The pleasantry. at attempt an with Pencroft, replied Good!
matter! the of end an be will there and volcano, the extinguish

rushing sea, the when arrive day a should Harding, Cyrus said so! Not
the into shaft central the by penetrates cavern, the of wall the through
day that will Island Lincoln lava, boiling the to island the of interior
were Sicily of island the to happen would as air--just the into blown be
Etna. Mount into itself precipitate to Mediterranean the

engineer. the of words significant these to answer no made colonists The
menaced. were they which by danger the understood now They

danger the exaggerated way no in had Harding Cyrus that added be may It
be would it that idea an formed have persons Many apprehended. be to
on situated always almost are which volcanoes, extinguish to possible
of admission the for passage a opening by lake, or sea a of shores the
risk the incur to be would this that aware not are they But water. the
is steam whose boiler a like globe, the of portion a up blowing of
cavity a into rushing water, The heat. intense by expanded suddenly
would degrees, of thousands at estimated be might temperature whose
could enclosure no which energy sudden a with steam into converted be
resist.

frightful a by menaced island, the that doubtful therefore not was It
wall the as long so only endure would convulsion, approaching and
of question a even not was It endure. should itself Grotto Dakkar of
hours. of be might it days; of but weeks, of nor months,

profound of that was felt colonists the which sentiment first The
themselves menaced which peril the of much so not thought They sorrow.
sheltered had which island the of destruction the of but personally,
hoped had and well, so loved they which cultivated, had they which them,
much so expended, ineffectually effort much So flourishing. so render to
lost. labor

nor cheek, his down rolling from tear large a prevent not could Pencroft
it. conceal to attempt he did

of favor in yet chances The place. took now conversation further Some
was there that agreed was it finally but discussed; were colonists the
vessel the of fitting and building the that lost, be to hour an not
the was this that and energy, utmost their with forward pushed be should
Island. Lincoln of inhabitants the for safety of chance sole

avail it could What vessel. the on work to set therefore, hands, All
House? Granite of stores the increase to hunt, to reap, to sow, to
than more contained outbuildings and storehouse the of contents The
its be might long however voyage, a for ship the provide to sufficient
receive to ready be should ship the that imperative was it But duration.
arrive. should catastrophe inevitable the before them

of 23rd the By ardor. feverish with on carried now were labors Their
had change no time this to Up over. half-decked was vessel the January
with mingled smoke and Vapor volcano. the of summit the on place taken
But crater. the from up thrown were stones incandescent and flames
the attaining lava the of consequence in 23rd, the of night the during
which cone hat-shaped the volcano, the of stratum first the of level
The heard. was sound frightful A disappeared. latter the over formed
out rushed and asunder, rent was island the thought first at colonists
House. Granite of

morning. the in oclock two about occurred This

thousand a rock of mass a cone, superior The fire. on appeared sky The
had pounds, of millions of thousands weighing and height, in feet
foundation. its to tremble it making island, the upon down thrown been
the upon fallen had and north, the to inclined cone this Fortunately,
The sea. the and volcano the between stretching tufa and sand of plain
a sky the towards projected enlarged thus being crater the of aperture
atmosphere the reflection of effect simple the by that intense so glare
the from bursting lava, of torrent a time same the At red-hot. appeared
vase a from escaping water like cascades, long in out poured summit, new
the of sides the over crept fire of tongues thousand a and full, too
volcano.

Ayrton. exclaimed corral! the corral! The

the as rushing was lava the that corral the towards fact, in was, It
the of portions fertile the consequently and east, the faced crater new
with menaced were Wood, Jacamar and Creek Red of springs the island,
destruction. instant

cart The stables. onagers the to rushed colonists the cry Ayrtons At
hasten thought--to same the by possessed were All harnessed. once at was
enclosed. it animals the liberty at set and corral the to

the of cries The corral. the at arrived they morning the in three Before
them. possessed which alarm the indicated goats and musmons terrified
from fell minerals liquefied and matter burning of torrent a Already
the of side the as far as meadows the upon mountain the of side the
bewildered animals, the and Ayrton, by open burst was gate The palisade.
directions. all in fled terror, with

into converting corral, the filled lava boiling the afterwards hour An
up burning it, through ran which rivulet little the of water the vapor
to palisade the of post a even not leaving and grass, dry like house the
stood. once corral the where spot the mark

In madness. folly--nay, been have would disaster this against contend To
powerless. is man convulsions grand Natures of presence

his and Harding Cyrus January. of 24th daylight--the now was It
the ascertain to desired House, Granite to returning before companions,
soil The take. to about was lava of inundation this direction probable
be to was it and coast, east the to Franklin Mount from gradually sloped
reach would torrent the Wood, Jacamar thick the of spite in that, feared
Heights. Prospect of plateau the

Spilett. Gideon said us, cover will lake The

reply. only Hardings Cyrus was so! hope I

the which upon plain the reaching of desirous were colonists The
their arrested lava the but fallen, had Franklin Mount of cone superior
and Creek, Red of valley the side, one on followed, had It progress.
its in watercourses those evaporating River, Falls of that other the on
lava; of torrent the crossing of possibility no was There passage.
The it. before retreat to obliged were colonists the contrary, the on
it as terminated recognizable, longer no was crown, its without volcano,
two From crater. ancient the replaced which table flat of sort a by was
lava of flow unceasing an sides eastern and southern its in openings
a crater new the Above streams. distinct two forming thus forth, poured
massed atmosphere, the of those with mingled ashes, and smoke of cloud
be scarcely could and broke, thunder of peals Loud island. the over
vomited mouth whose mountain, the of rumblings the from distinguished
burst feet, thousand a than more to hurled which, rocks, ignited forth
the intensity in rivaled lightning of Flashes shells. like air the in
eruption. volcanos

the by tenable longer no was position the morning the in seven Towards
Wood. Jacamar of borders the in shelter took accordingly who colonists,
lava, the but them, around rain to begin projectiles the did only Not
the to road the off cut to threatened Creek, Red of bed the overflowing
suddenly sap, their and fire, caught trees of rows nearest The corral.
while reports, loud with explode to them caused vapor, into transformed
inundation. the of midst the in unhurt remained moist, less others,

but proceeded They corral. the to road the taken again had colonists The
inclination the of consequence in but, back; looking frequently slowly,
waves lower its as and east, the in rapidly gained lava the soil, the of
immediately. them covered heat, boiling at others, solidified became

and more became Valley Creek Red of stream principal the Meanwhile,
enormous and fire, on was forest the of portion this All menacing. more
already were trunks whose trees, the over rolled smoke of wreaths
lava. the by consumed

of mouth the from mile a half about lake, the near halted colonists The
decided. be to now was death or life of question A Creek. Red

and crises, important of consideration the to accustomed Harding, Cyrus
whatever truth, the hearing of capable men addressing was he that aware
said,-- then be, might it

of part a and lava, the of progress the arrest will lake the Either
will stream the or destruction, utter from preserved be will island the
will plant or tree a not and West, Far the of forests the overrun
that but prospect no have shall We soil. the of surface the on remain
be probably will which death rocks--a barren these upon starvation of
island. the of explosion the by anticipated

his stamping and arms his folding Pencroft, replied case, that In
vessel? the on longer any working of use the whats foot,

last! the to duty our do must we Harding, Cyrus answered Pencroft,

through passage a broken having after lava, of river the instant this At
the of borders the reached course, its in devoured it trees noble the
it had which, soil the of elevation an was there point this At lake.
torrent. the arrest to sufficed have might greater, been

Harding. Cyrus cried work! To

to possible be might It understood. once at was thought engineers The
the into itself pour to it compel thus and torrent, the were, it as dam,
lake.

shovels, with returned They dockyard. the to hastened colonists The
fallen of aid the with earth the banking of means by and axes, picks,
feet three embankment an raising in hours few a in succeeded they trees
when them, to seemed It length. in paces of hundreds some and high
few a than more working been scarcely had they if as finished, had they
minutes.

after soon substances liquefied The soon. too moment a not was It
a like swelled lava of stream The barrier. the of bottom the reached
sole the demolish to threatened and banks, its overflow to about river
But West. Far whole the overrunning from it prevent could which obstacle
torrent the suspense terrible of moment a after and firm, held dam the
feet. twenty of height a from Lake Grant into itself precipitated

regarded breathlessly word, a uttering or moving without colonists, The
elements. two the of strife this

pen What fire! and water between conflict this was spectacle a What
could pencil scene--what this of horror marvelous the describe could
boiling the with contact by evaporated it as hissed water The it? depict
if as height, immeasurable an to air the in whirled vapor The lava.
however But, opened. suddenly been had boiler immense an of valves the
must it lake, the in contained water of volume the be might considerable
stream the while replenished, not was it because absorbed, be eventually
new ceasing without on rolled source, inexhaustible an from fed lava, of
matter. incandescent of waves

solidified immediately lake the in fell which lava of waves first The
surface their Upon it. from emerge to speedily as so accumulated and
step a but stone, became turn their in which waves, other fell
which pier a formed was manner this In lake. the of center the nearer
the overflow, not could which lake, the up fill gradually to threatened
water the of hissing The evaporated. being lava the by displaced water
wind, the by blown vapor, the and sound, deafening a with air the rent
the and longer, and longer became pier The sea. the upon rain in fell
stretched formerly Where another. on one themselves piled lava of blocks
smoking of mass enormous an appeared now lake the of waters calm the
Imagine shoals. immense formed had soil the of upheaving an if as rocks,
solidified suddenly then hurricane, a by aroused lake the of waters the
of aspect the of formed be may conception some and frost, intense an by
of torrent irresistible this of eruption the after hours three lake the
lava.

fire. by vanquished be would water time This

the that colonists the for circumstance fortunate a was it Nevertheless
They Grant. Lake of direction the in been have should lava of effusion
Heights, Prospect of plateau The respite. days some them before had
these And preserved. moment the for were dockyard the and House, Granite
calking carefully and planking in employ to necessary was it days few
on refuge take then would colonists The her. launching and vessel, the
the on afloat be should she after her rig to content vessel, the board
the destroy to threatened which explosion an of danger the With waters.
House, Granite of walls The shore. on security no be could there island
them. upon in fall moment any at might retreat, a sure so once

the January, of 30th the to 25th the from days, following six the During
as vessel their of construction the of much as accomplished colonists
moments a themselves allowed hardly They done. have could men twenty
enabled crater the from shot which flames the of glare the and repose,
perhaps but continued, lava of flow The day. and night work to them
entirely almost was Grant Lake for fortunate, was This abundantly. less
spread inevitably would it accumulate should lava more if and up, choked
beach. the upon thence and Heights, Prospect of plateau the over

not was it side, this on protected partially thus was island the if But
part. western the with so

of valley the followed had which lava, of stream second the fact, In
the of sides both on land the extent, great of valley a River, Falls
then had liquid burning The obstacle. no with met flat, being creek
year, the of period this At West. Far the of forest the through spread
fire caught forest the heat, tropical a by up dried were trees the when
itself extended conflagration the that manner a such in instantaneously,
whose branches, higher their by and trees the of trunks the by both
current the that appeared even It progress. its favored interlacement
the than trees the of summits the among rapidly more spread flame of
bases. their at lava of current

capybaras, boars, wild jaguars, animals, wild the that happened it Thus
banks the to fled had terror, with mad kind, every of game and koalas,
Balloon. Port to road the beyond Marsh, Tadorn the to and Mercy the of
any pay to task their with occupied much too were colonists the But
had They animals. these of formidable most the even to attention
the at shelter take even not would and House, Granite abandoned
Mercy. the of mouth the near tent, a under encamped but Chimneys,

of plateau the ascended Spilett Gideon and Harding Cyrus day Each
never but them, accompanied Herbert Sometimes Heights. Prospect
now island the of prospect the upon look to bear not could who Pencroft,
devastated. utterly so

the of part wooded the All spectacle. heart-rending a truth, in was, It
raised trees green of clump single One bare. completely now was island
there and Here Peninsula. Serpentine of extremity the at heads their
the of side The stumps. branchless and blackened grotesque few a were
eruption The Marsh. Tadorn than barren more even was forest devastated
charming that up sprang formerly Where complete. been had lava of
tufa. volcanic of mass savage a but nothing now was soil the verdure,
now water of drop no rivers Mercy and Falls the of valleys the In
up, dried entirely be Grant Lake should and sea, the towards flowed
But, thirst. their quenching of means no have would colonists the
lake, the of corner southern the spared had lava the fortunately
island. the of water drinking the of remained that all containing
of outlines well-defined and rugged the out stood northwest the Towards
island. the over hovering claw gigantic a like volcano, the of sides the
who, colonists, the to painful how and sight, fearful and sad a What
watercourses, by irrigated forests, with covered domain fertile a from
it as themselves, found toils, their of produce the by enriched and
reserves their for but which, upon rock, desolate a to transported were,
subsistence! of means the gather even not could they provisions, of

day. one Spilett, Gideon said heart! ones break to enough is It

to time the us grant God May engineer. the answered Spilett, Yes,
refuge! sole our now vessel, this complete

somewhat has eruption the of violence the that Cyrus, think, you not Do
less somewhat but lava, forth vomits still volcano The lessened?
not. mistake I if abundantly,

burning still is fire The Harding. Cyrus answered little, matters It
moment. any at in break may sea the and mountain, the of interior the in
a by devoured is ship whose passengers of condition the in are We
or sooner that know who and extinguish, cannot they which conflagration
to Spilett, work, To powder-magazine. the reach must flames the later
hour! an lose not us let and work,

February, of 7th the until say to is that more, days eight During
the within confined was eruption the but flow, to continued lava the
liquefied the lest all above feared Harding Cyrus limits. previous
could dockyard the event that in for shore, the overflow should matter
of frame the in felt colonists the time this about Moreover, escape. not
degree. highest the to them alarmed which vibrations island the

the before elapse must month another Yet February. of 20th the was It
then? till together hold island the Would sea. for ready be would vessel
vessel the launch to was Harding Cyrus and Pencroft of intention The
the upperworks, the deck, The complete. be should hull the as soon as
the but afterwards, finished be might rigging the and woodwork interior
refuge assured an have should colonists the that was point essential
the conduct to better even be might it Perhaps island. the from away
the from possible as far as say, to is that Balloon, Port to vessel
and islet the between Mercy, the of mouth the at for eruption, of center
event the in crushed being of risk the run would it granite, of wall the
therefore were voyagers the of exertions the All convulsion. any of
hull. the of completion the upon concentrated

launching upon calculate might they and arrived, March of 3rd the Thus
days. ten in vessel the

fourth this in had, who colonists, the of hearts the in revived Hope
Even trials. many so suffered island, Lincoln on sojourn their of year
by occasioned taciturnity somber the measure some in lost Pencroft
were true, is it hopes, His domain. his of ruin and devastation the
vessel. his upon concentrated

it, finish shall we engineer, the to said he it, finish shall We
equinox the and advancing is season the for time, is it and captain,
island Tabor to in put must we necessary, if Well, here. be soon will
Ah, Island. Lincoln after island Tabor of think But winter. the spend to
possible? it believed have could Who unfortunate! how

reply. invariable engineers the was on, get us Let

moment. a losing without away worked they And

have could this all think you do later, days few a Neb, asked Master,
alive? still been had Nemo Captain if happened

Harding. Cyrus answered Neb, Certainly,

Neb. to Pencroft whispered it! believe dont one, for I,

seriously. Neb answered I! Nor

menacing. became again appearances March of week first the During
rain like fell lava, fluid of formed glass, like threads of Thousands
overflowed which lava with boiling again was crater The island. the upon
the of surface the along flowed torrent The volcano. the of back the
had which trees of skeletons meager few the destroyed and tufa, hardened
the towards time this flowing stream, The eruption. first the withstood
and Glycerine, Creek beyond stretched Grant, Lake of shore southwest
of work the to blow last This Heights. Prospect of plateau the invaded
court, inner the of buildings the mill, The terrible. was colonists the
all in fled poultry affrighted The destroyed. all were stables, the
their if as alarm, greatest the of signs showed Jup and Top directions.
the of number large A catastrophe. impending an of them warned instinct
which Those eruption. first the in perished had island the of animals
the which to few a save Marsh, Tadorn but refuge no found survived
retreat last this even But asylum. afforded Heights Prospect of plateau
of edge the over flowing lava-torrent, the and them, to closed now was
of cataracts its beach the upon down pour to began wall, granite the
description. all passed spectacle this of horror sublime The fire.
fluid, molten of Niagara a to compared be only could it night the During
below. masses boiling its and above vapors incandescent its with

the although and entrenchment, last their to driven were colonists The
launch to decided they calked, yet not were vessel the of seams upper
once. at her

for preparations necessary the about set therefore Ayrton and Pencroft
the day, next the of morning the place take to was which launching, the
March. of 9th

escaping vapor of column enormous an 8th the of night the during But
than more of height a to explosions frightful with rose crater the from
way given evidently had Grotto Dakkar of wall The feet. thousand three
central the through rushing sea, the and gases, of pressure the under
But vapor. into converted once at was gulf, igneous the into shaft
An vapor. this for outlet sufficient a afford not could crater the
miles, hundred a of distance a at heard been have might which explosion,
a in and, Pacific, the into fell mountains of Fragments air. the shook
once island Lincoln where spot the over rolled ocean the minutes, few
stood.



20 Chapter

ten scarcely breadth, in twenty length, in feet thirty rock, isolated An
of waves the which point solid only the was such edge, waters the from
engulfed. not had Pacific the

had wall The House! Granite of structure the of remained that all was It
the of few a and fragments, to shattered then been and headlong fallen
point. this form to another above one piled were room large the of rocks
Mount of cone inferior the abyss; the in disappeared had around All
Gulf, Shark of jaws lava the explosion; the by asunder rent Franklin,
Port of rocks granite the Islet, Safety Heights, Prospect of plateau the
so Peninsula, Serpentine long the Grotto, Dakkar of basalts the Balloon,
could that All eruption. the of center the from nevertheless distant
a as served now which rock narrow the was Island Lincoln of seen be now
Top. dog their and colonists six the to refuge

well as birds, the catastrophe; the in perished also had animals The
or crushed either island--all the of fauna the representing those as
in death his found alas! had, himself Jup unfortunate the and drowned,
soil. the of crevice some

Ayrton and Neb, Pencroft, Herbert, Spilett, Gideon Harding, Cyrus If
been had they tent, their under assembled because, was it survived, had
island the of fragments the when instant the at sea the into hurled
side. every on down rained

a half at perceive, only could they surface the reached they When
which on and swam they which towards rocks, of mass this length, cables
footing. found they

provisions few A days. nine for existed now had they rock barren this On
a catastrophe, the before House Granite of magazine the from taken
the of hollow a in fallen had which rain the from water fresh little
hope, last Their possessed. colonists unfortunate the that all was rock,
quitting of means no had They pieces. to shattered been had vessel, the
they that seemed It it. obtaining of means any nor fire, no reef; the
perish. inevitably must

two for provisions only remained there March, of 18th the day, This
necessaries bare the to consumption their limited they although days,
in nothing them avail could intelligence and science their All life. of
God. of hand the in were They position. present their

a Pencroft, and nervous, more Spilett Gideon calm, was Harding Cyrus
not did Herbert rock. the on fro and to walked anger, sullen to prey
that him from demanding if as side, engineers the quit moment a for
to resigned were Ayrton and Neb give. to power no had he assistance
fate. their

Pencroft. repeated often misfortune! a what misfortune! a what Ah,
have we But Island! Tabor to us take to walnut-shell a but had we If
nothing! nothing,

Neb. said die, to right did Nemo Captain

unfortunate his and Harding Cyrus days ensuing five the During
eating care, extreme most the with provisions their husbanded companions
weakness Their starvation. of dying from them prevent would what only
delirium. of symptoms show to began Neb and Herbert extreme. was

the even retain to them for possible it was circumstances these Under
a That chance? remaining sole their was What No! hope? a of shadow
well too only knew they But rock? the of sight in appear should vessel
Pacific. the of part this visited ever ships no that experience from
the coincidence, providential truly a by that, calculate they Could
Ayrton of search in time this at precisely arrive would yacht Scotch
supposing besides, and, probable; scarcely was It Island? Tabor at
deposit to able been not had colonists the as there, come should she
the of commander the abode, of change Ayrtons out pointing notice a
again would results, without Island Tabor explored having after yacht,
latitudes. lower to return and sail set

death, horrible a and retained, be could saved being of hope no No!
rock. this upon them awaited thirst, and hunger from death

longer no and inanimate, rock, the on stretched were they Already
effort, supreme a by alone, Ayrton them. around passed what of conscious
the over glance despairing a cast and head, his raised time to time from
ocean. desert

extended were arms Ayrtons March of 24th the of morning the on But
knees, his on first at himself, raised he horizon; the in point a toward
signal. a make to seemed hand his and upright, then

an without not evidently was She rock. the off sight in was sail A
line, direct a in making was she which for mark the was reef The object.
out her made have might colonists unfortunate the and steam, all under
horizon. the watch to strength the had had they if before hours some

life. of sign without back fell Ayrton--and murmured Duncan! The

to thanks consciousness, recovered companions his and Harding Cyrus When
of cabin the in themselves found they them, upon lavished attention the
death. escaped had they how comprehend to able being without steamer, a

everything. explained Ayrton from word A

murmured. he Duncan! The

Heaven, to hand his raising And Harding. Cyrus exclaimed Duncan! The
us! preserved Thou hast mercifully God! Almighty Oh! said, he

by commanded now yacht, Glenarvans Lord Duncan, the fact, in was, It
to Island Tabor to despatched been had who Grant, Captain of son Robert,
of years twelve after land native his to back him bring and Ayrton, find
expiation.

their to way the on already but saved, only not were colonists The
country. native

the you to suggested have can who Harding, Cyrus asked Grant, Captain
of Ayrton, find not did you where Island, Tabor left having after idea,
northeast? farther miles hundred a coming

not find, to order in was it Grant, Robert replied Harding, Captain
companions. your and yourself but Ayrton, only

myself? and companions My

Island. Lincoln at Doubtless,

Neb, Herbert, Spilett, Gideon breath a in exclaimed Island! Lincoln At
astonished. degree highest the in Pencroft, and

inquired Island? Lincoln of existence the of aware be you could How
charts. the in named even not is it Harding, Cyrus

answered Island, Tabor on you by left document a from it of knew I
Grant. Robert

Spilett. Gideon cried document! A

a producing Grant, Robert answered is, it here and doubt, Without
the Island, Lincoln of latitude and longitude the indicated which paper
colonists. American five and Ayrton of residence present

notice, the read having after Harding, Cyrus cried Nemo! Captain is It
paper the of that to similar was handwriting the that recognized and
corral. the at found

and Bonadventure our took who he then was it Pencroft, said Ah!
Island! Tabor to go to alone himself hazarded

Herbert. added notice, this leave to order In

his after even that sailor, the exclaimed saying, in right then was I
service. last a us render would captain the death

emotion, profoundest the of voice a in Harding, Cyrus said friends, My
our Nemo, Captain of soul the on pity had have mercy of God the may
benefactor.

Harding, Cyrus of words last these at themselves uncovered colonists The
Nemo. Captain of name the murmured and

this should Where simply, said engineer, the approaching Ayrton, Then
deposited? be coffer

at life, his of risk the at saved had Ayrton which coffer the was It
now he which and engulfed, been had island the that instant very the
engineer. the to handed faithfully

addressing Then, touched. deeply Harding, Cyrus said Ayrton! Ayrton!
find you criminal; a you behind left you added, he Sir, Grant, Robert
I hand whose and penitence, by honest become has who man a place his in
mine. in clasp to proud am

Captain of history strange the with acquainted made now was Grant Robert
taken being observation Then, Island. Lincoln of colonists the and Nemo
the on figure henceforward must which shoal, this of remained what of
sail. all make to given was order the Pacific, the of charts

their found and America, in landed colonists the afterwards weeks few A
right which in conflict terrible the after peace at more once country
triumphed. had justice and

the to Nemo Captain by left coffer the in contained treasures the Of
the in employed was portion larger the Island, Lincoln of colonists
the alone, pearl One Iowa. of State the in territory vast a of purchase
the in Glenarvan Lady to sent and treasure the from reserved was finest,
Duncan. the by country their to restored castaways the of name

say, to is that labor, to invited colonists the domain, this upon There,
the offer to hoped had they whom to those all happiness, and wealth to
to colony vast a founded was There Island. Lincoln of hospitality
the of waters the beneath sunk island that of name the gave they which
name the took mountain a Mercy, the called was there river A Pacific.
forests the and Grant, Lake named was lake small a Franklin, Mount of
on island an been have might It West. Far the of forests the became
firma. terra

companions, his and engineer the of hands intelligent the under There,
Island Lincoln of colonists former the of one Not prospered. everything
his with was Neb together. always live to sworn had they for absent, was
Pencroft all; for himself sacrifice to ready there was Ayrton master;
completed who Herbert, sailor; a been ever had he than farmer a more was
Gideon and Harding, Cyrus of superintendence the under studies his
journal best-informed the Herald, Lincoln New the founded who Spilett,
world. the in

from visits intervals at received companions his and Harding Cyrus There
sister the wife, his and Mangles John Captain Glenarvan, Lady and Lord
who those all and McNab, Major himself, Grant Robert Grant, Robert of
Nemo. Captain and Grant Captain of both history the in part taken had

had they as present the in united happy, were all conclude, to There,
which upon island that forget they could never but past; the in been
four during which, island that friendless, and poor arrived had they
a but remained there which of and wants, their all supplied had years
him of tomb the Pacific, the of waves the by washed granite of fragment
Nemo. Captain of name the borne had who

REEF SHIFTING A

and mysterious a incident, remarkable a by signalised was 1866 year The
to Not forgotten. yet has one no doubtless which phenomenon, puzzling
the excited and population maritime the agitated which rumours mention
were men seafaring continents, of interior the in even mind, public
vessels, of captains sailors, common Merchants, excited. particularly
countries, all of officers naval America, and Europe of both skippers,
were continents, two the on States several of Governments the and
matter. the in interested deeply

long a thing," enormous "an by met been had vessels past time some For
infinitely and phosphorescent, occasionally spindle-shaped, object,
whale. a than movements its in rapid more and larger

log-books) various in (entered apparition this to relating facts The
in creature or object the of shape the to as respects most in agreed
power surprising its movements, its of rapidity untiring the question,
If endowed. seemed it which with life peculiar the and locomotion, of
in classified hitherto those all size in surpassed it whale, a was it
at made observations of mean the consideration into Taking science.
to assigned who those of estimate timid the times--rejecting divers
exaggerated the with equally feet, hundred two of length a object this
length--we in three and width in mile a as down it set which opinions
all greatly surpassed being mysterious this that conclude fairly might
at existed it if day, the of ones learned the by admitted dimensions
that with and, fact; undeniable an was exist DID it that And all.
we marvellous, the of favour in mind human the disposes which tendency
this by world entire the in produced excitement the understand can
the fables, of list the in it classing to As apparition. supernatural
question. the of out was idea

the of Higginson, Governor steamer the 1866, July, of 20th the On
mass moving this met had Company, Navigation Steam Burnach and Calcutta
at thought Baker Captain Australia. of coast east the off miles five
even he sandbank; unknown an of presence the in was he that first
water, of columns two when position exact its determine to prepared
hundred a noise hissing a with shot object, mysterious the by projected
been had sandbank the unless Now, air. the into up feet fifty and
Governor the geyser, a of eruption intermittent the to submitted
mammal, aquatic an with than less nor more neither do to had Higginson
water of columns blow-holes its from up threw which then, till unknown
vapour. and air with mixed

in year, same the in July of 23rd the on observed were facts Similar
Steam Pacific and India West the of Columbus, the by Ocean, Pacific the
transport could creature extraordinary this But Company. Navigation
an in as, velocity; surprising with another to place one from itself
had Columbus the and Higginson Governor the days, three of interval
a by separated chart, the of points different two at it observed
leagues. nautical hundred seven than more of distance

of Helvetia, the off, farther miles thousand two later, days Fifteen
Steamship Mail Royal the of Shannon, the and Compagnie-Nationale, the
lying Atlantic the of portion that in windward to sailing Company,
the signalled respectively Europe, and States United the between
long. W. 35' 60 and lat. N. 15' 42 in other each to monster
in justified themselves thought they observations simultaneous these In
hundred three than more at mammal the of length minimum the estimating
dimensions smaller of were Helvetia and Shannon the as feet, fifty and
all. over feet hundred three measured they though it, than

sea the of parts those frequent which those whales, largest the Now
never have islands, Umgullich and Kulammak, Aleutian, the round
that. attain they if yards, sixty of length the exceeded

sang They fashion. the was monster the resort great of place every In
on it represented and papers, the in it ridiculed cafes, the in it of
There it. regarding circulated were stories of kinds All stage. the
imaginary and gigantic every of caricatures papers the in appeared
sub-arctic of Dick" "Moby terrible the whale, white the from creature,
ship a entangle could tentacles whose kraken, immense the to regions,
The ocean. the of abyss the into it hurry and tons hundred five of
revived. even were times ancient of legends

the and believers the between argument unending the forth burst Then
journals. scientific the and wise the of societies the in unbelievers
of Editors minds. all inflamed monster" the of question "The
supernatural, the in believers with quarrelling journals, scientific
drawing even some campaign, memorable this during ink of seas spilled
personalities. direct to came they sea-serpent the from for blood;

buried, seemed question the 1867 year the of months first the During
was It public. the before brought were facts new when revive, to never
danger real a but solved, be to problem scientific a longer no then
The shape. another quite took question The avoided. be to seriously
indefinite of reef a but reef, a rock, a island, small a became monster
proportions. shifting and

Company, Ocean Montreal the of Moravian, the 1867, March, of 5th the On
15' 72 and lat. 30' 27 in night the during herself finding
for chart no in marked rock, a quarter starboard her on struck long.,
its and wind the of efforts combined the Under sea. the of part that
knots. thirteen of rate the at going was it power, horse hundred four
Moravian, the of hull the of strength superior the for been not it Had
237 the with down gone and shock the by broken been have would she
Canada. from home bringing was she passengers

was day the as morning, the in o'clock five about happened accident The
after-part the to hurried quarter-deck the of officers The breaking.
attention. careful most the with sea the examined They vessel. the of
distant, length cables' three about eddy strong a but nothing saw They
the of bearings The agitated. violently been had surface the if as
without route its continued Moravian the and exactly, taken were place
enormous an on or rock, submerged a on struck it Had damage. apparent
bottom ship's the of examination on but, tell; not could They wreck?
broken. was keel her of part that found was it repairs, undergoing when

like forgotten been have perhaps might itself, in grave so fact, This
under re-enacted been not had it after, weeks three if, others many
of victim the of nationality the to thanks But, circumstances. similar
vessel the which to company the of reputation the to thanks shock, the
circulated. extensively became circumstance the belonged,

breeze the beautiful, being sea the 1867, April, of 13th The
in herself found line, Company's Cunard the of Scotia, the favourable,
of speed the at going was She lat. 37' 45 and long. 12' 15
half. a and knots thirteen

passengers the whilst afternoon, the in four past minutes seventeen At
on felt was shock slight a saloon, great the in lunch at assembled were
port-paddle. the of aft little a quarter, her on Scotia, the of hull the

by seemingly and struck, been had she but struck, not had Scotia The
been had shock The blunt. than penetrating and sharp rather something
shouts the for been not it had alarmed, been had one no that slight so
"We exclaiming, bridge, the to on rushed who watch, carpenter's the of
much were passengers the first At sinking!" are we sinking! are
danger The them. reassure to hastened Anderson Captain but frightened,
by compartments seven into divided Scotia, The imminent. be not could
Captain leak. any impunity with brave could partitions, strong
sea the that found He hold. the into immediately down went Anderson
influx the of rapidity the and compartment; fifth the into pouring was
this Fortunately considerable. was water the of force the that proved
been have would fires the or boilers, the hold not did compartment
be to engines the ordered Anderson Captain extinguished. immediately
extent the ascertain to down went men the of one and once, at stopped
existence the discovered they afterwards minutes Some injury. the of
a Such bottom. ship's the in diameter, in yards two hole, large a of
submerged, half paddles her Scotia, the and stopped; be not could leak
miles hundred three then was She course. her continue to obliged was
great caused which delay, days' three after and, Clear, Cape from
company. the of basin the entered she Liverpool, in uneasiness

They dock. dry in put was which Scotia, the visited engineers The
below half a and yards two at possible; it believe scarcely could
triangle. isosceles an of form the in rent, regular a was water-mark
it that defined perfectly so was plates iron the in place broken The
then, clear, was It punch. a by done neatly more been have not could
stamp common a of not was perforation the producing instrument the that
an piercing and strength, prodigious with driven been having after and,
backward a by itself withdrawn had thick, inches 3/8 1 plate iron
motion.

the more once exciting in resulted which fact, last the was Such
casualties unlucky all moment this From opinion. public of torrent
monster. the to down put were for accounted otherwise be not could which

these all of responsibility the rested creature imaginary this Upon
three of for considerable; were unfortunately which shipwrecks,
number the Lloyd's, at recorded annually was loss whose ships thousand
the from lost, totally be to supposed steam-ships and sailing of
hundred! two than less not to amounted news, all of absence

their of accused was unjustly, or justly who, "monster" the was it Now,
different the between communication it, to thanks and, disappearance,
sharply demanded public The dangerous. more and more became continents
formidable this from relieved be price any at should seas the that
cetacean.[1]


family. whale the of Member [1]



II CHAPTER

CON AND PRO

a from returned just had I place, took events these when period the At
the in Nebraska, of territory disagreeable the in research scientific
the in Professor Assistant as office my of virtue In States. United
attached had Government French the Paris, in History Natural of Museum
New in arrived I Nebraska, in months six After expedition. that to me
My collection. precious a with laden March, of end the towards York
I Meanwhile May. in days first the for fixed was France for departure
and botanical, mineralogical, my classifying in myself occupying was
Scotia. the to happened accident the when riches, zoological

day. the of question the was which subject the in up perfectly was I
and American the all reread and read had I otherwise? be I could How
mystery This conclusion. a nearer any being without papers European
jumped I opinion, an forming of impossibility the Under me. puzzled
could something was really there That other. the to extreme one from
on finger their put to invited were incredulous the and doubted, be not
Scotia. the of wound the

theory The height. its at was question the York New at arrival my On
by supported sandbank, unapproachable the and island, floating the of
indeed, And, abandoned. was judgment, a form to competent little minds
its change it could how stomach, its in machine a had shoal this unless
rapidity? astonishing such with position

wreck enormous an of hull floating a of idea the cause, same the From
up. given was

question, the of solutions possible two only then, remained, There
a for were who those side, one on parties: distinct two created which
a for were who those other, the on strength; colossal of monster
power. motive enormous of vessel submarine

against stand not could was, it as plausible theory, last this But
have should gentleman private a That worlds. both in made inquiries
was how and when, Where, likely. not was command his at machine a such
secret? kept been have construction its could how and built? it
And machine. destructive a such possess might Government a Certainly
the multiplied has man of ingenuity the when times, disastrous these in
of knowledge the without that, possible was it war, of weapons of power
engine. formidable a such work to try might State a others,

of declaration the before fell machine war a of idea the But
transatlantic and question, in was interest public As Governments.
how But doubted. be not could veracity their suffered, communications
the escaped had boat submarine this of construction the that admit
such under secret the keep to gentleman private a For eye? public
act every whose State a for and difficult, very be would circumstances
impossible. certainly rivals, powerful by watched persistently is

of honour the me did persons several York New in arrival my Upon
France in published had I question. in phenomenon the on me consulting
Great the of Mysteries entitled volumes, two in quarto, in work a
world, learned the in of approved highly book, This Grounds. Submarine
of branch obscure rather this in reputation special a me for gained
the deny could I as long As asked. was advice My History. Natural
But negative. decided a to myself confined I fact, the of reality
explain to obliged was I corner, a into driven myself finding soon,
forms, its all in question the discussed I point. by point myself
a from extract an here give I and scientifically; and politically
30th the of number the in published I which article carefully-studied
follows: as ran It April. of

other all rejecting theories, different the one by one examining "After
marine a of existence the admit to necessary becomes it suggestions,
power. enormous of animal

Soundings us. to unknown entirely are ocean the of depths great "The
beings depths--what remote those in passes What them. reach cannot
the of surface the beneath miles fifteen or twelve live, can or live,
scarcely can we animals, these of organisation the is waters--what
may me to submitted problem the of solution the However, conjecture.
of varieties the all know do we Either dilemma. the of form the modify
them know NOT do we If not. do we or planet, our people which beings
more is nothing us, for deeps the in secrets still has Nature all--if
or fishes, of existence the admit to than reason to conformable
organisation an of species, new of even or kinds, other of cetaceans
an which and soundings, to inaccessible strata the inhabit to formed
level upper the to intervals long at brought has sort some of accident
ocean. the of

necessarily must we kinds, living all know DO we contrary, the on "If,
already beings marine those amongst question in animal the for seek
existence the admit to disposed be should I case, that in and, classed;
narwhal. gigantic a of

of length a attains often sea, the of unicorn or narwhal, common "The
strength it give tenfold, or fivefold size its Increase feet. sixty
you and weapons, destructive its lengthen size, its to proportionate
by determined proportions the have will It required. animal the obtain
perforation the by required instrument the Shannon, the of officers the
the of hull the pierce to necessary power the and Scotia, the of
steamer.

halberd, a sword, ivory of sort a with armed is narwhal the "Indeed,
tusk principal The naturalists. certain of expression the to according
buried found been have tusks these of Some steel. of hardness the has
success. with attacks always unicorn the which whales, of bodies the in
of bottoms the from trouble, without not out, drawn been have Others
pierces gimlet a as through, and through pierced had they which ships,
one possesses Paris of Medicine of Faculty the of Museum The barrel. a
and length, in quarter a and yards two weapons, defensive these of
base. the at diameter in inches fifteen

animal the and stronger times six be to weapon this suppose well! "Very
hour, an miles twenty of rate the at it launch powerful; more times ten
required. catastrophe the producing of capable shock a obtain you and
a be to it maintain shall I therefore, information, further Until
with but halberd, a with not armed dimensions, colossal of sea-unicorn
whose war, of `rams' the or frigates, armoured the as spur, real a
Thus time. same the at possess would it power motive and massiveness
something be there unless explained, be phenomenon puzzling this may
or perceived, seen, conjectured, ever has one that all above and over
possibility." of bounds the within just is which experienced;

point, certain a to up but, part; my on cowardly were words last These
much too give not and professor, as dignity my shelter to wished I
laugh. do they when well laugh who Americans, the to laughter for cause
admitted I however, effect, In escape. of way a myself for reserved I
which discussed, warmly was article My "monster." the of existence the
of number certain a it round rallied It reputation. high a it procured
to liberty full least, at gave, proposed it solution The partisans.
of conceptions grand in delights mind human The imagination. the
the vehicle, best their precisely is sea the And beings. supernatural
terrestrial which (against giants these which through medium only
be can nothing) as are rhinoceroses, or elephants as such animals,
developed. or produced

from chiefly question the treated papers commercial and industrial The
Lloyd's the Gazette, Mercantile and Shipping The view. of point this
papers all Review, Colonial and Maritime the and Packet-Boat, the List,
of rates their raise to threatened which companies insurance to devoted
been had opinion Public point. this on unanimous were premium,
New in and field; the in first the were States United The pronounced.
this pursue to destined expedition an for preparations made they York
in put was Lincoln, Abraham the speed, great of frigate A narwhal.
Commander to opened were arsenals The possible. as soon as commission
always it as but, frigate; his of arming the hastened who Farragut,
monster the monster, the pursue to decided was it moment the happens,
met ship No of. spoken it heard one no months two For appear. not did
around weaving plots the of knew unicorn this if as seemed It it. with
cable, Atlantic the through even of, talked much so been had It it.
on telegram a stopped had fly slender this that pretended jesters that
it. of most the making was and passage its

provided and campaign, long a for armed been had frigate the when So
to course what tell could one no apparatus, fishing formidable with
learned they July, of 2nd the on when, apace, grew Impatience pursue.
to California from Francisco, San of line the of steamer a that
Pacific North the in before weeks three animal the seen had Shanghai,
was ship The extreme. was news this by caused excitement The Ocean.
coal. with stocked well and revictualled

a received I pier, Brooklyn left Lincoln Abraham the before hours Three
follows: as worded letter

Hotel, Avenue Fifth Paris, of Museum the in Professor ARONNAX, M. To
York. New

this in Lincoln Abraham the join to consent will you SIR,--If
see pleasure with will States United the of Government the expedition,
cabin a has Farragut Commander enterprise. the in represented France
disposal. your at

Marine. of Secretary HOBSON, J.B. yours, cordially Very



III CHAPTER

RESOLUTION MY FORM I

more no I letter Hobson's B. J. of arrival the before seconds Three
the of passage the attempting of than unicorn the pursuing of thought
honourable the of letter the reading after seconds Three Sea. North
my of end sole the vocation, true my that felt I Marine, of Secretary
world. the from it purge and monster disturbing this chase to was life,

for longing and weary journey, fatiguing a from returned just had I But
my country, my seeing again than more nothing to aspired I repose.
and dear my Plantes, des Jardin the by lodging little my friends,
forgot I back! me keep could nothing collections--but precious
hesitation without accepted collections--and and friends all--fatigue,
Government. American the of offer the

unicorn the and Europe; to back lead roads "all I, thought "Besides,"
This France. of coast the towards me hurry to enough amiable be may
(for Europe of seas the in caught be to itself allow may animal worthy
yard a half than less back bring not will I and benefit), particular my
the in But History." Natural of Museum the to halberd ivory his of
which, Ocean, Pacific North the in narwhal this seek must I meanwhile
antipodes. the to road the taking was France, to return to

voice. impatient an in called I "Conseil,"

had who boy, Flemish devoted true, a servant, my was Conseil
the returned he and him, liked I travels. my all in me accompanied
zealous principle, from regular nature, by quiet was He well. liking
of surprises different the at disturbance little evincing habit, from
of required service any at apt and hands, his with quick very life,
it. for asked when advice--even giving never name, his despite and, him;

led. science wherever years ten last the for me followed had Conseil
never journey, a of fatigue or length the of complain he did once Never
might it country whatever for portmanteau his pack to objection an make
he this, all Besides Congo. or China whether away, far however or be,
no but muscles, solid and sickness, all defied which health, good had
and old, years thirty was boy This understood. are morals good nerves;
excused be I May twenty. to fifteen as master his of that to age his
old? years forty was I that saying for

would and degree, a to ceremonious was he fault: one had Conseil But
sometimes was which person, third the in but me to speak never
provoking.

make to hands feverish with beginning again, I said "Conseil,"
departure. my for preparations

him asked never I rule, a As boy. devoted this of sure was I Certainly
but travels; my in me follow to not or him for convenient were it if
the and prolonged, be might question in expedition the time this
of capable animal an of pursuit in hazardous be might enterprise
for matter was there Here nutshell. a as easily as frigate a sinking
would What world. the in man impassive most the to even reflection
say? Conseil

time. third a called I "Conseil,"

appeared. Conseil

entering. he, said sir?" call, you "Did

in leave We too. yourself and me for preparations make boy; my "Yes,
hours." two

quietly. Conseil, replied sir," please, you "As

utensils, travelling all trunk my in lock lose; to instant an "Not
and can, you as many as counting, stockings--without and shirts, coats,
haste." make

Conseil. observed sir?" collections, your "And

hotel." the at them keep will "They

Conseil. said then?" Paris, to returning not are "We

curve." a making "by evasively, answered, I certainly," "Oh!

sir?" you, please curve the "Will

We all. is that road, a direct so quite not nothing; be will it "Oh!
Lincoln." Abraham, the in passage our take

Conseil. replied coolly sir," proper, think you "As

narwhal. famous monster--the the with do to has it friend, my see, "You
a but mission, glorious A seas. the from it purge to going are We
be can animals these go; may we where tell cannot We one! dangerous
captain a got have we no; or whether go will we But capricious. very
wide-awake." pretty is who

I immediately. frigate the of deck the to transported was luggage Our
sailors the of One Farragut. Commander for asked and board on hastened
a of presence the in myself found I where poop, the to me conducted
me. to hand his out held who officer, good-looking

he. said Aronnax?" Pierre "Monsieur

Farragut?" "Commander I. replied "Himself,"

you." for ready is cabin your Professor; welcome, are "You

me. for destined cabin the to conducted be to desired and bowed, I

new her for equipped and chosen well been had Lincoln Abraham The
with fitted speed, great of frigate a was She destination.
atmospheres. seven of pressure a admitted which engines high-pressure
nearly of speed mean the attained Lincoln Abraham the this Under
but, speed, considerable hour--a an third a and knots eighteen
cetacean. gigantic this with grapple to insufficient nevertheless,

nautical its to corresponded frigate the of arrangements interior The
after the in was which cabin, my with satisfied well was I qualities.
gunroom. the upon opening part,

Conseil. to I said here," off well be shall "We

a of shell the in hermit-crab a as leave, honour's your by well, "As
Conseil. said whelk,"

the remounted and away, conveniently trunks our stow to Conseil left I
departure. for preparations the survey to order in poop

be to moorings last the ordering was Farragut Commander moment that At
So Brooklyn. of pier the to Lincoln Abraham the held which loose cast
sailed have would frigate the less, perhaps hour, an of quarter a in
and supernatural, extraordinary, this missed have should I me. without
some with meet well may which of recital the expedition, incredible
suspicion.

the scouring in hour an nor day a lose not would Farragut Commander But
engineer. the for sent He sighted. been had animal the which in seas

he. asked on?" full steam the "Is

engineer. the replied sir," "Yes,

Farragut. Commander cried ahead," "Go



IV CHAPTER

LAND NED

commanded. he frigate the of worthy seaman, good a was Farragut Captain
of question the On it. of soul the was He one. were he and vessel His
the allow not would he and mind, his in doubt no was there monster the
as it, in believed He board. on disputed be to animal the of existence
reason. by not faith, leviathan--by the in believe women good certain
Either it. of seas the rid to sworn had he and exist, did monster The
the kill would narwhal the or narwhal, the kill would Farragut Captain
course. third no was There captain.

were They chief. their of opinion the shared board on officers The
a of chances various the calculating and discussing, chatting, ever
than More ocean. the of surface vast the narrowly watching meeting,
have would who cross-trees, the in voluntarily quarters his up took one
sun the as long As circumstances. other any under berth a such cursed
whose sailors, with crowded was rigging the course, daily its described
render to as deck the of heat the by extent an such to burnt were feet
the breasted yet not had Lincoln Abraham the still unbearable; it
they company, ship's the to As Pacific. the of waters suspected
hoist it, harpoon to unicorn, the meet to than better nothing desired
eager with sea the watched They it. despatch and board, on it
attention.

thousand two of sum certain a of spoken had Farragut Captain Besides,
he were monster, the sight first should whoever for apart set dollars,
officer. or seaman, common cabin-boy,

Lincoln. Abraham the board on used were eyes how judge to you leave I

my one no to left and, others, the behind not was I part own my For
the called been have might frigate The observations. daily of share
to seemed Conseil, us, amongst one Only reasons. hundred a for Argus,
us interested so which question the against indifference his by protest
on enthusiasm general the with keeping of out be to seemed and all,
board.

with ship his provided carefully had Farragut Captain that said have I
ever had whaler No cetacean. gigantic the catching for apparatus every
harpoon the from engine, known every possessed We armed. better been
the and blunderbuss, the of arrows barbed the to hand the by thrown
perfection the lay forecastle the On duck-gun. the of balls explosive
in narrow very and breech, the at thick very gun, breech-loading a of
This 1867. of Exhibition the in been had which of model the bore, the
conical a ease with throw could origin American of weapon precious
miles. ten of distance mean a to pounds nine of projectile

what and, destruction; of means no for wanted Lincoln Abraham the Thus
harpooners. of prince the Land, Ned board on had she still better was

who and hand, of quickness uncommon an with Canadian, a was Land Ned
audacity, coolness, Skill, occupation. dangerous his in equal no knew
cunning a be must it and degree, superior a in possessed he cunning and
harpoon. his of stroke the escape to whale

six than (more man tall a was he age; of years forty about was Land Ned
violent, occasionally taciturn, and grave built, strongly high), feet
attention, attracted person His contradicted. when passionate very and
singular a gave which look, his of boldness the all above but
face. his to expression

little and, French; himself calls Canadian himself calls Who
certain a took he that admit must I was, Land Ned as communicative
an was It doubt. no me, to him drew nationality My me. for liking
of language old that hear, to me for and talk, to him for opportunity
The provinces. Canadian some in use in still is which Rabelais,
tribe a already was and Quebec, from originally was family harpooner's
France. to belonged town this when fishermen hardy of

loved I and chatting, for taste a acquired Land Ned little, by Little
related He seas. polar the in adventures his of recital the hear to
his expression; of poetry natural with combats, his and fishing, his
to listening be to seemed I and poem, epic an of form the took recital
North. the of regions the of Iliad the singing Homer Canadian a

old are We him. knew really I as companion hardy this portraying am I
and born is which friendship unchangeable that in united now, friends
to than more no ask I Ned! brave Ah, dangers. extreme amidst cemented
the dwell to time more have may I that longer, years hundred a live
memory. your on longer

marine the of question the upon opinion Land's Ned was what Now,
was and unicorn, the in believe not did he that admit must I monster?
He conviction. universal that share not did who board on one only the
press to duty my it thought day one I which subject, the avoided even
say, to is (that July 30th the evening, magnificent One him. upon
Cape of abreast was frigate the departure), our after weeks three
had We Patagonia. of coast the of leeward to miles thirty Blanc,
opened Magellan of Straits the and Capricorn, of tropic the crossed
were days eight Before south. the to miles hundred seven than less
Pacific. the of waters the ploughing be would Lincoln Abraham the over

and thing one of chatting were I and Land Ned poop, the on Seated
up had depths great whose sea, mysterious this at looked we as another
up led naturally I man. of eye the to inaccessible been time this to
chances various the examined and unicorn, giant the to conversation the
let Land Ned that seeing But, expedition. the of failure or success of
closely. more him pressed I himself, much too saying without speak me

the of convinced not are you that possible it "is I, said Ned," "Well,
any you Have following? are we that cetacean this of existence
incredulous?" so being for reason particular

answering, before moments some for fixedly me at looked harpooner The
to if as his), of habit (a hand his with forehead broad his struck
Aronnax." Mr. have, I "Perhaps last, at said and himself, collect

great the all with familiarised profession, by whaler a you, Ned, "But,
such under doubt to last the be to ought mammalia--YOU marine
circumstances!"

whaler a "As Ned. replied Professor," you, deceives what just is "That
killed and number, great a harpooned cetacean, a many followed have I
neither been, have may they well-armed or strong however but, several;
the scratch to even able been have would weapons their nor tails their
steamer." a of plates iron

have narwhal the of teeth the which ships of tell they Ned, "But,
through." and through pierced

have I "but Canadian, the replied possible," is ships--that "Wooden
whales, that deny I proof, further until and, done; it seen never
describe." you effect the produce ever could sea-unicorns or cetaceans,

of logic the on resting conviction a with it repeat I Ned, "Well,
organised, fully power mammal a of existence the in believe I facts.
cachalots, the whales, the like vertebrata, of branch the to belonging
great of defence of horn a with furnished and dolphins, the or
power." penetrating

who man a of air the with head his shaking harpooner, the said "Hum!"
convinced. be not would

animal an such "If resumed. I Canadian," worthy my thing, one "Notice
it if ocean, the of depths the inhabits it if existence, in is
it water, the of surface the below miles lying strata the frequents
would which of strength the organisation an possess necessarily must
comparison." all defy

Ned. demanded organisation?" powerful this why "And

these in self one's keep to strength incalculable requires it "Because
the that admit us Let me. to Listen pressure. their resist and strata
of column a of weight the by represented is atmosphere the of pressure
be would water of column the reality In high. feet thirty-two water
is which of density the water, sea of speaking are we as shorter,
as Ned, dive, you when well, Very water. fresh of that than greater
does times many so you, above are there as water of feet 32 times many
to is that atmosphere, the of that to equal pressure a bear body your
then, follows, It surface. its of inch square each for lb. 15 say,
100 of atmospheres, 10 of that equals pressure this feet 320 at that
feet, 32,000 at atmospheres 1,000 of and feet, 3,200 at atmospheres
could you if that saying to equivalent is which miles; 6 about is, that
of inch an of three-eighths square each ocean, the in depth this attain
my Ah! lb. 5,600 of pressure a bear would body your of surface the
surface the on carry you inches square many how know you do Ned, brave
body?" your of

Aronnax." Mr. idea, no have "I

15 about is pressure atmospheric the reality in as and 6,500; "About
a moment this at bear inches square 6,500 your inch, square the to lb.
lb." 97,500 of pressure

it?" perceiving my "Without

a such by crushed not are you if And it. perceiving your "Without
body your of interior the penetrates air the because is it pressure,
interior the between equilibrium perfect Hence pressure. equal with
which and other, each neutralise thus which pressure, exterior and
is it water the in But inconvenience. without it bear to you allows
thing." another

the "because attentive; more becoming Ned, replied understand," I "Yes,
penetrate." not does but me, surrounds water

you sea the of surface the beneath feet 32 at that so Ned: "Precisely,
that times ten feet, 320 at lb.; 97,500 of pressure a undergo would
at lastly, pressure; that times hundred a feet, 3,200 at pressure;
97,500,000 be would pressure that times thousand a feet, 32,000
been had you if as flattened be would you that say, to is lb.--that
machine!" hydraulic a of plates the from drawn

Ned. exclaimed devil!" "The

hundred several vertebrate, some if harpooner, worthy my well, "Very
such in itself maintain can proportion, in large and long, yards
square of millions by represented is surface whose those depths--of
the estimate must we pounds, of millions of tens by is that inches,
of resistance the be must what then, Consider, undergo. they pressure
to organisation their of strength the and structure, bony their
pressure!" such withstand

eight plates iron of made be must "they Land, Ned exclaimed "Why!"
frigates." armoured the like thick, inches

cause, would mass a such destruction what think And Ned. say, you "As
a of hull the against train express an of speed the with hurled if
vessel."

these by shaken Canadian, the replied "Yes--certainly--perhaps,"
in. give to willing yet not but figures,

you?" convinced I have "Well,

such if that, is which sir, thing, one of me convinced have "You
as be necessarily must they seas, the of bottom the at exist do animals
say." you as strong

the explain how harpooner, obstinate mine exist, not do they if "But
Scotia?" the to accident



V CHAPTER

VENTURE A AT

no by marked time long a for was Lincoln Abraham the of voyage The
the showed which happened circumstance one But incident. special
might we confidence what proved and Land, Ned of dexterity wonderful
him. in place

we whom from whalers, American some spoke frigate the June, of 30th The
the them, of one But narwhal. the about nothing knew they that learned
the board on shipped had Land Ned that knowing Monroe, the of captain
in had they whale a chasing in help his for begged Lincoln, Abraham
gave work, at Land Ned seeing of desirous Farragut, Commander sight.
Canadian our served fate And Monroe. the board on go to permission him
double a with two harpooned he whale, one of instead that, well so
after other the catching and heart, the to straight one striking blow,
pursuit. minutes' some

I harpoon, Land's Ned with do to had ever monster the if Decidedly,
favour. its in bet not would

great with America of coast south-east the skirted frigate The
of Straits the of opening the at were we July of 3rd The rapidity.
not would Farragut Commander But Vierges. Cape with level Magellan,
Horn. Cape doubled but passage, tortuous a take

that possible was it certainly And him. with agreed crew ship's The
sailors the of Many pass. narrow this in narwhal the meet might they
big too was he "that there, pass not could monster the that affirmed
that!" for

Abraham the afternoon, the in o'clock three about July, of 6th The
island, solitary the doubled south, the to miles fifteen at Lincoln,
which to continent, American the of extremity the at rock lost this
The Horn. Cape town, native their of name the gave sailors Dutch some
of screw the day next the and north-west, the towards taken was course
Pacific. the of waters the beating last at was frigate the

sailors. the out called open!" eyes your "Keep

dazzled, little a glasses, and eyes Both widely. opened were they And
an not had dollars, thousand two of prospect the by true, is it
repose. instant's

on attentive least the not was charms, no had money whom for myself, I
sleep, to hours few a but meals, my to minutes few but Giving board.
the of poop the leave not did I sunshine, or rain either to indifferent
the on now forecastle, the of netting the on leaning Now vessel.
the whitened which foam soft the eagerness with devoured I taffrail,
the shared I have often how and reach; could eye the as far as sea
raised whale capricious some when crew, the of majority the of emotion
on crowded was vessel the of poop The waves! the above back black its
officers, and sailors of torrent a forth poured cabins The moment. a
the of course the watching eye troubled and breast heaving with each
Conseil whilst blind, nearly was I till looked and looked I cetacean.
voice: calm a in repeating kept

better!" see would you much, so squint not would you sir, "If,

made and speed its checked Lincoln Abraham The excitement! vain But
which cachalot, common or whale, simple a signalled, animal the for
abuse. of storm a amidst disappeared soon

the under accomplished being was voyage The good. was weather the But
the Australia, in season bad the then was It auspices. favourable most
sea the but Europe, in January our to corresponding zone that of July
circumference. vast a round scanned easily and beautiful was

longitude, of 105d by cut was Capricorn of tropic the July, of 20th The
110th the on Equator the crossed we month same the of 27th the and
westerly decided more a took frigate the passed, This meridian.
Commander Pacific. the of waters central the scoured and direction,
deep in remain to better was it that reason, with and thought, Farragut
itself beast the which islands, or continents of clear keep and water,
him! for water enough not was there because (perhaps shun to seemed
some at passed frigate The crew). the of part greater the suggested
the crossed Islands, Sandwich the and Marquesas the from distance
theatre the on were We Seas. China the for made and Cancer, of tropic
longer no we truth, say to and, monster: the of diversions last the of
nervous a undergoing were crew ship's entire The board. on LIVED
they eat, not could they idea: no give can I which of excitement,
optical an or misconception a day, a times sleep--twenty not could
dreadful cause would taffrail, the on seated sailor some of illusion
a in us kept repeated, times twenty emotions, these and perspirations,
unavoidable. was reaction a that violent so excitement of state

which during months, three For itself. showed soon reaction truly, And
the of waters the all furrowed Lincoln Abraham the age, an seemed day a
her from deviations sharp making whales, at running Pacific, Northern
suddenly, stopping another, to tack one from suddenly veering course,
deranging of risk the at anon and ever backing and steam, on putting
was coast American or Japanese the of point one not and machinery, her
unexplored. left

ardent most its became now enterprise the of partisans warmest The
and himself, captain the to crew the from mounted Reaction detractors.
part the on determination resolute the for been not it had certainly,
This southward. due headed have would frigate the Farragut, Captain of
had Lincoln Abraham The longer. much last not could search useless
succeed. to best her done had she with, herself reproach to nothing
its patience; or zeal more shown crew ship's American an had Never
but nothing remained charge--there their to placed be not could failure
return. to

hide not could sailors The commander. the to represented was This
a was there say not will I suffered. service the and discontent, their
Captain obstinacy, of period reasonable a after but board, on mutiny
three in If patience. days' three for asked did) Columbus (as Farragut
three give should helm the at man the appear, not did monster the days
European the for make would Lincoln Abraham the and wheel, the of turns
seas.

of effect the had It November. of 2nd the on made was promise This
renewed with watched was ocean The crew. ship's the rallying
his up sum to which in glance last a for wished one Each attention.
grand a was It activity. feverish with used were Glasses remembrance.
to fail scarcely could he and narwhal, giant the to given defiance
"appear." and summons the answer

schemes thousand a pressure; half at was steam the passed, days Two
the of apathy the stimulate and attention the attract to tried were
of quantities Large parts. those in met be should it case in animal
satisfaction great the to ship, the of wake the in trailed were bacon
directions all in radiated craft Small sharks. the of say) must (I
of spot a leave not did and to, lay she as Lincoln Abraham the round
arrived November of 4th the of night the But unexplored. sea the
mystery. submarine this of unveiling the without

(morally would delay the twelve, at November, of 5th the day, next The
his to faithful Farragut, Commander time, that after expire; speaking)
ever for abandon and south-east the to course the turn to was promise,
Pacific. the of regions northern the

long. E. 42' 136 and lat. N. 15' 31 in then was frigate The
to miles hundred two than less remained still Japan of coast The
bells; eight struck just had They approaching. was Night leeward.
quarter. first its in then moon, the of face the veiled clouds large
vessel. the of stern the under peaceably undulated sea The

netting. starboard the on forward leaning was I moment that At
crew, The him. before straight looking was me, near standing Conseil,
and contracted which horizon the examined ratlines, the in perched
the scoured glasses night their with Officers degrees. by darkened
the of rays the under sparkled ocean the sometimes darkness: growing
lost was light of trace all then clouds, two between darted which moon,
darkness. the in

the of little a undergoing was he see could I Conseil, at looking In
time first the for Perhaps so. thought I least At influence. general
curiosity. of sentiment a to vibrated nerves his

two the pocketing of chance last the is "this I, said Conseil," "Come,
dollars." thousand

never I "that Conseil, replied sir," say, to permitted be I "May
Union the of government the had and, prize; the getting on reckoned
poorer." the none been have would it dollars, thousand hundred a offered

one and all, after affair foolish a is It Conseil. right, are "You
useless what lost, time What lightly. too entered we which upon
ago." months six France in back been have should We emotions!

sir; museum, your in "and Conseil, replied sir," room, little your "In
the And sir. fossils, your all classed already have should I and
des Jardin the in cage its in installed been have would Babiroussa
capital!" the of people curious the all drawn have and Plantes,

being of chance fair a run shall we fancy I Conseil. say, you "As
pains." our for at laughed

they think "I quietly; Conseil, replied certain," tolerably "That's
it----?" say I must And, sir. you, of fun make will

friend." good my on, "Go

deserts." your get only will you sir, "Well,

"Indeed!"

should one sir, are, you as _savant_ a being of honour the has one "When
to----" self one's expose not

general of midst the In compliment. his finish to time not had Conseil
Land Ned of voice the was It heard. been just had voice a silence
shouting:

weather our for--on looking are we thing very The there! out "Look
beam!"



VI CHAPTER

STEAM FULL AT

the towards hurried crew ship's whole the cry this At
the even boys; cabin sailors, masters, officers, harpooner--commander,
furnaces. their stokers the and engines, their left engineers

went simply now frigate the and given, been had her stop to order The
however and, profound, then was darkness The momentum. own her by on
to managed had he how myself asked I were, eyes Canadian's the good
would it if as beat heart My see. to able been had he what and see,
object the perceived all we and mistaken, not was Land Ned But break.
the on Lincoln, Abraham the from length cables' two At to. pointed he
was It over. all illuminated be to seemed sea the quarter, starboard
fathoms some emerged monster The phenomenon. phosphoric mere a not
mysterious but intense very that out threw then and water, the from
magnificent This captains. several of report the in mentioned light
power. SHINING great of agent an by produced been have must irradiation
elongated, much oval, immense an sea the on traced part luminous The
overpowering whose heat, burning a condensed which of centre the
gradations. successive by out died brilliancy

the of one cried particles," phosphoric of massing a only is "It
officers.

an of is brightness "That replied. I not," certainly sir, "No,
is it moves; it see! see, Besides, nature. electrical essentially
us!" towards darting is it backwards; forwards, moving

frigate. the from arose cry general A

engines." the reverse helm, the with "Up captain. the said "Silence!"

port, to beating Lincoln, Abraham the and off, shut was steam The
semicircle. a described

captain. the cried ahead," go helm, the "Right

the from rapidly moved frigate the and executed, were orders These
light. burning

animal supernatural the but off, sheer to tried She mistaken. was I
own. her double velocity a with approached

and dumb us made fear than more Stupefaction breath. for gasped We
made It waves. the with sporting us, on gained animal The motionless.
and knots, fourteen making then was which frigate, the of round the
dust. luminous like rings electric its with it enveloped

track, phosphorescent a leaving miles, three or two away moved it Then
All behind. leave trains express the that steam of volumes those like
gain to retired it whither horizon the of line dark the from once at
Lincoln Abraham the towards suddenly rushed monster the momentum, its
the from feet twenty about suddenly stopped rapidity, alarming with
did brilliancy its for water, the under diving out--not died and hull,
brilliant this of source the if as and suddenly, abate--but not
the of side other the on reappeared it Then exhausted. was emanation
a moment Any hull. the under slid and turned had it if as vessel,
us. to fatal been have would which occurred have might collision
fled She frigate. the of manoeuvres the at astonished was I However,
attack. not did and

of expression an was impassive, so generally face, captain's the On
astonishment. unaccountable

I being formidable what with know not do "I said, he Aronnax," "Mr.
midst the in frigate my risk imprudently not will I and deal, to have
defend how thing, unknown this attack how Besides, darkness. this of
change." will scene the and daylight, for Wait it? from self one's

animal?" the of nature the of captain, doubt, further no have "You

one." electric an and narwhal, gigantic a evidently is it sir; "No,

torpedo." a with it approach only can "one I, added "Perhaps,"

dreadful such possesses it "if captain, the replied "Undoubtedly,"
is That created. was ever that animal terrible most the is it power,
guard." my on be must I sir, why,

The sleep. of thought one No night. all feet their on were crew The
had velocity, such with struggle to able being not Lincoln, Abraham
the part, its For speed. half at sailed and pace, its moderated
and will, at it rock waves the let frigate, the imitating narwhal,
Towards struggle. the of scene the leave to not decided seemed
term, appropriate more a use to or, disappeared, it however, midnight,
only could One fled? it Had glow-worm. large a like out" "died it
morning the in o'clock one to minutes seven at But it. hope not fear,
water of body a by produced that like heard, was whistling deafening a
violence. great with rushing

peering eagerly poop, the on then were I and Land, Ned captain, The
darkness. profound the through

of roaring the heard often have "you commander, the asked Land," "Ned
whales?"

two in me brought which of sight the whales such never but sir; "Often,
length harpoons' four within approach only can I If dollars. thousand
it!" of

at whaler a put to ought "I commander, the said it," approach to "But
disposal?" your

sir." "Certainly,

men." my of lives the with trifling be will "That

harpooner. the said simply too," mine "And

not reappeared, light burning the morning, the in o'clock two Towards
Lincoln. Abraham the of windward to miles five about intense, less
one sea, and wind the of noise the and distance, the Notwithstanding
its even and tail, animal's the of strokes loud the distinctly heard
enormous the that moment the at that, seemed It breath. panting
air the water, the of surface the at breath take to come had narwhal
a of cylinders vast the in steam the like lungs, its in engulfed was
horse-power. thousand two of machine

regiment cavalry a of strength the with whale "a I, thought "Hum!"
whale!" pretty a be would

combat. the for prepared and daylight, till vive qui the on were We
The nettings. hammock the along laid were implements fishing The
harpoons throw could which busses, blunder the loaded lieutenant second
bullets, explosive with duck-guns, long and mile, a of distance the to
Ned animals. terrible most the to even wounds mortal inflicted which
weapon terrible harpoon--a his sharpening with himself contented Land
hands. his in

of glimmer first the with and, break; to began day o'clock six At
o'clock seven At disappeared. narwhal the of light electric the light,
obscured fog sea thick very a but advanced, sufficiently was day the
caused That it. pierce not could glasses spy best the and view, our
anger. and disappointment

the on perched already were officers Some mizzen-mast. the climbed I
its and waves, the on heavily lay fog the o'clock eight At mast-heads.
and wider grew horizon The little. by little rose scrolls thick
Ned before, day the on as just Suddenly, time. same the at clearer
heard: was voice Land's

harpooner. the cried quarter!" port the on itself thing "The

a and mile a There, indicated. point the towards turned was eye Every
the above yard a emerged body blackish long a frigate, the from half
eddy. considerable a produced agitated, violently tail, Its waves.
of track, immense An violence. such with sea the beat tail a did Never
a described and animal, the of passage the marked whiteness, dazzling
curve. long

thoroughly. it examined I cetacean. the approached frigate The

exaggerated rather had Helvetia the of and Shannon the of reports The
fifty and hundred two only at length its estimated I and size, its
be to them conjecture only could I dimensions, its to As feet.
of jets two phenomenon, this watched I While proportioned. admirably
of height the to rose and vents, its from ejected were water and steam
concluded I breathing. of way its ascertained I thus feet; 120
mammalia. class branch, vertebrate the to belonged it that definitely

latter, The orders. chief's their for impatiently waited crew The
The engineer. the called attentively, animal the observed having after
him. to ran engineer

up?" steam have "you commander, the said "Sir,"

engineer. the answered sir," "Yes,

steam." all on put and fires your up make "Well,

had struggle the for time The order. this greeted hurrahs Three
vomited frigate the of funnels two the after, moments Some arrived.
of trembling the under quaked bridge the and smoke, black of torrents
boilers. the

at straight went screw, wonderful her by propelled Lincoln, Abraham The
cable's a half within come to it allowed latter The animal. the
and turn, little a took it dive, to disdaining if as then, length;
off. distance short a stopped

the without hour, an of three-quarters nearly lasted pursuit This
that evident quite was It cetacean. the on yards two gaining frigate
it. with up come never should we rate that at

boats the put to me advise you "do captain, the asked Land," Mr. "Well,
sea?" to out

beast that take not shall we "because Land; Ned replied sir," "No,
easily."

then?" do we shall "What

post to mean I leave, your With sir. can, you if steam more on "Put
I distance, harpooning within get we if and, bowsprit, the under myself
harpoon." my throw shall

pressure." more on put "Engineer, captain. the said Ned," "Go,

screw the increased, were fires The post. his to went Land Ned
the of out poured steam the and minute, a times forty-three revolved
was Lincoln Abraham the that calculated and log, the heaved We valves.
hour. an miles 1/2 18 of rate the at going

speed. same the at swam animal accursed the But

six gaining without pace, this up kept frigate the hour whole a For
the in sailers swiftest the of one for humiliating was It feet.
abused sailors the crew; the seized anger stubborn A navy. American
no captain the them; answer to disdained before, as who, monster, the
it. gnawed beard--he his twisting with himself contented longer

again. called was engineer The

on?" steam full turned have "You

engineer. the replied sir," "Yes,

to down trembled masts Its increased. Lincoln Abraham the of speed The
out way find hardly could smoke of clouds the and holes, stepping their
funnels. narrow the of

time. second a log the heaved They

wheel. the at man the of captain the asked "Well?"

sir." three-tenths, and miles "Nineteen

steam." more on "Clap

the But degrees. ten showed manometer The obeyed. engineer The
it itself, straining without for doubt; no itself, warm grew cetacean
miles. 3/10 19 made

vibrated that emotion the describe cannot I No, pursuit! a What
times Several hand. in harpoon post, his kept Land Ned me. through
catch shall we it! catch shall it.--"We upon gain us let animal the
the strike, to going was he as just But Canadian. the cried it!"
less at estimated be not could that rapidity a with away stole cetacean
it speed, of maximum our during even and hour, an miles thirty than
broke fury of cry A it. round and round going frigate, the bullied
everyone! from

the in o'clock eight at than advanced further no were we noon At
morning.

means. direct more take to decided then captain The

Lincoln. Abraham the than quicker goes animal "that he, said "Ah!"
bullets. conical these escape will it whether see will we well! Very
sir." forecastle, the to men your Send

the But round. slewed and loaded immediately was gun forecastle The
off. mile a half was which cetacean, the above feet some passed shot

to dollars five "and commander, the cried right," the to more "Another,
beast." infernal that hit will whoever

eye steady now--with see can I beard--that grey a with gunner old An
report loud A aim. long a took and gun the to up went face, grave and
crew. the of cheers the mingled were which with heard, was

the off sliding and, animal, the hit it work; its did bullet The
sea. of depth miles two in lost was surface, rounded

said: me, towards leaning captain, the and again, began chase The

up." bursts frigate my till beast that pursue will "I

it." do to right quite be will you "and I; answered "Yes,"

to insensible be not and itself, exhaust would beast the wished I
passed, Hours use. no of was it But engine. steam a like fatigue
exhaustion. of signs any showing its without

she that Lincoln Abraham the of praise in said be must it However,
made she distance the reckon cannot I indefatigably. on struggled
6th. the November day, unlucky this during miles hundred three under
ocean. rough the overshadowed and on, came night But

never should we that and end, an at was expedition our thought I Now
to minutes ten At mistaken. was I animal. extraordinary the see again
to miles three reappeared light electric the evening, the in eleven
preceding the during as intense as pure, as frigate, the of windward
night.

it work, day's its with tired perhaps, motionless; seemed narwhal The
was Now waves. the of undulation the with float itself letting slept,
advantage. take to resolved captain the which of chance a

and steam, half up kept Lincoln Abraham The orders. his gave He
rare no is It adversary. its awake to not as so cautiously advanced
that asleep sound so whales ocean the of middle the in meet to thing
than more harpooned had Land Ned and attacked, successfully be can they
under again place his take to went Canadian The sleep. its during one
bowsprit. the

from lengths cables' two at stopped noiselessly, approached frigate The
silence deep a breathed; one No track. its following and animal, the
burning the from feet hundred a not were We bridge. the on reigned
eyes. our dazzled and increased which of light the focus,

Ned me below saw I bulwark, forecastle the on leaning moment, this At
terrible his brandishing hand, one in martingale the grappling Land
animal. motionless the from feet twenty scarcely other, the in harpoon
the heard I thrown; was harpoon the and straightened, arm his Suddenly
body. hard a struck have to seemed which weapon, the of stroke sonorous
waterspouts enormous two and suddenly, out went light electric The
stem from torrent a like rushing frigate, the of bridge the over broke
A spars. the of lashings the breaking and men, overthrowing stern, to
time having without rail the over thrown and, followed, shock fearful
sea. the into fell I myself, stop to



VII CHAPTER

WHALE OF SPECIES UNKNOWN AN

of recollection clear no have I that me stunned so fall unexpected This
of depth a to down drawn first at was I time. the at sensations my
to pretending without (though swimmer good a am I feet. twenty about
that in and art), the of masters were who Poe, Edgar or Byron rival
strokes vigorous Two mind. of presence my lose not did I plunge
for look to was care first My water. the of surface the to me brought
Lincoln Abraham the Had disappear? me seen crew the Had frigate. the
be to hope I Might boat? a out put captain the Would round? veered
saved?

mass black a of glimpse a caught I intense. was darkness The
distance. the in out dying lights beacon its east, the in disappearing
lost. was I frigate! the was It

in Lincoln Abraham the towards swimming shouted, I help!" "Help,
desperation.

paralysed and body, my to glued seemed they me; encumbered clothes My
movements. my

suffocating! was I sinking! was I

"Help!"

against struggled I water; with filled mouth My cry. last my was This
a by seized were clothes my Suddenly abyss. the down drawn being
the of surface the to up drawn quickly myself felt I and hand, strong
ear: my in pronounced words these heard I yes, heard, I and sea;

would master shoulder, my on lean to as good so be would master "If
ease." greater much with swim

arm. Conseil's faithful my hand one with seized I

"you?" I, said you?" it "Is

orders." master's waiting "and Conseil; answered "Myself,"

sea?" the into me as well as you threw shock "That

him." followed I service, master's my in being but, "No;

natural. but was that thought fellow worthy The

asked. I frigate?" the "And

that think "I back; his on turning Conseil, replied frigate?" "The
her." on much too count not better had master

so?" think "You

men the heard I sea, the into myself threw I time the at that, say "I
broken.' are rudder the and screw `The say, wheel the at

"Broken?"

Abraham the injury only the is It teeth. monster's the by broken "Yes,
longer no us--she for look-out bad a is it But sustained. has Lincoln
helm." her answers

lost!" are we "Then

several still have we "However, Conseil. answered calmly so," "Perhaps
hours." some in deal good a do can one and us, before hours

more swam I again. up me set coolness imperturbable Conseil's
leaden a like me to stuck which clothes, my by cramped but, vigorously;
this. saw Conseil up. bearing in difficulty great felt I weight,

knife open an slipping and, he; said slit?" a make me let master "Will
rapidly. very bottom to top from up them ripped he clothes, my under
us. of both for swam I while me, off them slipped cleverly he Then

each to near swim to continued we and Conseil, for same the did I Then
other.

our Perhaps terrible. less no was situation our Nevertheless,
frigate the been, had it if and, noticed; been not had disappearance
this on argued Conseil helm. its without being tack, not could
was boy quiet This accordingly. plans his laid and supposition,
of chance only our as that, decided then We self-possessed. perfectly
to ought we boats, Lincoln's Abraham the by up picked being was safety
to then resolved I possible. as long as them for wait to as so manage
same the at exhausted be not should both that so strength, our husband
back, our on lay us of one while managed: we how is this and time;
would other the out, stretched legs and crossed, arms with still, quite
last not did business towing This front. in on other the push and swim
could we thus, other each relieving and each; minutes ten than more
hope but chance! Poor day-break. till perhaps hours, some for on swim
of two were there Moreover, man! of heart the in rooted firmly so is
to sought I if improbable) seem may it (though declare I Indeed us.
not. could I despair, to wished I hope--if all destroy

about occurred had cetacean the with frigate the of collision The
have should we then reckoned I before. evening the in o'clock eleven
if practicable quite operation an sunrise, before swim to hours eight
favour. our in was calm, very sea, The other. each relieved we
only was that darkness intense the pierce to tried I Sometimes
watched I movements. our by caused phosphorescence the by dispelled
surface mirror-like whose hand, my over broke that waves luminous the
a in were we that said have might One rings. silvery with spotted was
quicksilver. of bath

fatigue. dreadful with seized was I morning, the in o'clock one Near
was Conseil cramp. violent of strain the under stiffened limbs My
I alone. him on devolved preservation our and up, me keep to obliged
I hurried. and short became breathing his pant; boy poor the heard
longer. much up keep not could he that found

him. to said I me!" leave me! "Leave

first." drown would "I he. replied Never!" master? my "Leave

that cloud thick a of fringes the through appeared moon the then Just
glittered sea the of surface The east. the to driving was wind the
better got head My us. reanimated light kindly This rays. its with
She frigate! the saw I horizon. the of points all at looked I again.
hardly mass, dark a like looked and us, from miles five was
boats! no But discernible.

a such at been have it would good what But out. cried have would I
could Conseil sounds. no utter could lips swollen My distance!
"Help! intervals, at repeat him heard I and words, some articulate
help!"

be might It listened. we instant; an for suspended were movements Our
the answered cry a if as me to seemed it but ear, the in singing a only
Conseil. from cry

murmured. I hear?" you "Did

Yes!" "Yes!

cry. despairing more one gave Conseil And

Was ours! to responded voice human A mistake! no was there time This
middle the in abandoned creature, unfortunate another of voice the it
vessel? the by sustained shock the of victim other some ocean, the of
the in us hailing was that frigate, the from boat a it was rather Or
darkness?

struck I while shoulder, my on leaning and, effort, last a made Conseil
water, the of out half himself raised he effort, desperate a in out
exhausted. back fell then

see?" you did "What

your all talk--reserve not do saw--but "I he; murmured saw----" "I
strength!"

monster the of thought the why, not know I Then, seen? he had What
is time The voice! that But time! first the for head my into came
Conseil However, bellies! whales' in refuge take to Jonahs for past
us, before looked sometimes, head his raised He again. me towing was
voice a by to responded was which recognition, of cry a uttered and
was strength My it. heard scarcely I nearer. and nearer came that
longer; no support me afforded hand my stiffened; fingers my exhausted;
crept Cold water. salt with filled opening, convulsively mouth, my
sank. I then time, last the for head my raised I me. over

that felt I then it: to clung I me. struck body hard a moment this At
water, the of surface the to brought was I that up, drawn being was I
fainted. collapsed--I chest my that

that rubbings vigorous the to thanks to, came soon I that certain is It
eyes. my opened half I received. I

murmured. I "Conseil!"

Conseil. asked me?" call master "Does

to down sinking was which moon the of light waning the by then, Just
I which and Conseil's not was which face a saw I horizon, the
recognised. immediately

cried. I "Ned!"

Canadian. the replied prize!" his seeking is who sir, same, "The

frigate?" the to shock the by sea the into thrown you "Were

a find to able was I you, than fortunate more but Professor; "Yes,
island." floating a upon directly almost footing

island?" "An

narwhal." gigantic our on speaking, correctly more "Or,

Ned!" yourself, "Explain

was and skin its entered not had harpoon my why out found soon I "Only
blunted."

why?" Ned, "Why,

iron." sheet of made is beast that Professor, "Because,

I brain. my in revolution sudden a produced words last Canadian's The
of out half object, or being, the of top the to quickly myself wriggled
was It it. kicked I refuge. a for us served which water, the
that substance soft the not and body, impenetrable hard, a evidently
body hard this But mammalia. marine great the of bodies the forms
I and animals; antediluvian the of that like covering, bony a be might
as such reptiles, amphibious among monster this class to free be should
alligators. or tortoises

polished, smooth, was me supported that back blackish the no! Well,
incredible and, sound; metallic a produced blow The scales. without
riveted of made was it if as say, might I seemed, it be, may it though
plates.

phenomenon natural this monster, This it! about doubt no was There
the misled and thrown over and world, learned the puzzled had that
still a was owned be must it hemispheres, both of seamen of imagination
human simply a was it as inasmuch phenomenon, astonishing more
construction.

sort a of back the upon lying were We however. lose, to time no had We
huge a like judge) could I as far (as appeared which boat, submarine of
and Conseil point. this on up made was mind Land's Ned steel. of fish
him. with agree only could I

was (which thing strange this of back the at began bubbling a then Just
only had We move. to began it and screw), a by propelled evidently
feet seven about rose which part, upper the of hold seize to time just
great. not was speed its happily and water, the of out

mind; not do "I Land, Ned muttered horizontally," sails it as long "As
my for straws two give not would I dive, to fancy a takes it if but,
life."

to necessary really became It less. still said have might Canadian The
the inside up shut were, they whatever beings, the with communicate
or panel, a aperture, an for outside the over all searched I machine.
iron the of lines the but expression; technical a use to manhole, a
clear were plates, iron the of joints the into driven solidly rivets,
total in us left and then, disappeared moon the Besides, uniform. and
darkness.

my prevents remembrance indistinct My passed. night long this last At
one recall only can I made. it impressions the all describing
heard I fancied I sea, and wind the of lulls some During circumstance.
by produced harmony fugitive of sort a sounds, vague times several
craft, submarine this of mystery the then, was, What command. of words
of kind What explanation? an sought vainly world whole the which of
its caused agent mechanical What boat? strange this in existed beings
speed? prodigious

soon they but us, surrounded mists morning The appeared. Daybreak
a deck on formed which hull, the examine to about was I off. cleared
sinking. gradually it felt I when platform, horizontal of kind

plate. resounding the kicking Land, Ned cried it!" confound "Oh!
rascals!" inhospitable you "Open,

works iron like noise, a Suddenly ceased. movement sinking the Happily
iron One boat. the of interior the from came aside, pushed violently
disappeared and cry, odd an uttered appeared, man a moved, was plate
immediately.

appeared faces, masked with men, strong eight after, moments Some
machine. formidable their into down us drew and noiselessly,



VIII CHAPTER

MOBILI IN MOBILIS

with accomplished was out, carried roughly so abduction, forcible This
deal to we had Whom over. all shivered I lightning. of rapidity the
their in sea the explored who pirates, of sort new some doubt No with?
was I when me, upon closed panel narrow the had Hardly way. own
could light, outer the with dazzled eyes, My darkness. in enveloped
an of rungs the to cling feet naked my felt I nothing. distinguish
the At me. followed seized, firmly Conseil, and Land Ned ladder. iron
with immediately us after shut and opened, door a ladder, the of bottom
bang. a

black, was All imagine. hardly say, not could I Where, alone. were We
been not had eyes my minutes, some after that, black dense a such and
glimmer. faintest the even discern to able

to vent free gave proceedings, these at furious Land, Ned Meanwhile,
indignation. his

for Scotch the to up come who people are "here he, cried it!" "Confound
be not should I cannibals. being miss just only They hospitality.
my without me eat not shall they that declare I but it, at surprised
protesting."

quietly. Conseil, replied yourself," calm Ned, friend yourself, "Calm
yet." for done quite not are We hurt. are you before out cry not "Do

all at near, pretty "but Canadian, the replied sharply quite," "Not
and still, have I knife bowie my Happily, black. look Things events.
who pirates these of first The it. use to enough well see always can I
me----" on hand a lays

not do "and harpooner, the to said I Ned," yourself, excite not "Do
listen not will they that knows Who violence. useless by us compromise
are." we where out find to try rather us Let us? to

plates of made wall, iron an to came I steps five In about. groped I
table, wooden a against struck I back turning Then together. bolted
were prison this of boards The stools. several ranged were which near
The feet. the of noise the deadened which mat, thick a under concealed
round going Conseil, door. or window of trace no revealed walls bare
cabin, the of middle the to back went we and me, met way, reverse the
Land, Ned height, its to As ten. by feet twenty about measured which
it. measure not could height, great own his of spite in

bettered, being situation our without passed already had hour an Half
prison Our light. extreme to way gave suddenly darkness dense the when
luminous a with filled became it say, to is that lighted, suddenly was
whiteness its In first. at it bear not could I that strong so matter,
the round played which light electric that recognised I intensity and
After phosphorescence. of phenomenon magnificent a like boat submarine
this that saw and them, opened I involuntarily, eyes my shutting
roof the in placed unpolished, globe, half a from came agent luminous
cabin. the of

the on stood hand, in knife who, Land, Ned cried see," can one last "At
defensive.

ourselves." about dark the in still are we "but I; said "Yes,"

Conseil. imperturbable the said patience," have master "Let

It minutely. it examine to me enabled cabin the of lighting sudden The
be might door invisible The stools. five and table a contained only
the in dead seemed All heard. was noise No sealed. hermetically
the of surface the on float it did move, it Did boat. this of interior
guess. not could I depths? its into dive it did or ocean,

appeared. men two and opened, door the heard, now was bolts of noise A

limbs, robust with broad-shouldered, muscular, very short, was One
quick a moustache, thick hair, black of abundance an head, strong
population the characterises which vivacity the and look, penetrating
France. Southern of

his out made I description. detailed more a merits stranger second The
was head his self-confidence--because directly: qualities prevailing
cold with around looked eyes black his and shoulders, his on set well
of coolness his showed pale, rather skin, his calmness--for assurance;
and brows; lofty his of contraction rapid the by energy--evinced blood;
lungs. of power great denoted breathing deep his courage--because

not could I age, of years fifty or thirty-five was person this Whether
cut clearly a nose, straight forehead, large a had tall, was He say.
highly a of indicative hands, taper fine with teeth, beautiful mouth,
admirable most the certainly was man This temperament. nervous
rather eyes, his was feature particular One met. ever had I specimen
the of quarter a nearly in take could which and other, each from far
once. at horizon

far vision of range a him later)--gave it verified faculty--(I This
his object, an upon fixed stranger this When Land's. Ned to superior
the contract to as so around closed eyelids large his met, eyebrows
objects the magnified he if as looked he and vision, his of range
opaque so water of sheets those pierced he if as distance, by lessened
seas. the of depths very the read he if as and eyes, our to

and otter, sea the of fur the from made caps with strangers, two The
a of clothes in dressed were skin, seal's of boots sea with shod
The limbs. the of movement free allowed which texture, particular
great with us examined board, on chief the evidently two, the of taller
companion, his to turning then, word; a saying without attention,
harmonious, sonorous, a was It tongue. unknown an in him with talked
varied very of admit to seeming vowels the dialect, flexible and
accentuation.

three or two added and head, the of shake a by replied other The
a by me question to seemed he Then words. incomprehensible perfectly
look.

he but language; his know not did I that French good in replied I
embarrassing. more became situation my and me, understand to not seemed

these "perhaps Conseil, said story," our tell to were master "If
words." some understand may gentlemen

and clearly, syllable each articulating adventures, our tell to began I
rank, and names our announced I detail. single one omitting without
and Conseil, servant his Aronnax, Professor person in introducing
harpooner. the Land, Ned master

politely, even quietly, me to listened eyes calm soft the with man The
indicated countenance his in nothing but attention; extreme with and
word. a not said he finished, I When story. my understood had he that

know would they Perhaps English. speak to resource, one remained There
German the as well it--as knew I language. universal almost this
it speak to not but fluently, it read to enough language--well
understood. ourselves make must we anyhow, But, correctly.

best your "speak harpooner; the to said I turn," your in on "Go
I." than better do to try and Anglo-Saxon,

story. our recommenced and off, beg not did Ned

himself made have to seem not did harpooner the disgust, great his To
They stir. not did visitors Our had. I than intelligible more
France. of nor England of language the neither understood evidently

speaking our exhausted vainly having after embarrassed, much Very
said: Conseil when take, to part what not knew I resources,

German." in it relate will I me, permit will master "If

the narrator, the of accent good and terms elegant the of spite in But
to tried I nonplussed, last, At success. no had language German
but Latin, in adventures our narrate to and lessons, first my remember
two the avail, no of being attempt last This success. better no with
retired. and language, unknown their in words some exchanged strangers

shut. door The

the for out broke who Land, Ned cried shame," infamous an is "It
German, English, French, in rogues those to speak "We time. twentieth
answer!" to politeness the has them of one not and Latin, and

good." no do will "anger Ned; impetuous the to said I yourself," "Calm

we "that companion, irascible our replied Professor," see, you do "But
cage?" iron this in hunger of die absolutely shall

yet." time some out hold can "we philosophically; Conseil, said "Bah!"

off worse been have We despair. not must "we said, I friends," "My
opinion an forming before little a wait to favour the me Do this. than
boat." this of crew and commander the upon

rascals." are "They sharply. Land, Ned replied formed," is opinion "My

country?" what from and "Good!

rogues!" of land the "From

the of map the on indicated clearly not is country that Ned, brave "My
to hard is strangers two the of nationality the that admit I but world;
certain. quite is that German, nor French, English, Neither determine.
companion his and commander the that think to inclined am I However,
I But them. in blood southern is There latitudes. low in born were
Turks, Spaniards, are they whether appearance their by decide cannot
quite is it language, their to As Indians. or Arabians,
incomprehensible."

Conseil, said languages," all knowing not of disadvantage the is "There
language." universal one having not of disadvantage the "or

He entered. steward A opened. door the words, these said he As
know. not did I stuff a of made trousers, and coats clothes, us brought
example. my followed companions my and myself, dress to hastened I
the arranged deaf--had perhaps steward--dumb, the time, that During
plates. three laid and table,

Conseil. said like!" something is "This

here? eat they suppose you do "what harpooner, angry the said "Bah!"
seadogs." from steaks beef and shark, filleted liver, Tortoise

Conseil. said see," shall "We

our took we and table, the on placed were metal, bell of dishes, The
it had and, people, civilised with do to had we Undoubtedly places.
fancied have could I us, flooded which light electric the for been not
the at or Liverpool, at Hotel Adelphi the of dining-room the in was I
neither was there that however, say, must I Paris. in Hotel Grand
and water was it but clear, and fresh was water The wine. nor bread
brought were which dishes the Amongst taste. Land's Ned suit not did
some, of but dressed; delicately fish several recognised I us, to
to tell I could neither opinion, no give could I excellent, although
the to As vegetable. or animal whether belonged, they kingdom what
Each taste. perfect in and elegant, was it dinner-service,
a with it, on engraved letter a plate--had knife, fork, utensil--spoon,
facsimile: exact an is this which of it, above motto


N MOBILI IN MOBILIS

enigmatical the of name the of initial the doubt no was N letter The
seas. the of bottom the at commanded who person

I and food, the devoured They much. reflect not did Conseil and Ned
seemed it and fate; our to as reassured besides, was, I likewise. did
want. of die us let not would hosts our that evident

hunger the even away, passes everything end, an has everything However,
appetites Our hours. fifteen for eaten not have who people of
sleep. with overcome felt we satisfied,

Conseil. said well," sleep shall I "Faith!

Land. Ned replied I," shall "So

were and carpet, cabin the on themselves stretched companions two My
my crowded thoughts many too part, own my For asleep. sound soon
fancies many too me, upon pressed questions insoluble many too brain,
us carried power strange What we? were Where open. half eyes my kept
the to down sinking machine felt--the I fancied rather felt--or I on?
these in saw I me; beset nightmares Dreadful sea. the of beds lowest
this which amongst animals, unknown of world a asylums mysterious
and moving, living, kind, same the of be to seemed boat submarine
wandered imagination my calmer, grew brain my Then they. as formidable
sleep. deep a into fell soon I and unconsciousness, vague into



IX CHAPTER

TEMPERS LAND'S NED

long, lasted have must sleep our but know; not do I slept we long How
My first. woke I fatigues. our from completely us rested it for
corner. their in stretched still were and moved, not had companions

my freed, brain my felt I couch, hard somewhat my from roused Hardly
cell. our of examination attentive an began then I clear. mind
prison--the a still was prison The inside. changed was Nothing
had sleep, our during steward, the However, prisoners. prisoners,
seemed air heavy The difficulty. with breathed I table. the cleared
evidently had we large, was cell the Although lungs. my oppress to
each Indeed, contained. it that oxygen the of part great a consumed
pints 176 than more in contained oxygen the hour, one in consumes, man
of quantity equal nearly a with then) (as charged air, this and air, of
unbreathable. becomes acid, carbonic

doubt no and prison, our of atmosphere the renew to necessary became It
my in question a to rise gave That boat. submarine the in whole the
proceed? dwelling-place floating this of commander the would How mind.
oxygen the heat by getting in means, chemical by air obtain he Would
by acid carbonic absorbing in and potash, of chlorate in contained
consequently and economical, convenient, more Or--a potash? caustic
take and rise to satisfied be he alternative--would probable more
for renew so and whale, a like water, the of surface the at breath
provision? atmospheric the hours twenty-four

out eke to respirations my increase to obliged already was I fact, In
was I suddenly when contained, it oxygen little the cell this of
saline with perfumed and air, pure of current a by refreshed
I iodine. with charged breeze, sea invigorating an was It emanations.
fresh with themselves saturated lungs my and wide, mouth my opened
particles.

had monster iron-plated The rolling. boat the felt I time same the At
the after breathe, to ocean the of surface the to risen just evidently
the ventilating of mode the that from out found I whales. of fashion
boat.

which pipe, conduit the sought I freely, air this inhaled had I When
it. finding in long not was I and whiff, beneficial the us to conveyed
air fresh of volumes which through ventilator, a was door the Above
cell. the of atmosphere impoverished the renewed

the at almost awoke Conseil and Ned when observations, my making was I
their rubbed They air. reviving this of influence the under time, same
instant. an in feet their on were and themselves, stretched eyes,

politeness. usual his with Conseil, asked well?" sleep master "Did

Land?" Mr. you, And boy. brave my well, "Very

there not, or right am I if know don't I But, Professor. "Soundly,
breeze!" sea a be to seems

had that all Canadian the told I and mistaken, be not could seaman A
sleep. his during passed

the when heard, we roarings those for accounts "That he. said "Good!"
Lincoln." Abraham the sighted narwhal supposed

breath." taking was it Land; Master so, "Quite

is it unless is, it o'clock what idea no have I Aronnax, Mr. "Only,
dinner-time."

we for breakfast-time, rather Say fellow? good my "Dinner-time!
day." another begun have certainly

hours?" twenty-four slept have "we Conseil, said "So,"

opinion." my is "That

or dinner "But, Land. Ned replied you," contradict not will "I
brings." he whichever welcome, be will steward the breakfast,

our suppose I and board, on rules the to conform must we Land, "Master
hour." dinner the of advance in are appetites

"You impatiently. Ned, said Conseil," friend you, like just is "That
before thanks return would you calm; always temper, of out never are
complain!" than rather hunger of die and grace,

the time this and hungry; fearfully were we and on, getting was Time
they if us, leave to long too rather was It appear. not did steward
the by tormented Land, Ned us. towards intentions good had really
his notwithstanding and, angry; more still got hunger, of cravings
the of one with himself found he when explosion an dreaded I promise,
crew.

shouted, he cried, he increased; temper Land's Ned more hours two For
in heard be to sound no was There deaf. were walls The vain. in but
have should I for move, not did It death. as still was all boat; the
screw. the of influence the under hull the of motion trembling the felt
earth: to longer no belonged it waters, the of depths the in Plunged
dreadful. was silence this

roared. Land Ned calm, was Conseil terrified, felt I

flags. metal the on sounded Steps outside. heard was noise a then Just
appeared. steward the and opened, door the turned, were locks The

him thrown had Canadian the him, stop to forward rush could I Before
the under choking was steward The throat. the by him held and down,
hand. powerful his of grip

his from hand harpooner's the unclasp to trying already was Conseil
when rescue, the to fly to going was I and victim, half-suffocated
French: in words these hearing by spot the to nailed was I suddenly

to as good so be you will Professor, you, and Land; Master quiet, "Be
me?" to listen



X CHAPTER

SEAS THE OF MAN THE

spoke. thus who vessel the of commander the was It

strangled, nearly steward, The suddenly. rose Land Ned words, these At
the of power the was such But master. his from sign a on out tottered
which resentment the betrayed gesture a not that board, on commander
in interested Conseil Canadian. the towards felt have must man this
this of result the silence in awaited stupefied, I himself, of spite
scene.

arms his with table a of corner the against leaning commander, The
speak? to hesitate he Did attention. profound with us scanned folded,
might One French? in spoken just had he which words the regret he Did
so. think almost

breaking, of dreamed us of one not which silence, of moments some After
French, speak "I voice, penetrating and calm a in he, said "Gentlemen,"
have therefore, could, I well. equally Latin and German, English,
first, you know to wished I but interview, first our at you answered
the in agreeing entirely one, each by told story The reflect. to then
has chance that now know I identity. your of me convinced points, main
at History Natural of Professor Aronnax, Pierre M. me before brought
abroad, mission scientific a with entrusted Paris, of Museum the
on harpooner origin, Canadian of Land, Ned and servant, his Conseil,
of States United the of navy the of Lincoln Abraham frigate the board
America."

me. to put commander the that question a not was It assent. bowed I
himself expressed man This made. be to answer no was there Therefore
turned, well were sentences His accent. any without ease, perfect with
not did I Yet, remarkable. speech of fluency his and clear, words his
fellow-countryman. a him in recognise

terms: these in conversation the continued He

paying in long delayed have I that sir, thought, doubtless have "You
I recognised, identity your that, is reason The visit. second this you
have I you. towards act to part what maturely weigh to wished
the into you brought have circumstances annoying Most much. hesitated
have You humanity. of ties the all broken has who man a of presence
existence." my trouble to come

I. said "Unintentionally!"

little. a voice his raising stranger, the replied "Unintentionally?"
over all me pursued Lincoln Abraham the that unintentionally it "Was
this in passage took you that unintentionally it Was seas? the
off rebounded cannon-balls your that unintentionally it Was frigate?
Land Ned Mr. that unintentionally it Was vessel? my of plating the
harpoon?" his with me struck

these to But words. these in irritation restrained a detected I
it. made I and make, to answer natural very a had I recriminations

have which discussions the of ignorant are you doubt "no I, said "Sir,"
that know not do You Europe. and America in you concerning place taken
machine, submarine your with collisions by caused accidents, divers
theories the omit I continents. two the in feeling public excited have
you which of that explain to sought was it which by number without
pursuing in that, understand must you But secret. the possess alone
believed Lincoln Abraham the Pacific, the of seas high the over you
was it which of sea-monster, powerful some chasing be to itself
price." any at ocean the rid to necessary

tone: calmer a in then, commander: the of lips the curled half-smile A

not would frigate your that affirm you "dare replied, he Aronnax," "M.
monster?" a as boat submarine a cannonaded and pursued have soon as

not might Farragut Captain certainly for me, embarrassed question This
a destroy to duty his it thought have might He hesitated. have
narwhal. gigantic a would he as kind, this of contrivance

the have I "that stranger, the continued sir," then, understand "You
enemies?" as you treat to right

discuss to be it would good what For purposely. nothing, answered I
arguments? best the destroy could force when proposition, a such

obliged "nothing commander; the continued time," some hesitated have "I
I you, from myself separate to chose I If hospitality. you show to me
the upon you place could I again; you seeing in interest no have should
sink could I refuge, a as you served has which vessel this of deck
not Would existed. ever had you that forget and waters, the beneath
right?" my be that

a of that not "but answered, I savage," a of right the be might "It
man." civilised

a call you what not am "I quickly, commander, the replied "Professor,"
I which reasons for entirely, society with done have I man! civilised
its obey therefore, not, do I appreciating. of right the have alone
again!" me before them to allude to never you desire I and laws,

the in kindled disdain and anger of flash A plainly. said was This
life the in past terrible a of glimpse a had I and Unknown, the of eyes
human of pale the beyond himself put he had only Not man. this of
the in free them, of independent himself made had he but laws,
then Who reach! their beyond quite word, the of acceptation strictest
its on when, sea, the of bottom the at him pursue to dare would
him? against made attempts all defied he surface,

What monitor? submarine his of shock the resist could vessel What
man No spur? his of blows the withstand could thick, however cuirass,
in believed he if God, actions; his of account an him from demand could
was he whom to judges sole the one--were had he if conscience, one--his
answerable.

stranger the whilst rapidly, mind my crossed reflections These
I himself. in up wrapped if as and absorbed, silent, was personage
OEdiphus doubtless, as, interest, with mingled fear with him regarded
Sphinx. the regarded

conversation. the resumed commander the silence, long a rather After

might interest my that thought have I "but he, said hesitated," have "I
right. a has being human every which to pity that with reconciled be
You there. you cast has fate since vessel, my board on remain will You
impose only shall I liberty, this for exchange in and, free; be will
will it to submit to honour of word Your condition. single one
suffice."

man a which one is condition this suppose "I answered. I sir," "Speak,
accept?" may honour of

unforeseen, events, certain that possible is It this: is it sir; "Yes,
some or hours some for cabins your to you consign to me oblige may
expect I violence, use to never desire I As be. may case the as days,
thus In obedience. passive a others, the all than more you, from
I for entirely, you acquit I responsibility: the all take I acting,
Do seen. be to not ought what see to you for impossibility an it make
condition?" this accept you

singular, were least, the say to which, board on place took things Then
the beyond placed not were who people by seen be to not ought which and
was future the which surprises the Amongst laws. social of pale
least. the be not might this me, for preparing

to sir, permission, your ask will I "only answered; I accept," "We
only." you--one to question one address

sir." "Speak,

board." on free be should we that said "You

"Entirely."

liberty?" this by mean you what then, you, ask "I

that all even observe to see, to come, to go, to liberty the "Just
which short, in liberty, circumstances--the rare under save here passes
I." and companions my ourselves, enjoy we

another. one understand not did we that evident was It

every what only is liberty this "but resumed, I sir," me, "Pardon
us." suffice cannot It prison. his pacing of has prisoner

however." you, suffice must "It

our friends, our country, our seeing ever for renounce must we "What!
again?" relations

men which yoke worldly unendurable that renounce to But sir. "Yes,
think." you as painful so perhaps not is liberty be to believe

to not honour of word my give I will "never Land, Ned exclaimed "Well,"
escape." to try

the answered Land," Master honour, of word your for you ask not did "I
coldly. commander,

"you self, my of spite in angry get to beginning replied, I "Sir,"
cruelty." is it us; towards situation your abuse

you, keep I war. of prisoners my are You clemency. is it sir, "No,
You ocean. the of depths the into you plunge word, a by could, I when
world the in man no which secret a surprise to came You me. attacked
I that think you And existence. whole my of secret penetrate--the must
more? no me know must which world that to back you send to going am
myself." is guard--it I whom you not is it you, retaining In Never!

commander, the of part the on taken resolution a indicated words These
prevail. would arguments no which against

and life between choice the simply us give "you rejoined, I sir," "So,
death?"

"Simply."

to nothing is there put, thus question a "to I, said friends," "My
vessel." this of master the to us binds honour of word no But answer.

Unknown. the answered sir," "None,

continued: he tone, gentler a in Then,

M. you, know I you. to say to have I what finish to me permit "Now,
to much so have perhaps, not, will companions your and You Aronnax.
will You fate. my to you bound has which chance the in of complain
you which work the study favourite my are which books the amongst find
You it. read often have I sea.' the of depths `the on published have
you. permitted science terrestrial as far as work your out carried have
then, you tell me Let all. seen not have all--you know not do you But
vessel. my board on passed time the regret not will you that Professor,
marvels." of land the visit to going are You

deny cannot I me. upon effect great a had commander the of words These
the that moment, a for forgot, I and touched; was point weak My it.
of loss the worth not was subjects sublime these of contemplation
grave this decide to future the to trusted I Besides, liberty.
saying: with myself contented I So question.

you?" address to I ought name what "By

Nemo; Captain but you to nothing am "I commander, the replied "Sir,"
the of passengers the but me to nothing are companions your and you and
Nautilus."

his him gave captain The appeared. steward A called. Nemo Captain
Then, understand. not did I which language strange that in orders
Conseil: and Canadian the towards turning

follow to as good so "Be he. said cabin," your in you awaits repast "A
man. this

the lead to me Permit ready. is breakfast our Aronnax, M. now, "And
way."

Captain." service, your at am "I

door, the through passed had I as soon as and Nemo; Captain followed I
to similar electricity, by lighted passage of kind a in myself found I
second a yards, dozen a proceeded had we After ship. a of waist the
me. before opened door

taste. severe in furnished and decorated dining-room, a entered then I
extremities two the at stood ebony, with inlaid sideboards, oaken High
and porcelain, china, glittered shelves their upon and room, the of
the in sparkled table the on plate The value. inestimable of glass
was light the while around, shed ceiling luminous the which rays
paintings. exquisite by softened and tempered

Nemo Captain out. laid richly table a was room the of centre the In
occupy. to was I place the indicated

of contents the dishes, of number certain a of consisted breakfast The
nature the of ignorant was I and alone; sea the by furnished were which
were they that acknowledged I them. of some of preparation of mode and
accustomed became easily I which flavour, peculiar a had they but good,
phosphorus, in rich be to me to appeared aliments different These to.
origin. marine a have must they thought I and

my guessed he but questions, no him asked I me. at looked Nemo Captain
was I which questions the accord own his of answered and thoughts,
him. to address to burning

me. to said he you," to unknown are dishes these of part greater "The
and wholesome are They fear. without them of partake may you "However,
earth, the of food the renounced have I time long a For nourishing.
same the on fed are healthy, are who crew, My now. ill never am I and
food."

sea?" the of produce the are eatables these "all I, said "So,"

my cast I Sometimes wants. my all supplies sea the Professor, "Yes,
in hunt I Sometimes break. to ready in them draw I and tow, in nets
and man, to inaccessible be to appears which element, this of midst the
like flocks, My forests. submarine my in dwells which game the quarry
immense the in fearlessly graze shepherds, old Neptune's of those
cultivate I which there, property vast a have I ocean. the of prairies
all of Creator the of hand the by sown always is which and myself,
things."

fish excellent furnish nets your that sir, perfectly, understand can "I
in game aquatic hunt you that also understand can I table; your for
particle a how all at understand cannot I but forests; submarine your
fare." of bill your in figure can small, how matter no meat, of

than else nothing is Professor, meat, be to believe you which "This,
take you which livers, dolphins' some also are Here turtle. of fillet
in excels who fellow, clever a is cook My pork. of ragout be to
dishes. these all Taste ocean. the of products various these dressing
be to declare would Malay a which sea-cucumber, of preserve a is Here
been has milk the which of cream, a is here world; the in unrivalled
North the of fucus great the by sugar the and cetacea, the by furnished
anemones, of preserve some you offer to me permit lastly, and, Sea;
fruits." delicious most the of that to equal is which

Captain whilst connoisseur, a as than curiosity from more tasted, I
stories. extraordinary his with me enchanted Nemo

Captain?" sea, the like "You

the of tenths seven covers It everything. is sea The it! love I "Yes;
immense an is It healthy. and pure is breath Its globe. terrestrial
all on stirring life feels he for lonely, never is man where desert,
wonderful and supernatural a of embodiment the only is sea The sides.
`Living the is it emotion; and love but nothing is It existence.
Nature Professor, fact, In said. has poets your of one as Infinite,'
and vegetable, kingdoms--mineral, three her by it in herself manifests
with began globe The Nature. of reservoir vast the is sea The animal.
is it In it? with end not will it if knows who and speak; to so sea,
its Upon despots. to belong not does sea The tranquillity. supreme
to another one tear fight, laws, unjust exercise still can men surface
thirty at But horrors. terrestrial with away carried be and pieces,
quenched, is influence their ceases, reign their level, its below feet
the of bosom the in live--live sir, Ah! disappears. power their and
masters! no recognise I There independence! is only There waters!
free!" am I There

by enthusiasm, this of midst the in silent became suddenly Nemo Captain
and up paced he moments few a For away. carried quite was he which
accustomed his regained calm, more became he Then agitated. much down,
me: towards turning and expression, of coldness

am I Nautilus, the over go to wish you "if he, said Professor," "Now,
service." your at

the at contrived door, double A him. followed I rose. Nemo Captain
in equal room a entered I and opened, dining-room, the of back
quitted. just had I which that to dimensions

ebony violet black of furniture, of pieces High library. a was It
of number great a shelves wide their upon supported brass, with inlaid
room, the of shape the followed They bound. uniformly books
brown with covered divans, huge in part lower the at terminating
Light comfort. greatest the afford to curved, were which leather,
rest to one allowed will, at out and in slide to made desks, movable
table, immense an stood centre the In reading. while book one's
of already newspapers, some were which amongst pamphlets, with covered
four from shed was it everything; flooded light electric The date. old
looked I ceiling. the of volutes the in sunk half globes unpolished
I and up, fitted ingeniously so room, this at admiration real with
eyes. my believe scarcely could

one on himself thrown just had who host, my to I said Nemo," "Captain
than more to honour do would which library a is "this divans, the of
I when astounded absolutely am I and palaces, continental the of one
seas." the of bottom the to you follow can it that consider

replied Professor?" silence, or solitude greater find one could "Where
perfect such you afford Museum the in study your "Did Nemo. Captain
quiet?"

yours. after one poor very a is it that confess must I and sir; "No,
here." volumes thousand seven or six have must You

to me bind which ties only the are These Aronnax. M. thousand, "Twelve
Nautilus my when day the on world the with done had I But earth. the
my bought I day That waters. the beneath time first the for plunged
I time that from and papers, last my pamphlets, last my volumes, last
books, These write. or think longer no men that think to wish
them of use make can you and besides, service your at are Professor,
freely."

library. the of shelves the to up went and Nemo, Captain thanked I
language; every in abounded literature and morals, science, on Works
subject that economy; political on work single one see not did I but
books these all say, to Strange proscribed. strictly be to appeared
and written; were they language whatever in arranged, irregularly were
read have must Nautilus the of Captain the that proved medley this
chance. by up took he which books the indiscriminately

this placed having for you thank "I Captain, the to I said "Sir,"
shall I and science, of treasures contains It disposal. my at library
them." by profit

a also is "it Nemo, Captain said library," a only not is room "This
smoking-room."

board?" on smoke may one "Then cried. I smoking-room!" "A

"Certainly."

a up kept have you that believe to forced am I sir, "Then,
Havannah." with communication

and, Aronnax; M. cigar, this "Accept Captain. the answered any," "Not
if it, with pleased be will you Havannah, from come not does it though
connoisseur." a are you

London the recalled shape its me; offered was which cigar the took I
a at it lighted I gold. of leaves of made be to seemed it but ones,
and stem, bronze elegant an upon supported was which brazier, little
has who smoking of lover a of delight the with whiffs first the drew
days. two for smoked not

tobacco." not is it but excellent, is "It

Havannah from neither comes tobacco "this Captain, the answered "No!"
with nicotine, in rich sea-weed, of kind a is It East. the from nor
sparingly." somewhat but me, provides sea the which

that to opposite stood which door a opened Nemo Captain moment that At
immense an into passed I and library, the entered had I which by
lighted. splendidly drawing-room

and wide, eighteen long, feet thirty room, four-sided vast, a was It
arabesques, light with decorated ceiling, luminous A high. fifteen
this in accumulated marvels the all over light clear soft a shed
and intelligent an which in museum, a fact in was it For museum.
with art, and nature of treasures the all gathered had hand prodigal
studio. painter's a distinguishes which confusion artistic the

bright by separated framed, uniformly pictures, first-rate Thirty
severe of tapestry with hung were which walls, the ornamented drapery,
had I which of part greater the value, great of works saw I design.
of exhibitions the in and Europe, of collections special the in admired
a by represented were masters old the of schools several The paintings.
Corregio, of nymph a Vinci, da Leonardo of Virgin a Raphael, of Madonna
a Murillo, of Assumption an Veronese, of Adoration an Titan, of woman a
of fair a Ribera, of martyr a Velasquez, of monk a Holbein, of portrait
"genre" little three Teniers, of landscapes Flemish two Rubens,
of specimens two Potter, Paul and Metsu, Dow, Gerard of pictures
Vernet. and Backhuysen of sea-pieces some and Prudhon, and Gericault
signatures the with pictures were painters modern of works the Amongst
and etc.; Daubigny, Meissonier, Troyon, Decamps, Ingres, Delacroix, of
antique finest the after bronze, and marble in statues admirable some
museum. magnificent this of corners the in pedestals upon stood models,
already had predicted, had Nautilus the of Captain the as Amazement,
me. of possession take to begun

unceremonious the excuse must "you man, strange this said "Professor,"
room." this of disorder the and you, receive I which in way

in recognise I are, you who know to seeking "without answered, I "Sir,"
artist." an you

these collect to loved I Formerly sir. more, nothing amateur, "An
greedily, them sought I man. of hand the by created works beautiful
bring to able been have I and indefatigably, out them ferreted and
of souvenirs last my are These value. great of objects some together
are artists modern your eyes, my In me. to dead is which world that
I existence; of years thousand three or two have they old; already
age." no have Masters mind. own my in them confound

Weber, of works some out pointing I, said musicians?" these "And
Auber, Wagner, Herold, Meyerbeer, Haydn, Beethoven, Mozart, Rossini,
model large a over scattered others, of number a and Gounod,
drawing-room. the of panels the of one occupied which piano-organ

of contemporaries the "are Nemo, Captain replied musicians," "These
differences chronological all dead the of memory the in for Orpheus;
your of those as dead much as Professor; dead, am I and effaced; are
earth!" the under feet six sleeping are who friends

I reverie. profound a in lost seemed and silent, was Nemo Captain
strange the silence in analysing interest, deep with him contemplated
of angle an against elbow his on Leaning countenance. his of expression
my forgotten had me,--he saw longer no he table, mosaic costly a
presence.

the of observation my continued and reverie, this disturb not did I
drawing-room. this enriched which curiosities

and classed were rivets, copper by fixed cases, glass elegant Under
been ever had which sea the of productions precious most the labelled
be may professor a as delight My naturalist. a of eye the to presented
conceived.

curious most the presented zoophytes the containing division The
first the In echinodermes. and polypi of groups two the of specimens
sponges soft fan, a like arranged gorgones were tubipores, the group,
of virgularia admirable an pennatules, Moluccas, the of ises Syria, of
whole a alcyonariae, unbellulairae, variegated seas, Norwegian the
cleverly so has Edwards Milne master my which madrepores, of series
flabellinae wonderful some remarked I which amongst classified,
Antilles, the of car" "Neptune's the Bourbon, of Island the of oculinae
curious those of species every short, corals--in of varieties superb
become day one will which formed, are islands entire which of polypi
of coating their for remarkable echinodermes, the Of continents.
echini, asterophons, comatules, pantacrinae, sea-stars, asteri, spines,
this of collection complete a individually represented etc., holothuri,
group.

before fainted have certainly would conchyliologist nervous somewhat A
of specimens the classified were which in cases, numerous more other
me fails time which value, inestimable of collection a was It molluscs.
memory from quote will I specimens these Amongst minutely. describe to
regular whose Ocean, Indian the of hammer-fish royal elegant the only
imperial an ground, brown and red a on brightly out stood spots white
in specimen rare a spines, with bristling bright-coloured, spondyle,
a L1000); than less not at value its estimated museums--(I European the
procured only is which Holland, New of seas the of hammer-fish common
bivalve white fragile Senegal; of buccardia exotic difficulty; with
several soap-bubble; a like shatter might breath a which shells,
edged tube, calcareous of kind a Java, of aspirgillum the of varieties
of series whole a amateurs; by debated much and folds, leafy with
a others seas, American the in found greenish-yellow, a some trochi,
of Gulf the from others waters; Australian of natives reddish-brown,
the in found stellari shell; imbricated their for remarkable Mexico,
New of spur magnificent the all, of rarest the last, and Seas; Southern
which to shells fragile and delicate of description every and Zealand;
names. appropriate given has science

of pearls of chaplets out spread were compartments, separate in Apart,
little in light electric the reflected which beauty, greatest the
Sea; Red the of pinna-marina the from torn pearls, pink fire; of sparks
the pearls, black and blue yellow, iris; haliotyde the of pearls green
certain and ocean, every of molluscs divers the of productions curious
of specimens several lastly, North; the of water-courses the of mussels
pintadines. rarest the from gathered been had which value inestimable
as worth were and egg, pigeon's a than larger were pearls these of Some
Shah the to sold Tavernier traveller the which that than more and much,
possession the in one the surpassed and millions, three for Persia of
the in unrivalled be to believed had I which Muscat, of Imaum the of
world.

simply was collection this of value the estimate to Therefore,
the in millions expended have must Nemo Captain impossible.
source what thinking was I and specimens, various these of acquirement
fancy his gratify to thus able been have to from, drawn have could he
words: these by interrupted was I when collecting, for

be must they Unquestionably Professor? shells, my examining are "You
charm, greater far a have they me for but naturalist; a to interesting
sea a not is there and hand, own my with all them collected have I for
researches." my escaped has which globe the of face the on

midst the in about wandering of delight the Captain, understand, can "I
their collected have who those of one are You riches. such of
collection a such possesses Europe in museum No themselves. treasures
upon admiration my all exhaust I if But ocean. the of produce the of
not do I it. carries which vessel the for left none have shall I it,
Nautilus, this that confess must I but secrets: your into pry to wish
which contrivances the it, in confined is which power motive the with
excite all it, propels which agent powerful the worked, be to it enable
of walls the on suspended see I pitch. highest the to curiosity my
ignorant." am I use whose of instruments room this

where Professor, room, own my in instruments same these find will "You
first But you. to use their explaining in pleasure much have shall I
You use. own your for apart set is which cabin the inspect and come
Nautilus." the board on accommodated be will you how see must

each from opening doors the of one by who, Nemo Captain followed I
towards me conducted He waist. the regained drawing-room, the of panel
a with room, elegant an but cabin, a not found, I there and bow, the
furniture. excellent of pieces other several and dressing-table, bed,

host. my thank only could I

into opens mine "and door, a opening he, said mine," adjoins room "Your
quitted." just have we that drawing-room the

monkish a almost severe, a had it room: Captain's the entered I
toilet; the for articles some table, a bedstead, iron small A aspect.
strictest the comforts, No skylight. a by lighted whole the
only. necessaries

seat. a to pointed Nemo Captain

began he and myself, seated I said. he down," sit to as good so "Be
thus:



XI CHAPTER

ELECTRICITY BY ALL

the on hanging instruments the me showing Nemo, Captain said "Sir,"
the for required contrivances the are "here room, his of walls
them have I drawing-room, the in as Here, Nautilus. the of navigation
direction exact and position my indicate they and eyes, my under always
the as such you, to known are Some ocean. the of middle the in
the Nautilus; the of temperature internal the gives which thermometer,
the foretells and air the of weight the indicates which barometer,
the of dryness the marks which hygrometer, the weather; the of changes
decomposing, by which, of contents the storm-glass, the atmosphere;
course; my guides which compass, the tempests; of approach the announce
sun; the of altitude the by latitude the shows which sextant, the
day for glasses and longitude; the calculate I which by chronometers,
the when horizon, the of points the examine to use I which night, and
waves." the of surface the to rises Nautilus

the know I "and replied, I instruments," nautical usual the are "These
particular the to answer doubt, no others, these But them. of use
a is needle movable with dial This Nautilus. the of requirements
not?" it is manometer,

water, the with communication by But manometer. a actually is "It
same the at depth our gives it indicates, it pressure external whose
time."

guess?" cannot I which of use the instruments, other these "And

be you Will explanations. some you give to ought I Professor, "Here,
me?" to listen to enough kind

said: he then moments, few a for silent was He

to conforms which easy, rapid, obedient, agent, powerful a is "There
done is Everything vessel. my board on supreme reigns and use, every
mechanical my of soul the is and it, warms lights, It it. of means by
electricity." is agent This apparatus.

surprise. in cried I "Electricity?"

sir." "Yes,

movement, of rapidity extreme an possess you Captain, "Nevertheless,
now, Until electricity. of power the with well agree not does which
able been only has and restraint, under remained has force dynamic its
power." of amount small a produce to

everybody's. not is electricity "my Nemo, Captain said "Professor,"
are grammes thousand a In of. composed is sea-water what know You
chloride of cent. per 2/3 2 about and water, of cent. per 1/2 96 found
of and magnesium of chlorides quantity, smaller a in then, sodium; of
and sulphate magnesia, of sulphate magnesium, of bromide potassium,
a forms sodium of chloride that then, see, You lime. of carbonate
the from extract I that sodium this is it So it. of part large
the to all owe I ingredients. my compose I which of and sea-water,
light, heat, gives electricity and electricity, produces it ocean;
Nautilus." the to life word, a in and, motion,

breathe?" you air the not "But

it but consumption, my for necessary air the manufacture could I "Oh!
please. I when water the of surface the to up go I because useless, is
it breathe, to air with me furnish not does electricity if However,
spacious in stored are that pumps powerful the least at works
I as long as and need, at prolong to me enable which and reservoirs,
and uniform a gives It sea. the of depths the in stay my will,
clock; this at look Now not. does sun the which light, unintermittent
best the defies that regularity a with goes and electrical, is it
the like hours, twenty-four into it divided have I chronometers.
nor sun day, nor night neither is there me for because clocks, Italian
bottom the to me with take I that light factitious that only but moon,
morning." the in o'clock ten is it now, just Look! sea. the of

"Exactly."

us of front in hanging dial This electricity. of application "Another
in it puts thread electric An Nautilus. the of speed the indicates
speed. real the indicates needle the and screw, the with communication
miles fifteen of speed uniform a with along spinning are we now Look!
hour." an

of use make to right were you Captain, see, I And marvelous! is "It
steam." and water, wind, of place the takes that agent this

you "If rising. Nemo, Captain said Aronnax," M. finished, not have "We
Nautilus." the of stern the examine will we me, allow will

of boat, submarine this of part anterior the already knew I Really,
the head: ship's the from starting division, exact the is this which
a by library the from separated long, yards five dining-room,
large the long; yards five library, the partition; water-tight
a by room Captain's the from separated long, yards ten drawing-room,
length; in yards five room, said the partition; water-tight second
a and seven air, of reservoir a lastly and, yards; half a and two mine,
yards, five thirty length Total bows. the to extended that yards, half
shut were that doors had partitions The feet. five and hundred one or
the ensured they and instruments, india-rubber of means by hermetically
leak. a of case in Nautilus the of safety

of centre the at arrived and waist, the through Nemo Captain followed I
partitions. two between opened that well of sort a was There boat. the
the to led partition, the to hook iron an with fastened ladder, iron An
for. used was ladder the what Captain the asked I end. upper

said. he boat," small the to leads "It

surprise. in exclaimed, I boat?" a you have "What!

serves that insubmersible, and light vessel, excellent an course; "Of
boat." pleasure a as or fishing a as either

the to come to obliged are you embark, to wish you when then, "But
water?" the of surface

of hull the of part upper the to attached is boat This all. at "Not
quite decked, is It it. for made cavity a occupies and Nautilus, the
a to leads ladder This bolts. solid by together held and water-tight,
a with corresponds that Nautilus, the of hull the in made man-hole
I opening double this By boat. the of side the in made hole similar
the to belonging one the shut They vessel. small the into get
the undo I pressure. screw of means by other the shut I Nautilus;
with sea the of surface the to up goes boat little the and bolts,
carefully bridge, the of panel the open then I rapidity. prodigious
off." I'm and oars, my take sail, my hoist it, mast I then; till shut

board?" on back get you do how "But

me." to comes Nautilus the Aronnax; M. back, come not do "I

orders?" your "By

and it, to telegraph I us. connects thread electric An orders. my "By
enough." is that

more be can "nothing marvels, these at astonished said, I "Really,"
simple."

the to led that staircase the of cage the by passed having After
Land, Ned and Conseil which in long, feet six cabin a saw I platform,
a Then avidity. with it devouring were repast, their with enchanted
large the between situated long, feet nine kitchen a into opened door
the all did itself, gas than better electricity, There store-rooms.
of sponges the to out gave furnaces the under streams The cooking.
also They distributed. and up kept regularly was which heat a platina
furnished evaporation, by which, apparatus, distilling a heated
bathroom a was kitchen this Near water. drinkable excellent
taps. water cold and hot with furnished, comfortably

feet sixteen vessel, the of berth-room the was kitchen the to Next
it, of management the see not could I and shut, was door the But long.
on employed men of number the of idea an me given have might which
Nautilus. the board

from office this separated that partition fourth a was bottom the At
compartment the in myself found I and opened, door A engine-room. the
order--had high very a of engineer an Nemo--certainly Captain where
lighted, clearly engine-room, This machinery. locomotive his arranged
divided was It length. in feet sixty-five than less measure not did
producing for materials the contained first the parts; two into
the with it connected that machinery the second the and electricity,
the understand to order in interest, great with it examined I screw.
Nautilus. the of machinery

not contrivances, Bunsen's use "I Captain, the said see," "You
are Bunsen's enough. powerful been have not would Those Ruhmkorff's.
be to proves experience which large, and strong but number, in fewer
by works, it where forward, passes produced electricity The best. the
cog-wheels and levers of system a on size, great of electro-magnets
the one, This screw. the of axle the to movement the transmit that
feet, twenty-three thread the and feet, nineteen is which of diameter
second." a in revolutions 120 about performs

then?" get you "And

hour." an miles fifty of speed "A

I and Lincoln, Abraham the before manoeuvre Nautilus the seen have "I
must We enough. not is this But speed. its to as ideas own my have
the to right, the to it direct to able be must We go. we where see
find you where depths, great the to get you do How below. above, left,
atmospheres? of hundreds by rated is which resistance, increasing an
maintain you do how And ocean? the of surface the to return you do How
much?" too asking I Am medium? requisite the in yourselves

hesitation; some with Captain, the replied Professor," all, at "Not
saloon, the into Come boat. submarine this leave never may you "since
know to want you all learn will you there and study, usual our is it
Nautilus." the about



XII CHAPTER

FIGURES SOME

The smoking. saloon the in divan a on seated were we after moment A
elevation and section, plan, the gave that sketch a me showed Captain
words: these in description his began he Then Nautilus. the of

in. are you boat the of dimensions several the are Aronnax, M. "Here,
cigar a like very is It ends. conical with cylinder elongated an is It
of constructions several in London in adopted already shape a shape, in
is stern, to stem from cylinder, this of length The sort. same the
is It feet. twenty-six is breadth maximum its and feet, 232 exactly
are lines its but steamers, long-voyage your like quite built not
water the allow to enough, prolonged curves its and long, sufficiently
two These passage. its to obstacle no oppose and easily, off slide to
and surface the calculation simple a by obtain to you enable dimensions
its and feet; 6,032 measures area Its Nautilus. the of contents cubic
completely when say, to is that yards; cubic 1,500 about contents
tons. 1,500 weighs or water, of feet 50,000 displaces it immersed

that meant I vessel, submarine this for plans the made I "When
to only ought it consequently submerged: be should nine-tenths
that weigh to only say, to is that bulk, its of nine-tenths displace
weight, that exceeded have to therefore, not, ought I tons. of number
dimensions. aforesaid the on it constructing

outside, other the inside, one hulls, two of composed is Nautilus "The
owing Indeed, strong. very it render which irons, T-shaped by joined
were it if as block, a like resists it arrangement cellular this to
by not and spontaneously, coheres it yield; cannot sides Its solid.
materials the of union perfect its and rivets; its of closeness the
seas. roughest the defy to it enables

.7 from is density whose plates, steel of composed are hulls two "These
half a and inches two than less not is first The water. of that .8 to
twenty keel, the envelope, second The tons. 394 weighs and thick
the engine, The tons. sixty-two only weighs thick, ten and high inches
the appendages, apparatus and accessories several the ballast,
this?" all follow you Do tons. 961.62 weigh bulkheads, and partitions

do." "I

one-tenth circumstances, these under afloat is Nautilus the when "Then,
to equal size a of reservoirs made have I if Now, water. the of out is
with them fill I if and tons, 150 holding of capable or tenth, this
immersed. completely be will tons, 1,507 then weighing boat, the water,
part lower the in are reservoirs These Professor. happen, would That
sinks vessel the and fill, they and taps on turn I Nautilus. the of
surface." the with level been just had that

can I difficulty. real the to come we now but Captain, "Well,
surface, the below diving but, surface; the to rising your understand
and pressure, a encounter contrivance submarine your not does
every for atmosphere one of thrust upward an undergo consequently
inch?" square per pounds fifteen about just water, of feet thirty

sir." so, "Just

can you how see not do I Nautilus, the fill quite you unless "Then,
depths." those to down it draw

be will you or dynamics with statics confound not must you "Professor,
in spent labour little very is There errors. grave to exposed
a have bodies all for ocean, the of regions lower the attaining
of increase necessary the out find to wanted I When sink. to tendency
the calculate to only had I Nautilus, the sink to required weight
depth." the to according acquires sea-water that volume of reduction

evident." is "That

capable least at is it incompressible, absolutely not is water if "Now,
calculations recent most the after Indeed, compression. slight very of
of feet thirty each for atmosphere an of .000436 only is reduction this
the of account keep should I feet, 3,000 sink to want we If depth.
water of column a of that to equal pressure a under bulk of reduction
have I Now, verified. easily is calculation The feet. thousand a of
Therefore tons. hundred a holding of capable reservoirs supplementary
level the to rise to wish I When depth. considerable a to sink can I
I if reservoirs the all empty and water, the off let only I sea, the of
capacity." total her of part tenth the from emerge to Nautilus the want

reasonings. these to object to nothing had I

to wrong be should "I replied; I Captain," calculations, your admit "I
real a foresee I but them; confirms experience daily since them dispute
way." the in difficulty

sir?" "What,

a bear Nautilus the of walls the deep, feet 1,000 about are you "When
the empty to were you now just then, If, atmospheres. 100 of pressure
the to up go to and vessel, the lighten to reservoirs, supplementary
which atmospheres, 100 of pressure the overcome must pumps the surface,
power----" a that From inch. square per lbs. 1,500 is

"I hastily. Captain, the said give," can alone electricity "That
infinite. almost is engines my of power dynamic the that sir, repeat,
have must you as power, enormous an have Nautilus the of pumps The
Abraham the upon torrent a like burst water of jets their when observed
mean a attain to only reservoirs subsidiary use I Besides, Lincoln.
my managing of view a with that and fathoms, 1,000 to 750 of depth
ocean the of depths the visit to mind a have I when Also, machines.
less not but slower of use make I surface, the below mlles six or five
means." infallible

Captain?" they, are "What

worked." is Nautilus the how you telling my involves "That

learn." to impatient am "I

following word, a in turn, to port, or starboard to boat this steer "To
the of back the on fixed rudder ordinary an use I plan, horizontal a
can I But by. steer to tackle some and wheel one with and stern-post,
vertical a by rise, and sink and sink, and rise Nautilus the make also
sides, its to fastened planes inclined two of means by movement
direction, every in move that planes flotation, of centre the opposite
the If interior. the from levers powerful by worked are that and
If horizontally. moves it boat, the with parallel kept are planes
the under and inclination, this to according Nautilus, the slanted,
as diagonally rises or diagonally sinks either screw, the of influence
I surface, the to quickly more rise to wish I if even And me. suits it
to Nautilus the causes water the of pressure the and screw, the ship
hydrogen." with filled balloon a like vertically rise

the in route the follow steersman the can how But Captain! "Bravo,
waters?" the of middle

hull the about raised is that box, glazed a in placed is steersman "The
lenses." with furnished and Nautilus, the of

pressure?" such resisting of capable lenses these "Are

capable nevertheless, is, blow, a at breaks which Glass, "Perfectly.
of experiments some During resistance. considerable offering of
plates saw we Seas, Northern the in 1864 in light electric by fishing
sixteen of pressure a resist thick inch an of third a than less
times thirty than less not is use I that glass the Now, atmospheres.
thicker."

the exceed must light the see, to order in all, after But, "Granted.
you can how water, the in darkness the of midst the in and darkness,
see?"

reflector, electric powerful a placed is cage steersman's the "Behind
front." in mile a half for sea the up light which from rays the

phosphorescence this for account can I Now Captain! bravo, bravo, "Ah!
the if you ask now I so. us puzzled that narwhal supposed the in
noise, a such made has that Scotia, the of and Nautilus the of boarding
rencontre?" chance a of result the been has

the below fathom one only sailing was I sir. accidental, "Quite
result." bad no had It came. shock the when water the of surface

Lincoln?" Abraham the with rencontre your about now, But sir. "None,

American the in vessels best the of one for sorry am I "Professor,
I myself. defend to bound was I and me, attacked they but navy;
she combat; de hors frigate the putting with however, myself, contented
port." next the at repaired getting in difficulty any have not will

boat." marvellous a certainly is Nautilus your Commander! "Ah,

danger If myself. of part were it if as it love I and Professor; "Yes,
the is impression first the ocean, the on vessels your of one threatens
hearts men's Nautilus the On below. and above abyss an of feeling
is shell double the for of, afraid be to defects No them. fail never
to wind the for sails no to; attend to rigging no iron; as firm as
is vessel the for fear, to fire no burst; to boilers no away; carry
the is electricity for short, run to coal no wood; of not iron, of made
deep in swims alone it for fear, to collision no agent; mechanical only
it water the below dives it when for brave, to tempest no water;
of perfection the is that sir! There, tranquillity. absolute reaches
in confidence more has engineer the that true is it if And vessels!
himself, captain the than builder the and builder, the than vessel the
once at am I for Nautilus; my in repose I trust the understand you
engineer." and builder, captain,

secret?" in Nautilus wonderful this construct you could how "But

of parts different from brought was Aronnax, M. portion, separate "Each
globe." the

arranged?" and together put be to had parts these "But

the in island desert a upon workshops my up set had I "Professor,
I that men brave the say, to is that workmen, my There ocean.
Nautilus. our together put have myself and educated, and instructed
our of trace all destroyed fire finished, was work the when Then,
had I if over jumped have could I that island, this on proceedings
liked."

great?" is vessel this of cost the "Then

Nautilus the Now ton. per L145 costs vessel iron an Aronnax, "M.
for more L80,000 and L67,500, to therefore came It 1,500. weighed
the and art of works the with L200,000, about and up, it fitting
contains." it collections

Nemo." Captain question, last "One

Professor." it, "Ask

rich?" are "You

national the pay it, missing without could, I and sir; rich, "Immensely
France." of debt

my upon playing he Was thus. spoke who person singular the at stared I
that. decide would future The credulity?



XIII CHAPTER

RIVER BLACK THE

is water by covered is which globe terrestrial the of portion The
mass fluid This acres. of millions eighty of upwards at estimated
miles, cubic of millions fifty and hundred two billions two comprises
of weight the leagues, sixty of diameter a of body spherical a forming
meaning the comprehend To tons. of quintillions three be would which
a to is quintillion a that observe to necessary is it figures, these of
many as are there words, other in unity; to is billion a as billion
mass This billion. a in units are there as quintillion a in billions
be would which water of quantity the about to equal is fluid of
years. thousand forty in earth the of rivers the all by discharged

everywhere. prevailed originally ocean the epochs geological the During
mountains the of tops the period, silurian the in degrees, by Then
partial in disappeared then emerged, islands the appear, to began
length at till continents, formed settled, became reappeared, deluges,
day. present the in see we as arranged, geographically became earth the
hundred six million thirty-seven liquid the from wrested had solid The
and hundred nine billions twelve to equal miles, square fifty-seven and
acres. of millions sixty

great five into waters the divide to us allows continents of shape The
Ocean, Frozen or Antarctic, the Ocean, Frozen or Arctic the portions:
Oceans. Pacific the and Atlantic, the Indian, the

Polar two the between south to north from extends Ocean Pacific The
extent an over America, and Asia between west to east from and Circles,
currents its seas; of quietest the is It longitude. of degrees 145 of
was Such rain. abundant and tides, medium has it slow, and broad are
these under over travel to first me destined fate my that ocean the
conditions. strange

bearings our take please, you if will, "we Nemo, Captain said "Sir,"
twelve; to quarter a is It voyage. this of starting-point the fix and
surface." the to again up go will I

to began pumps The times. three clock electric an pressed Captain The
a by marked manometer the of needle the tanks; the from water the drive
stopped. it then Nautilus, the of ascent the pressure different

Captain. the said arrived," have "We

platform, the to on opened which staircase central the to went I
the of part upper the on myself found and steps, iron the up clambered
Nautilus.

of back and front The water. of out feet three only was platform The
be to justly it caused which spindle-shape that of was Nautilus the
slightly plates, iron its that noticed I cigar. a to compared
of bodies the clothes which shell the resembled other, each overlaying
was, it natural how me to explained It reptiles. terrestrial large our
a for taken been have should boat this that glasses, all of spite in
animal. marine

hull the in buried half longboat, the platform the of middle the Toward
two rose aft and Fore excrescence. slight a formed vessel, the of
thick by closed partly and sides, inclined with height medium of cages
the directed who steersman the for destined one glasses; lenticular
the on light give to lantern brilliant a containing other the Nautilus,
road.

vehicle long the could Scarcely pure. sky the beautiful, was sea The
east the from breeze light A ocean. the of undulations broad the feel
made fog, from free horizon, The waters. the of surface the rippled
an not quicksand, a Not sight. in was Nothing easy. observation
desert. vast A island.

sun, the of altitude the took sextant, his of help the by Nemo, Captain
till moments some for waited He latitude. the give to also ought which
muscle a not observations taking Whilst horizon. the touched disc its
of hand a in motionless more been have not could instrument the moved,
marble.

like----" you "When he. said sir," o'clock, "Twelve

Japanese the by yellowed slightly sea, the upon look last a cast I
saloon. the to descended and coast,

"our Captain; the added studies," your to you leave I sir, now, "And
a on maps are Here fathoms. twenty-six is depth our E.N.E., is course
your at is saloon The it. follow may you which by scale large
Nemo Captain retire." will I permission, your with and, disposal,
the on bearing all thoughts in lost alone, remained I and bowed,
Nautilus. the of commander

pierce to seeking reflections, these in deep I was hour whole a For
vast the upon fell eyes my Then me. to interesting so mystery this
very the on finger my placed I and table, the upon spread planisphere
crossed. longitude and latitude given the where spot

special are They continents. the like rivers large its has sea The
most The colour. their and temperature their by known currents
Science Stream. Gulf the of name the by known is these of remarkable
one currents: principal five of direction the globe the on decided has
North the in third a South, the in second a Atlantic, North the in
Indian Southern the in fifth a and South, the in fourth a Pacific,
or time one at existed current sixth a that probable even is It Ocean.
Seas Aral and Caspian the when Ocean, Indian Northern the in another
water. of sheet vast one but formed

was currents these of one planisphere the on indicated point this At
which, River, Black the Japanese, the of Kuro-Scivo the rolling,
perpendicular the by warmed is it where Bengal, of Gulf the leaving
coast the along Malacca of Straits the crosses sun, tropical a of rays
carrying Islands, Aleutian the to Pacific North the into turns Asia, of
and productions, indigenous other and camphor-trees of trunks it with
water. warm its of indigo pure the with ocean the of waves the edging
it followed I follow. to was Nautilus the that current this was It
and Pacific, the of vastness the in itself lose it saw eye; my with
the at appeared Conseil and Land Ned when it, with drawn myself felt
saloon. the of door

wonders the of sight the at petrified remained companions brave two My
them. before spread

museum the "In Canadian. the exclaimed we?" are where we, are "Where
Quebec?" at

not are "you enter, to them for sign a making answered, I friends," "My
of level the below yards fifty Nautilus, the board on but Canada, in
sea." the

there men many how me tell you "can Land, Ned said Aronnax," M. "But,
hundred?" a fifty, twenty, Ten, board? on are

all time a for abandon to better is it Land; Mr. you, answer cannot "I
a is ship This it. from escaping or Nautilus the seizing of idea
seen have to not sorry be should I and industry, modern of masterpiece
to only if us, upon forced situation the accept would people Many it.
what see and try us let and quiet be So wonders. such amongst move
us." around passes

iron this in nothing see can we "but harpooner, the exclaimed "See!"
sailing--blindly." are walking--we are We prison!

suddenly was all when words these pronounced scarcely had Land Ned
eyes my that rapidly so and gone, was ceiling luminous The darkness.
impression. painful a received

awaited surprise what knowing not and stirring, not mute, remained We
one heard: was noise sliding A disagreeable. or agreeable whether us,
Nautilus. the of sides the at working were panels that said have would

Land. Ned said end!" the of end the is "It

oblong two through saloon, the of side each at broke light Suddenly
electric the by up lit vividly appeared mass liquid The openings.
I first At sea. the from us separated plates crystal Two gleam.
but break, might partition frail this that thought the at trembled
of power infinite almost an giving them, bound copper of bands strong
resistance.

What Nautilus. the round all mile a for visible distinctly was sea The
of effects the paint could Who it? describe can pen What spectacle! a
softness the and water, of sheets transparent those through light the
of strata superior the to lower the from gradations successive the of
ocean? the

far is clearness its that and sea the of transparency the know We
it which substances organic and mineral The rock-water. of that beyond
of parts certain In transparency. its heightens suspension in holds
be can water, of fathoms seventy-five under Antilles, the at ocean the
of power penetrating The sand. of bed a clearness surprising with seen
and hundred one of depth a for cease to seem not does rays solar the
the by over travelled fluid middle this in But fathoms. fifty
the of bosom the in even produced was brightness electric the Nautilus,
light. liquid but water, luminous longer no was It waves.

obscurity The abyss. unexplored this into opened window a side each On
looked we and outside, brightness the advantage to showed saloon the of
aquarium. immense an of glass the been had crystal pure this if as out

now." see you well, Ned; friend see, to wished "You

his forgetting who, Canadian, the muttered curious!" "Curious!
one "and attraction; irresistible some to submit to seemed ill-temper,
sight!" a such admire to this than further come would

has he man; this of life the understand "I myself, to I thought "Ah!"
greatest his all treasures he which in himself, for apart world a made
wonders."

During Nautilus. the escorted army aquatic an hours whole two For
beauty, in other each rivalling while bounds, their games, their
banded the labre; green the distinguished I velocity, and brightness,
a of goby, round-tailed the black; of line double a by marked mullet,
a scombrus, Japanese the back; the on spots violet with colour, white
head; silvery and body blue a with seas, these of mackerel beautiful
banded some description; defies alone name whose azurors, brilliant the
the of woodcocks the yellow; and blue of fins variegated with spares,
Japanese length; in yard a attain which of specimens some seas,
small eyes with long, feet six serpents lampreys, spider salamanders,
other many with teeth; with bristling mouth huge a and lively, and
species.

quickly followed interjections height, its at kept was imagination Our
in was I them. classed Conseil and fish, the named Ned other. each on
their of beauty the and movements their of vivacity the with ecstasies
alive animals, these surprise to me to given been it had Never forms.
the all mention not will I element. natural their in liberty, at and
of collection the all eyes, dazzled my before passed which varieties
birds the than numerous more fish, These Japan. and China of seas the
the of focus brilliant the by doubt, no attracted, came, air, the of
light. electric

closed panels iron the saloon, the in daylight was there Suddenly
I time long a for But disappeared. vision enchanting the and again,
the on hanging instruments the on fell eyes my till on, dreamt
the E.N.E., be to course the showed still compass The partition.
a to equivalent atmospheres, five of pressure a indicated manometer
of speed a gave log electric the and fathoms, five twenty of depth
appear. not did he but Nemo, Captain expected I hour. an miles fifteen
five. of hour the marked clock The

my to retired I and cabin, their to returned Conseil and Land Ned
of made soup turtle of composed was It ready. was dinner My chamber.
paste puff with served surmullet a of bills, hawks delicate most the
and delicious), most was itself, by prepared which, of liver (the
me to seemed which of savour the emperor-holocanthus, the of fillets
salmon. to even superior

sleep Then thinking. and writing, reading, evening the passed I
and zostera, of couch my on myself stretched I and me, overpowered
the through rapidly gliding was Nautilus the whilst profoundly, slept
River. Black the of current



XIV CHAPTER

INVITATION OF NOTE A

of sleep long a after awoke I November. of 9th the was day next The
passed I "how know to custom, to according came, Conseil hours. twelve
the friend his left had He services. his offer to and night," the
his all else anything done never had who man a like sleeping Canadian
to caring without pleased, he as chatter fellow worthy the let I life.
our during Captain the of absence the by preoccupied was I him. answer
to-day. him see to hoping and before, day the of sitting

I deserted. was It saloon. the into went I dressed was I as soon As
glasses. the behind hidden treasures shell the of study the into plunged

Captain from visit a by honoured being my without passed day whole The
not did they Perhaps open. not did saloon the of panels The Nemo.
things. beautiful these of tire to us wish

the knots, twelve speed her E.N.E., was Nautilus the of course The
fathoms. thirty and twenty-five between surface the below depth

solitude. same the desertion, same the November, of 10th day, next The
greater the spent Conseil and Ned crew: ship's the of one see not did I
absence puzzling the at astonished were They me. with day the of part
his altered he ill?--had man singular this Was Captain. the of
us? to regard with intentions

were we liberty, perfect enjoyed we said, Conseil as all, After
the of terms his to kept host Our fed. abundantly and delicately
our of singularity the indeed, and, complain, not could We treaty.
right no had we that us for compensation wonderful such reserved fate
yet. as it accuse to

enabled has which adventures these of journal the commenced I day That
detail. minute and exactitude scrupulous more with them relate to me

the over spreading air fresh The morning. the in early November, 11th
the of surface the to come had we that me told Nautilus the of interior
the to steps my directed I oxygen. of supply our renew to ocean
platform. the mounted and staircase, central

calm. but grey, sea the cloudy, was weather the o'clock, six was It
be he would meet, to hoped I whom Nemo, Captain billow. a Scarcely
cage. glass his in imprisoned steersman the but one no saw I there?
inhaled I pinnace, the of hull the by formed projection the upon Seated
delight. with breeze salt the

the rays, sun's the of action the under disappeared fog the degrees By
under flamed sea The horizon. eastern the behind from rose orb radiant
the in scattered clouds The gunpowder. of train a like glance its
and shades, beautiful of tints lively with coloured were heights
what But day. that for wind betokened which tails," "mare's numerous
frighten! not could tempests which Nautilus, this to wind was

so and gay, so sun, the of rising joyous this admiring was I
was I platform. the approaching steps heard I when life-giving,
had I (whom second his was it but Nemo, Captain salute to prepared
advanced He appeared. who visit) first Captain's the on seen already
his to glass powerful his With me. see to seeming not platform, the on
This attention. great with horizon the of point every scanned he eye,
in sentence a pronounced and panel the approached he over, examination
was it morning every for it, remembered have I terms. these exactly
worded: thus was It conditions. same the exactly under repeated

virch." lorni respoc "Nautron

say. not could I meant it What

the that thought I descended. second the pronounced, words These
regained I navigation. submarine its to return to about was Nautilus
chamber. my to returned and panel the

Every situation. our in change any without thus, sped days Five
the by pronounced was phrase same The platform. the mounted I morning
appear. not did Nemo Captain But individual. same

the on when, again, him see never should I that mind my up made had I
found I Conseil, and Ned with room my to returning on November, 16th
was It impatiently. it opened I me. to addressed note a table my upon
recalling pointed, rather characters the hand, clear bold, a in written
follows: as worded was note The type. German the


1867. November, of 16th Nautilus. the board On ARONNAX, PROFESSOR TO

will which hunting-party, a to Aronnax Professor invites Nemo Captain
Crespo. of Island the of forests the in morning to-morrow place take
present, being from Professor the prevent will nothing that hopes He
companions. his by joined him see pleasure with will he and

Nautilus. the of Commander NEMO, CAPTAIN


Ned. exclaimed hunt!" "A

Conseil. added Crespo!" of Island the of forests the in "And

Land. Ned replied firma?" terra on going is gentleman the then "Oh!

letter the reading I, said indicated," clearly be to me to seems "That
more. once

dry on more once "But Canadian. the said accept," must we "Well,
eat to sorry be not shall I Indeed, do. to what know shall we ground,
venison." fresh of piece a

Captain between contradictory was what reconcile to seeking Without
invitation his and continents, and islands to aversion manifest Nemo's
replying: with myself contented I forest, a in hunt to

is." Crespo of Island the where see first us "Let

157 and lat. N. 40' 32 in and planisphere, the consulted I
Captain by 1801 in recognised island, small a found I long., W. 50'
Plata, la de Rocca as maps Spanish ancient the in marked and Crespo,
eighteen about then were We Rock. Silver The is which of meaning the
Nautilus, the of course the and starting-point, our from miles hundred
southeast. the towards back it bringing was changed, little a

to Pacific, North the of midst the in lost rock, little this showed I
companions. my

least at "he I, said ground," dry on go sometimes does Nemo Captain "If
islands." desert chooses

he and Conseil and speaking, without shoulders his shrugged Land Ned
me. left

I impassive, and mute steward, the by served was which supper, After
anxiety. some without not bed, to went

the that felt I awakening, on November, of 17th the morning, next The
saloon. the entered and quickly dressed I still. perfectly was Nautilus

me asked and bowed, rose, He me. for waiting there, was Nemo Captain
allusion no made he As him. accompany to me for convenient was it if
and it, mention not did I days, eight last the during absence his to
him. follow to ready were myself and companions my that answered simply

served. was breakfast where dining-room, the entered We

without breakfast my share "pray, Captain, the said Aronnax," "M.
in walk a you promised I though For, eat. we as chat will we ceremony;
as breakfast So there. hotels find to undertake not did I forest, the
late." very till dinner his have not likely most will who man a

fish, of kinds several of composed was It repast. the to honour did I
drink Our seaweed. of sorts different and sea-cucumber, of slices and
a of drops some added Captain the which to water, pure of consisted
seaweed a from method Kamschatcha the by extracted liquor, fermented
first at ate Nemo Captain palmata. Rhodomenia of name the under known
began: he Then word. a saying without

Crespo, of forest submarine my in hunt to you to proposed I when "Sir,
of lightly judge never should you Sir, mad. me thought evidently you
man." any

me----" believe Captain, "But

any have you whether see then will you and listen, to enough kind "Be
contradiction." and folly of me accuse to cause

listen." "I

water, under live can man that Professor, do, I as well as know "You
air. breathable of supply sufficient a him with carries he providing
his with dress, impervious an in clad workman, the works, submarine In
forcing of means by above from air receives helmet, metal a in head
regulators." and pumps

I. said apparatus," diving a is "That

is he liberty; at not is man the conditions these under but so, "Just
tube, india-rubber an through air him sends which pump the to attached
go not could we Nautilus, the to held thus be to obliged were we if and
far."

asked. I free?" getting of means the "And

own your of two by invented apparatus, Rouquayrol the use to is "It
and use, own my for perfection to brought have I which countrymen,
physiological new these under yourself risk to you allow will which
a of consists It suffering. whatever organ any without conditions
a under air the store I which in plates, iron thick of reservoir
by back the on fixed is reservoir This atmospheres. fifty of pressure
box a forms part upper Its knapsack. soldier's a like braces, of means
cannot therefore and bellows, a of means by kept is air the which in
such apparatus Rouquayrol the In tension. normal its at unless escape
of sort a join and box this leave pipes rubber india two use, we as
the air, fresh introduce to is one mouth; and nose the holds which tent
other the or one closes tongue the and foul, the out let to other
great encountering in I, But respirator. the of wants the to according
like head, my shut to obliged was sea, the of bottom the at pressures
copper of ball this to is it and copper; of ball a in diver a of that
open." expirator, the and inspirator the pipes, two the that

soon must you with carry you that air the but Nemo; Captain "Perfectly,
no is it oxygen of cent. per fifteen contains only it when used; be
breathe." to fit longer

Nautilus the of pumps the that Aronnax, M. you, told I But "Right!
those on and pressure, considerable under air the store to me allow
air breathable furnish can apparatus the of reservoir the conditions
hours." ten or nine for

ask only will "I answered. I make," to objections further no have "I
of bottom the at road your light you can Captain--how thing, one you
sea?" the

back, the on carried is one Aronnax; M. apparatus, Ruhmkorff the "With
pile, Bunsen a of composed is It waist. the to fastened is other the
wire A sodium. with but potash, of bichromate with work not do I which
it directs and produced, electricity the collects which introduced is
glass spiral a is lantern this In lantern. made particularly a towards
is apparatus the When gas. carbonic of quantity small a contains which
continuous and white a out giving luminous, becomes gas this work at
see." can I and breathe can I provided, Thus light.

that answers crushing such make you objections my all to Nemo, "Captain
Rouquayrol the admit to forced am I if But, doubt. longer no dare I
with reservations some allowed be must I apparatus, Ruhmkorff and
carry." to am I gun the to regard

Captain. the answered powder," for gun a not is it "But

air-gun." an is it "Then

board, on powder gun manufacture me have you would How "Doubtless!
charcoal?" or sulphur, saltpetre, either without

and hundred eight medium a in water under fire "to added, I "Besides,"
considerable very conquer must we air, the than denser times fifty-five
resistance."

Fulton, to according guns, exist There difficulty. no be would "That
Furcy, by France in Burley, and Coles Philip by England in perfected
of system peculiar a with furnished are which Landi, by Italy in and
having repeat, I But conditions. these under fire can which closing,
the of pumps the which pressure, great under air use I powder, no
abundantly." furnish Nautilus

used?" rapidly be must air this "But

at it furnish can which reservoir, Rouquayrol my not I have "Well,
see must you Aronnax, M. Besides required. is that all is tap A need?
air little but spend can we hunt, submarine our during that, yourself
balls." few but and

this of midst the in and twilight, this in that me to seems it "But
could shots atmosphere, the with compared dense very is which fluid,
mortal." prove easily nor far, go not

however and, mortal; is blow every gun this with contrary, the on "Sir,
thunderbolt." a by struck if as falls it touched, is animal the lightly

"Why?"

little but balls, ordinary not are gun this by sent balls the "Because
steel, of case a with covered are cases glass These glass. of cases
into bottles, Leyden real are they lead; of pellet a with weighted and
the With tension. high very a to forced is electricity the which
it strong however animal, the and discharged, are they shock slightest
number size are cases these that you tell must I dead. falls be, may
ten." be would gun ordinary an for charge the that and four,

have "I table. the from rising replied, I longer," no argue will "I
you where go will I events, all At gun. my take to but me left nothing
go."

Conseil's and Ned's before passing in and aft; me led then Nemo Captain
came then We promptly. followed who companions, two my called I cabin,
walking-dress. our on put we which in machinery-room, the near cell a to



XV CHAPTER

SEA THE OF BOTTOM THE ON WALK A

the of wardrobe and arsenal the correctly, speak to was, cell This
waiting partition the from hung apparatuses diving dozen A Nautilus.
use. our

in himself dress to repugnance evident showed them, seeing on Land, Ned
one.

nothing are Crespo of Island the of forests the Ned, worthy my "But,
forests." submarine but

fresh of dreams his saw who harpooner, disappointed the said "Good!"
yourself dress to going you are Aronnax, M. you, "And away. fade meat
clothes?" those in

Ned." Master alternative, no is "There

shoulders; his shrugging harpooner, the replied sir," please, you "As
one." into get never will I forced, am I unless me, for as "but,

Nemo. Captain said Ned," Master you, force will one "No

Ned. asked it?" risk to going Conseil "Is

Conseil. replied goes," he wherever master my follow "I

in dress us help to came crew ship's the of two call Captain's the At
seam, without india-rubber of made clothes, impervious and heavy these
would One pressure. considerable resist to expressly constructed and
suit This resisting. and supple both armour, of suit a it thought have
with off finished were trousers The waistcoat. and trousers formed
the of texture The soles. leaden heavy with weighted boots, thick
the crossed which copper, of bands by together held was waistcoat
leaving and water, the of pressure great the from it protecting chest,
way no in which gloves, in ended sleeves the act; to free lungs the
difference vast a was There hands. the of movement the restrained
cork old the and apparatuses consummate these between noticeable
the during vogue in contrivances other and jackets, breastplates,
century. eighteenth

must who Hercules, of sort (a companions his of one and Nemo Captain
enveloped soon were myself and Conseil strength), great possessed have
enclose to but done be to more nothing remained There dresses. the in
operation, this to proceeding before But, box. metal the in heads our
guns. the examine to permission Captain's the asked I

which, of end butt the gun, simple a me gave men Nautilus the of One
a as served It large. rather was centre, the in hollow steel, of made
spring, a by worked valve, a which air, compressed for reservoir
groove a in projectiles of box A tube. metal a into escape to allowed
these of twenty about contained end butt the of thickness the in
the into forced were spring, a of means by which, balls, electric
ready. was another fired, was shot one as soon As gun. the of barrel

I handled: easily and perfect, is arm "this I, said Nemo," "Captain
of bottom the gain we shall how But it. try to allowed be to ask only
sea?" the

fathoms, five in stranded is Nautilus the Professor, moment, this "At
start." to but do to nothing have we and

off?" get we shall how "But

see." shall "You

the did I and Conseil helmet, the into head his thrust Nemo Captain
Canadian. the from sport!" "Good ironical an hearing without not same,
which upon collar copper a in terminated dress our of part upper The
glass, thick by protected holes, Three helmet. metal the screwed was
the in head our turning simply by directions, all in see to us allowed
the position, in was it as soon As head-dress. the of interior
I part, my for and, act; to began backs our on apparatus Rouquayrol
ease. with breathe could

I hand, my in gun the and belt, my from hanging lamp Ruhmkorff the With
these in imprisoned truth, the speak to But out. set to ready was
was it soles, leaden my by deck the to glued and garments, heavy
step. a take to me for impossible

pushed being myself felt I for. provided was things of state this But
companions My room. wardrobe the to contiguous room little a into
door, water-tight a heard I way. same the in along towed followed,
in wrapped were we and us, upon close plates, stopper with furnished
darkness. profound

mount cold the felt I heard. was hissing loud a minutes, some After
they vessel the of part some from Evidently chest. my to feet my from
invading was which water, the to entrance given tap, a of means by had,
the in cut door second A filled. soon was room the which with and us,
another In light. faint a saw We opened. then Nautilus the of side
sea. the of bottom the trod feet our instant

walk that by me upon left impression the retrace I can how now, And
Captain wonders! such relate to impotent are Words waters? the under
behind. steps some followed companion his front, in walked Nemo
had words of exchange an if as other, each near remained I and Conseil
weight the felt longer no I cases. metallic our through possible been
thick my or air, of reservoir my of shoes, my of or clothing, my of
its in almond an like rattled head my which of midst the in helmet,
shell.

the of surface the below feet thirty soil the lit which light, The
the through shone rays solar The power. its by me astonished ocean,
clearly I and colour, all dissipated and easily, mass watery
yards. fifty and hundred a of distance a at objects distinguished
and ultramarine, of gradations fine into darkened tints the that Beyond
was me surrounded which water this Truly obscurity. vague into faded
as almost but atmosphere, terrestrial the than denser air another but
were We sea. the of surface calm the was me Above transparent.
which shore, flat a on as wrinkled, not sand, even fine, on walking
a really carpet, dazzling This billows. the of impression the retains
which intensity, wonderful with sun the of rays the repelled reflector,
liquid. of atom every penetrated which vibration the for accounted
I feet, thirty of depth the at that, say I when believed be I Shall
daylight? broad in was I if as see could

impalpable the with sown sand, this on trod I hour an of quarter a For
shoal, long a resembling Nautilus, the of hull The shells. of dust
overtake should darkness when lantern, its but degrees; by disappeared
rays. distinct its by board on us guide to help would waters, the in us

I discernible. were distance the in outlined objects of forms Soon
the of zoophytes of tapestry a with hung rocks, magnificent recognised
effect peculiar the by struck first at was I and kind, beautiful most
medium. this of

surface the struck sun the of rays the morning; the in ten then was It
their of touch the at and angle, oblique an rather at waves the of
rocks, flowers, prism, a through as refraction by decomposed light,
solar seven the by edges the at shaded were polypi and shells, plants,
of complication this eyes, the for feast a marvellous, was It colours.
orange, yellow, green, of kaleidoscope perfect a tints, coloured
an of palette whole the word, one in blue; and indigo, violet,
the Conseil to communicate not I could Why colourist! enthusiastic
in him rival and brain, my to mounting were which sensations lively
his and Nemo Captain knew, I aught For admiration? of expressions
signs of means by thoughts exchange to able be might companion
I myself; to talked I better, of want for So, upon. agreed previously
expending thereby head, my covered which box copper the in declaimed
wise. perhaps was than words vain in air more

and fungi, prickly tuft-coral, pure of clusters isis, of kinds Various
their with decked flowers, of garden brilliant a formed anemones
It bottom. sandy the studding sea-stars tentacles, blue of collarettes
specimens brilliant the feet my under crush to me to grief real a was
hammerheads, of thousands, by ground the strewed which molluscs of
red and staircases, of shells), bounding (veritable donaciae
this by produced others many and angel-wings, helmet-shells,
whilst on, went we so walk, to bound were we But ocean. inexhaustible
rose-pink, or opal of umbrellas whose medusae waved heads our above
sun the of rays the from us sheltered blue, of band a with escalloped
path our strewn have would darkness, the in which, pelagiae, fiery and
light. phosphorescent with

scarcely mile, a of quarter a of space the in saw I wonders these All
signs. by on me beckoned who Nemo, Captain following and stopping,
an succeeded plain sandy the to changed; soil the of nature the Soon
equal of composed "ooze," call Americans the which mud slimy of extent
a over travelled then We shells. calcareous and silicious of parts
of was sward This vegetation. luxuriant and wild of seaweed of plain
carpet softest the rivalled and feet, the to soft and texture, close
feet, our at spread was verdure whilst But man. of hand the by woven
of plants, marine of network light A heads. our abandon not did it
thousand two than more which of seaweeds of family inexhaustible that
water. the of surface the on grew known, are kinds

whilst sea, the of top the nearer kept plants green the that noticed I
care the brown or black the to leaving depth, greater a at were red the
ocean. the of beds remote the in parterres and gardens forming of

near was It half. a and hour an about Nautilus the quitted had We
no were which rays, sun's the of perpendicularity the by knew I noon;
the and degrees, by disappeared colours magical The refracted. longer
regular a with walked We effaced. were sapphire and emerald of shades
the intensity; astonishing with ground the upon rang which step,
is ear the which to quickness a with transmitted was noise slightest
sound of conductor better a is water indeed, earth; the on unaccustomed
sloped earth the period this At one. to four of ratio the in air, than
a of depth a at were We tint. uniform a took light the downwards;
six of pressure a undergoing inches, twenty and yards five and hundred
atmospheres.

to feebly; though sun, the of rays the see still could I depth this At
lowest the twilight, reddish a succeeded had brilliancy intense their
was it enough; well see still could we but night; and day between state
this At yet. as apparatus Ruhmkorff the to resort to necessary not
then and him, joined I till waited he stopped; Nemo Captain moment
distance. short a at shadow, the in looming mass, obscure an to pointed

not was I and I; thought Crespo," of Island the of forest the is "It
mistaken.



XVI CHAPTER

FOREST SUBMARINE A

of one doubtless forest, this of borders the on arrived last at had We
his as it upon looked He domains. immense Nemo's Captain of finest the
men first the that it over right same the had he considered and own,
have would who indeed, And, world. the of days first the in had
What property? submarine this of possession the him with disputed
dark the down cut to hand, in hatchet come, would pioneer hardier other
copses?

we moment the and tree-plants; large of composed was forest This
singular the by struck was I arcades, vast its under penetrated
observed. yet not had I position branches--a their of position

the clothed which branch a not ground, the carpeted which herb an Not
all horizontally; extend they did nor bent, or broken either was trees,
a not filament, a Not ocean. the of surface the to up stretched
of rod a as straight as kept but be, might they thin however ribbon,
to due lines, perpendicular rigid in grew llianas and fuci The iron.
yet, Motionless them. produced had which element the of density the
former their resumed directly they hand, the by side one to bent when
perpendicularity! of region the was it Truly position.

the to as well as position, fantastic this to myself accustomed soon I
forest the of soil The us. surrounded which darkness comparative
submarine The avoid. to difficult blocks, sharp with covered seemed
would it than even richer and perfect, very being as me struck flora
are productions these where zones, tropical or arctic the in been have
the confounded involuntarily I minutes some for But plentiful. so not
been have not would who and plants; for animals taking genera,
this in allied closely too are flora the and fauna The mistaken?
world. submarine

existence their of principle the and self-propagated, are plants These
number, greater The them. nourishes and upholds which water, the in is
comprised shapes, capricious of blades forth shoot leaves, of instead
brown. and fawn, olive, green, carmine, pink, colours of scale a within

"in naturalist, ingenious an said element!" fantastic anomaly, "Curious
not!" does vegetable the and blossoms, kingdom animal the which

part, my for I, halt; to signal the gave Nemo Captain hour an about In
alariae, of arbour an under ourselves stretched we and sorry, not was
arrows. like up stood which of blades thin long the

but wanting nothing was there me; to delicious seemed rest short This
to impossible speak, to impossible but, conversation; of charm the
worthy the saw I Conseil's. to head copper great my put only I answer,
satisfaction, his show to and, delight, with glistening eyes fellow's
in way comical most the in air, of breastplate his in himself shook he
world. the

myself find to not surprised was I walking, this of hours four After
I stomach the of state this for account to How hungry. dreadfully
sleep, to desire insurmountable an felt I instead But tell. not could
thick the behind closed soon eyes my And divers. all to happens which
had alone movement the which slumber, heavy a into fell I and glasses,
in stretched companion, robust his and Nemo Captain before. prevented
example. the us set crystal, clear the

when but, judge, cannot I drowsiness this in buried remained I long How
had Nemo Captain horizon. the towards sinking seemed sun the woke, I
an when limbs, my stretch to beginning was I and risen, already
feet. my to briskly me brought apparition unexpected

inches thirty-eight about sea-spider, monstrous a off, steps few A
me. upon spring to ready eyes, squinting with me watching was high,
of bite the from me defend to enough thick was dress diver's my Though
the and Conseil horror. with shuddering help not could I animal, this
out pointed Nemo Captain moment. this at awoke Nautilus the of sailor
gun the of end butt the from blow a which crustacean, hideous the
in writhe monster the of claws horrible the saw I and over, knocked
animals other that me reminded incident This convulsions. terrible
whose against depths, obscure these haunt might feared be to more
of thought never had I me. protect not would diving-dress my attacks
thought I Indeed, guard. my upon be to resolved now I but before, it
was I but walk; our of termination the mark would halt this that
Nemo Captain Nautilus, the to returning of instead for, mistaken,
its incline, the on still was ground The excursion. bold his continued
greater to us leading be to and greater, getting be to seemed declivity
narrow a reached we when o'clock three about been have must It depths.
seventy-five about situated walls, perpendicular high between valley,
were we apparatus, our of perfection the to Thanks deep. fathoms
imposed have to seems nature which limit the below fathoms forty-five
excursions. submarine his to as man on

to which by instrument no had I though fathoms, seventy-five say I
the waters clearest the in even that knew I But distance. the judge
darkness the accordingly And further. penetrate not could rays solar
my groping was I visible. was object an not paces ten At deepened.
had Nemo Captain light. white brilliant a saw suddenly I when way,
same, the did companion his use; into apparatus electric his put just
I screw a turning By example. their followed I and Conseil and
and glass, spiral the and wire the between communication a established
of circle a for illuminated was lanterns, four our by lit sea, the
yards. thirty-six

not could apparatus Ruhmkorff our of light the thought I walked we As
did they if But couch. dark its from inhabitant some draw to fail
the from distance respectful a at kept least at they us, approach
his to gun his put stop, Nemo Captain saw I times Several hunters.
after last, At on. walk and it drop moments some after and shoulder,
of wall A end. an to came excursion marvellous this hours, four about
gigantic of heap a us, before rose mass, imposing an in rocks, superb
but grottos, dark forming shore, granite steep enormous, an blocks,
of Island the of prop the was it slope; practicable no presented which
gesture A suddenly. stopped Nemo Captain earth! the was It Crespo.
to be might I desirous however and, halt; a to all us brought his of
Nemo's Captain ended Here stop. to obliged was I wall, the scale
of portion a was on Further them. beyond go not would he And domains.
upon. trample not might he globe the

little his of head the to returned had Nemo Captain began. return The
not were we thought I hesitation. without course their directing band,
was road new The Nautilus. the to return to road same the following
surface the approached We painful. very consequently and steep, very
so not was strata upper the to return this But rapidly. sea the of
might which rapidly, too pressure the from relief cause to as sudden
on brought and organisation, our in disorder serious produced have
and reappeared light soon Very divers. to fatal so lesions, internal
the edged refraction the horizon, the on low being sun the and, grew,
deep, half a and yards ten At ring. spectral a with objects different
numerous more kinds, all of fishes little of shoal a amidst walked we
game aquatic no but agile; more also and air, the of birds the than
the saw I moment that at when gaze, our met yet as had shot a of worthy
the into object moving a follow and quickly, gun his shoulder Captain
fell creature a and hissing, slight a heard I fired; He shrubs.
an sea-otter, magnificent a was It us. from distance some at stunned
five was otter This quadruped. marine exclusively only the enhydrus,
chestnut-brown skin, Its valuable. very been have must and long, feet
beautiful those of one made have would underneath, silvery and above
fineness the markets: Chinese and Russian the in after sought so furs
this admired I L80. fetch certainly would coat its of lustre the and
its ears, short with ornamented head rounded its with mammal, curious
feet webbed with cat, a of those like whiskers white and eyes, round
tracked and hunted animal, precious This tail. tufted and nails, and
the in chiefly refuge taken and rare, very become now has fishermen, by
become soon would race its probably or Pacific, the of parts northern
extinct.

shoulder, his over it threw beast, the took companion Nemo's Captain
lay sand of plain a hour one For journey. our continued we and
some and yards two within to rose it Sometimes us. before stretched
clearly image our saw then I water. the of surface the of inches
group identical an appeared us above and inversely, drawn reflected,
every in us like word, a in actions; our and movements our reflecting
feet their and downward heads their with walked they that except point,
air. the in

which clouds thick of passage the was which noticed, I effect Another
these that understood I reflection on but rapidly; vanished and formed
the at reeds the of thickness varying the to due were clouds seeming
tops broken their which foam fleecy the see even could I and bottom,
above passing birds large of shadows the and water, the on multiplied
sea. the of surface the on discern could I flight rapid whose heads, our

which shots gun finest the of one to witness was I occasion this On
breadth great of bird large A thrill. hunter a of nerves the made ever
Nemo's Captain us. over hovering approached, visible, clearly wing, of
yards few a only was it when fired, and gun his shouldered companion
fall its of force the and stunned, fell creature The waves. the above
an was It grasp. hunter's dexterous of reach the within it brought
kind. finest the of albatross

we hours two For incident. this by interrupted been not had march Our
to disagreeable very algae of fields then plains, sandy these followed
light, of glimmer a saw I when more no do could I Candidly, cross.
the was It waters. the of darkness the broke mile, half a for which,
be should we over were minutes twenty Before Nautilus. the of lantern
that seemed it for ease, with breathe to able be should I and board, on
not did I But oxygen. in deficient very air supplied reservoir my
time. some for arrival our delayed which meeting accidental an on reckon

Nemo Captain saw presently I when behind, steps some remained had I
the to me bent he hand strong his With me. towards hurriedly coming
not knew I first At Conseil. to same the doing companion his ground,
seeing by reassured soon was I but attack, sudden this of think to what
immovable. remain and me, beside down lie Captain the

of bush a of shelter the under just ground, the on stretched was I
casting mass, enormous some saw I head, my raising when, algae,
by. blusteringly pass gleams, phosphorescent

which sharks formidable two recognised I as veins my in froze blood My
with creatures, terrible tintoreas, of couple a was It us. threatened
matter phosphorescent the stare, glassy dull a and tails enormous
which brutes! Monstrous muzzle. the around pierced holes from ejected
whether know not did I jaws. iron their in man whole a crush would
silver their noticed I part, my for them; classify to stopped Conseil
very a from teeth, with bristling mouths huge their and bellies,
a as than victim possible a as more and view, of point unscientific
naturalist.

without passed They well. see not do creatures voracious the Happily
a by escaped we and fins, brownish their with us brushing us, seeing
full-face tiger a meeting than greater certainly danger a from miracle
we light electric the by guided after, hour an Half forest. the in
Captain and open, left been had door outside The Nautilus. the reached
then He cell. first the entered had we as soon as it closed Nemo
vessel, the of midst the in working pumps the heard I knob. a pressed
cell the moments few a in and me, around from sinking water the felt I
the entered we and opened, then door inside The empty. entirely was
vestry.

and, trouble, some without not off, taken was diving-dress our There
in room, my to returned I sleep, and food of want from out worn fairly
sea. the of bottom the at excursion surprising this at wonder great



XVII CHAPTER

PACIFIC THE UNDER LEAGUES THOUSAND FOUR

my from recovered quite had I November, of 18th the morning, next The
as just platform, the to on up went I and before, day the of fatigues
phrase. daily his uttering was lieutenant second the

Nemo Captain when ocean the of aspect magnificent the admiring was I
a began and presence, my of aware be to seem not did He appeared.
he finished, had he when Then, observations. astronomical of series
abstractedly gazed and watch-light, the of cage the on leant and went
the of sailors the of number a meantime, the In ocean. the on
platform. the onto up come had men, healthy and strong all Nautilus,
These night. all laid been had that nets the up draw to came They
type European the although nations, different of evidently were sailors
Irishmen, unmistakable some recognised I them. of all in visible was
civil, were They Candiote. a or Greek, a and Sclaves, some Frenchmen,
I which of origin the themselves, among language odd that used only and
them. question I could neither guess, not could

like "chaluts," of kind large a were They in. hauled were nets The
chain a and waves the that pockets great coasts, Normandy the on those
iron by drawn pockets, These open. kept meshes smaller the in fixed
their in everything in gathered and water, the through swept poles,
productive those from specimens curious up brought they day That way.
coasts.

of hundredweight nine than more in brought had haul the that reckoned I
nets the Indeed, at. wondered be to not but haul, fine a was It fish.
infinite an meshes their in enclose and hours, several for down let are
the of rapidity the and food, excellent of lack no had We variety.
renew always could light electric the of attraction the and Nautilus
immediately were sea the of productions several These supply. our
eaten be to some room, steward's the to panel the through lowered
pickled. others and fresh,

the that thought I renewed, air of provision the ended, fishing The
was and excursion, submarine its continue to about was Nautilus
the preamble, further without when, room, my to return to preparing
saying: me, to turned Captain

its has It life? real with gifted ocean this not is "Professor,
it now and did, we as slept it Yesterday moods. gentle its and tempers
the under wakes "it continued, he Look!" night. quiet a after woke has
It existence. diurnal its renew to going is It sun. the of caresses
has It organisation. its of play the watch to study interesting an is
who Maury, learned the with agree I and spasms; arteries, pulse, a
in blood of circulation the as real as circulation a it in discovered
animals.

Creator the it, promote to and circulation, indeed has ocean the "Yes,
animalculae." and salt, it--caloric, in multiply to things caused has

aroused and changed, altogether seemed he thus, spoke Nemo Captain When
me. in emotion extraordinary an

the imagine can I and there; is existence "true added, he "Also,"
which, houses, submarine of clusters towns, nautical of foundations
surface the at breathe to morning every ascend would Nautilus, the like
whether knows who Yet cities. independent towns, free water, the of
despot----" some

Then, gesture. violent a with sentence his finished Nemo Captain
thought: sorrowful some away chase to if as me addressing

ocean?" the of depth the know you "do asked, he Aronnax," "M.

us." taught have soundings principal the what Captain, know, only "I

purpose?" my to them suit can I that so them, me tell you "Could

a mistaken, not am I If remember. I "that replied, I some," are "These
2,500 and Atlantic, North the in found been has yards 8,000 of depth
been have soundings remarkable most The Mediterranean. the in yards
they and parallel, thirty-fifth the near Atlantic, South the in made
it all, up sum To yards. 15,000 and yards, 14,000 yards, 12,000 gave
depth mean its levelled, were sea the of bottom the if that reckoned is
leagues." three-quarter and one about be would

than better you show shall "we Captain, the replied Professor," "Well,
tell I Pacific, the of part this of depth mean the to As hope. I that
yards." 4,000 only is it you

disappeared and panel, the towards went Nemo Captain this, said Having
drawing-room. large the into went and him, followed I ladder. the down
miles twenty gave log the and motion, in put immediately was screw The
hour. an

of sparing very was Nemo Captain passed, that weeks and days the During
ship's the pricked lieutenant The him. saw seldom I visits. his
route the exactly tell always could I so chart, the on regularly course
Nautilus. the of

were drawing-room the of panels the time, some for day, every Nearly
the of mysteries the penetrating of tired never were we and opened,
world. submarine

kept it and south-east, was Nautilus the of direction general The
know not do I however, day, One depth. of yards 150 and 100 between
touched it planes, inclined the of means by diagonally drawn being why,
4.25 of temperature a indicated thermometer The sea. the of bed the
all to common seemed depth this at that temperature a (cent.):
latitudes.

Nautilus the November of 26th the of morning the in o'clock three At
it instant 27th On long. 172 at Cancer of tropic the crossed
We 1779. 14, February died, Cook where Islands, Sandwich the sighted
morning, the In starting-point. our from leagues 4,860 gone then had
the Hawaii, windward, to miles two saw I platform, the on went I when
the clearly saw I group. the form that islands seven the of largest
parallel run that mountain-chains several the and ranges, cultivated
rise which Mouna-Rea, overtop that volcanoes the and side, the with
nets the things other Besides sea. the of level the above yards 5,000
are that polypi, graceful and flabellariae several were up, brought
was Nautilus the of direction The ocean. the of part that to peculiar
142 in 1, December equator the crossed It south-east. the to still
and rapidly crossing after month, same the of 4th the on and long.;
Marquesas the sighted we occurring, particular in anything without
the Nouka-Hiva, in peak Martin's off, miles three saw, I group.
woody the saw only I France. to belongs that group the of largest
to wish not did Nemo Captain because horizon, the against mountains
beautiful up brought nets the There wind. the to ship the bring
flesh the gold, like tails and fins azure with some fish: of specimens
of but scales, of destitute nearly some unrivalled; is which of
as gills, yellow-tinged and jaws, bony with others, flavour; exquisite
leaving After us. to use of be would that fish all bonitos; as good
to 4th the from flag, French the by protected islands charming these
miles. 2,000 about over sailed Nautilus the December of 11th the

the in reading busy was I December of 11th the of daytime the During
water luminous the watched Conseil and Land Ned drawing-room. large
its While immovable. was Nautilus The panels. half-open the through
region a yards, 1,000 of depth a at kept it filled, were reservoirs
seen. seldom were fish large which in and ocean, the in visited rarely

the of Slaves The Mace, Jean by book charming a reading then was I
Conseil when it, from lessons valuable some learning was I and Stomach,
me. interrupted

voice. curious a in said, he moment?" a here come master "Will

Conseil?" matter, the is "What

look." to master want "I

watched. and panes the before elbows my on leaned and went, rose, I

was immovable, quite mass, black enormous an light, electric full a In
attentively, it watched I waters. the of midst the in suspended
sudden a But cetacean. gigantic this of nature the out find to seeking
aloud. half said, I vessel!" "A mind. my crossed thought

sunk has that ship disabled "a Canadian, the replied "Yes,"
perpendicularly."

tattered the which of vessel a to close were we right; was Land Ned
good in be to seemed keel The chains. their from hung still shrouds
of stumps Three hours. few some most at wrecked been had it and order,
the that showed bridge, the above feet two about off broken masts,
had it side, its on lying But, masts. its sacrifice to had had vessel
had it what of skeleton This port. to over heeling was it and filled,
but waves, the under lost lay it as spectacle sad a was been once
bound corpses, some where bridge, the of sight the was still sadder
whom of one men, five--four counted I lying. still were ropes, with
an holding poop, the by standing woman a and helm, the at standing was
her distinguish could I young. quite was She arms. her in infant
light brilliant the by decomposed, not had water the which features,
infant her raised had she effort, despairing one In Nautilus. the from
mother's its encircled arms thing!--whose little head--poor her above
as distorted frightful, was sailors four the of attitude The neck.
to effort last a making whilst movements, convulsive their by were they
The vessel. the to them bound that cords the from themselves free
to glued hair grey his face, clear grave, a with calm, alone, steersman
even seemed helm, the of wheel the clutching hand his and forehead, his
the of depths the through masts broken three the guiding be to then
ocean.

this before fast beat hearts our dumb; were We scene! a What
last its in photographed and life from were it as taken shipwreck,
eyes, hungry with it towards coming already, saw I And moments.
flesh. human the by attracted sharks, enormous

in and vessel, submerged the round went turning, Nautilus, the However,
Sunderland." Florida, stern--"The the on read I instant one



XVIII CHAPTER

VANIKORO

maritime of series the of forerunner the was spectacle terrible This
route. its in with meet to destined was Nautilus the that catastrophes
the saw often we waters, frequented more through went it as long As
and depths, the in rotting were that vessels shipwrecked of hulls
other thousand a and chains, anchors, bullets, cannons, down deeper
we December of 11th the on However, rust. by up eaten materials iron
Bougainville, of group" "dangerous old the Islands, Pomotou the sighted
the from W.N.W., to E.S.E. at leagues 500 of space a over extend that
370 of area an covers group This Lazareff. of that to Ducie Island
among islands, of groups sixty of formed is it and leagues, square
exercises France which over remarkable, is group Gambier the which
created continuous, but raised, slowly islands, coral are These sway.
later joined be will island new this Then polypi. of work daily the by
from stretch will continent fifth a and groups, neighboring the to on
Marquesas. the to thence from and Caledonia, New and Zealand New

replied he Nemo, Captain to theory this suggesting was I when day, One
coldly:

men." new but continents, new want not does earth "The

of Island the towards Nautilus the conducted had Chance
was that group, the of curious most the of one Clermont-Tonnere,
now study could I Minerva. the of Bell Captain by 1822 in discovered
ocean. this in islands the due are which to system, madreporal the

lined tissue a have corals) for mistaken be not must (which Madrepores
have structure its of modifications the and crust, calcareous a with
five into them class to master, worthy my Edwards, Milne M. induced
by live secretes polypus marine the that animalcule The sections.
become deposits calcareous Their cells. their of bottom the at millions
ring, a form they Here islands. small and large and reefs, rocks,
by sea the with communicates that lake, inland little a surrounding
the on those like reefs of barriers make they There gaps. of means
other In islands. Pomoton various the and Caledonia New of coasts
reefs, fringed raise they Maurice, at and Reunion at those like places,
considerable. is ocean the of depth the which near walls, straight high,

admired I Clermont of Island the of shores the off cable-lengths Some
These workers. microscopical these by accomplished work gigantic the
milleporas, as known madrepores those of work the specially are walls
particularly found are polypi These astraeas. and madrepores, porites,
is it consequently and surface; the near sea, the of beds rough the in
they which in operations, their begin they that part upper the from
that secretions the of debris the with degrees by themselves bury
the explains thus who theory, Darwin's least, at is, Such them. support
given that to mind) my (to theory superior a _atolls_, the of formation
or mountains of summits works, madreporical the of foundation the of
sea. the of level the below feet some submerged are that volcanoes,

they perpendicularly for walls, curious these closely observe could I
this up lighted sheets electric our and deep, yards 300 than more were
me asked Conseil question a to Replying brilliantly. matter calcareous
astonished I raised, be to took barriers colossal these time the to as
eighth the about it reckoned men learned that him telling by much him
years. hundred a in inch an of

the and distance, the in lost was Clermont-Tonnerre evening Towards
the crossed having After changed. sensibly was Nautilus the of route
making W.N.W., sailed it longitude, 135 in Capricorn of tropic
strong, very was sun summer the Although zone. tropical the for again
the below fathoms twenty or fifteen at for heat, from suffer not did we
degrees. twelve to ten from above rise not did temperature the surface,

the of group bewitching the east the to left we December, of 15th On
the in saw I Pacific. the of queen Tahiti, graceful the and Societies
the of summits elevated the windward, the to miles some morning,
fish, excellent with table our furnished waters These island.
sea-serpent. a of varieties some and bonitos, mackerel,

New the of midst the into sailed Nautilus the December of 25th the On
explored Bougainville that and 1606, in Quiros by discovered Hebrides,
group This 1773. in name present its gave Cook which to and 1768, in
120 of band a form that islands, large nine of principally composed is
164 and lat., S. 2 and 15 between S.S.W., to N.N.S. leagues
of Island the to near tolerably passed We long. 168 and deg.
a by surmounted woods, green of mass a like looked noon at that Aurou,
height. great of peak

the sorely regret to seemed Land Ned Day, Christmas being day That
Protestants which of fete family the "Christmas," of non-celebration
the on when, week, a for Nemo Captain seen not had I fond. so are
always drawing-room, large the into came he 27th, the of morning
busily was I before. minutes five you seen had he if as seeming
came Captain The planisphere. the on Nautilus the of route the tracing
single this said and chart, the on spot one on finger his put me, to up
word.

"Vanikoro."

La which on islands the of name the was It magical! was effect The
suddenly. rose I lost! been had Perouse

asked. I Vanikoro?" to us brought has Nautilus "The

Captain. the said Professor," "Yes,

the and Boussole the where islands celebrated the visit can I "And
struck?" Astrolabe

Professor." like, you "If

there?" be we shall "When

now." there are "We

greedily and platform, the to on up went I Nemo, Captain by Followed
horizon. the scanned

by surrounded size, unequal of emerged islands volcanic two N.E. the To
close were We circumference. in miles forty measured that reef coral a
of name the gave d'Urville Dumont which to one the really Vanikoro, to
Vanou, of harbour little the facing exactly and Recherche, la de Isle
earth The long. E. 32' 164 and lat., S. 4' 16 in situated
the in summits the to shore the from verdure with covered seemed
The high. feet 476 Kapogo, Mount by crowned were that interior,
strait, narrow a by rocks of belt outer the passed having Nautilus,
forty to thirty from was sea the where breakers among itself found
perceived I mangroves some of shade verdant the Under deep. fathoms
the In approach. our at surprised greatly appeared who savages, some
some see not they did water, and wind between moving body, black long
suspicion? with regarded they that cetacean formidable

La of wreck the about knew I what me asked Nemo Captain then Just
Perouse.

replied. I Captain," knows, everyone what "Only

inquired, he it?" about knows everyone what me tell you could "And
ironically.

"Easily."

made had d'Urville Dumont of works last the that all him to related I
account. brief a is following the which from known--works

XVI, Louis by sent were Langle, de Captain second, his and Perouse, La
the in embarked They circumnavigation. of voyage a on 1785, in
heard again were which of neither Astrolabe, the and Boussole corvettes
of fate the to as uneasy justly Government, French the 1791, In of.
the and Recherche the merchantmen, large two manned sloops, two these
of command the under September of 28th the Brest left which Esperance,
d'Entrecasteaux. Bruni

Albemarle, the of commander Bowen, from learned they after, months Two
of coasts the on seen been had vessels shipwrecked of debris the that
communication--rather this ignoring D'Entrecasteaux, But Georgia. New
Islands, Admiralty the towards course his besides--directed uncertain,
La where place the being as Hunter's Captain of report a in mentioned
wrecked. was Perouse

before passed Recherche the and Esperance The vain. in sought They
most was voyage this fact, in and, there, stopping without Vanikoro
of two of those and life, his D'Entrecasteaux cost it as disastrous,
crew. his of several besides lieutenants, his

find to first the was sailor, Pacific old shrewd a Dillon, Captain
his 1824, May, of 15th the On wrecks. the of traces unmistakable
New the of one Tikopia, to close passed Patrick, St. the vessel,
the him sold canoe, a in alongside came Lascar a There Hebrides.
engraved characters of print the bore that silver in sword a of handle
stay a during before, years six that pretended Lascar The hilt. the on
vessels some to belonged that Europeans two seen had he Vanikoro, at
ago. years some reefs the on aground run had that

had disappearance whose Perouse, La meant he that guessed Dillon
where, Vanikoro, to on get to tried He world. whole the troubled
wreck, the of debris numerous find would he Lascar, the to according
him. prevented tides and winds but

Society Asiatic the interested he There Calcutta. to returned Dillon
given was which to vessel, A discovery. his in Company Indian the and
out, set he and disposal, his at put was Recherche, the of name the
agent. French a by accompanied 1827, January, 23rd

cast Pacific, the in points several at touching after Recherche, The
Vanou of harbour same that in 1827, July, 7th Vanikoro, before anchor
time. this at was Nautilus the where

utensils, wreck--iron the of relics numerous collected it There
of fragments shot, lb. 18 an swivel-guns, pulley-strops, anchors,
clock, bronze a and work, crown of piece a instruments, astronomical
of foundry the of mark the fait," m'a inscription--"Bazin this bearing
doubt. further no be could There 1785. about Brest at arsenal the

till place unlucky the in stayed inquiries, all made having Dillon,
New towards course his directed and Vanikoro, quitted he Then October.
France, to returned and 1828, April, 7th Calcutta, into put Zealand;
X. Charles by welcomed warmly was he where

Dumont movements, Dillon's knowing without time, same the at But
they And wreck. the of scene the find to out set already had d'Urville
had Louis St. of cross a and medals some that whaler a from learned had
Caledonia. New and Louisiade of savages some of hands the in found been
two and sailed, then had Astrolabe, the of commander d'Urville, Dumont
There Town. Hobart into put he Vanikoro left had Dillon after months
certain a that found and inquiries, Dillon's of results the learned he
landing after Calcutta, of Union the of lieutenant second Hobbs, James
long., E. 30' 156 and lat., S. 18' 8 situated island an on
these of natives the by used stuffs red and bars iron some seen had
credit to how knowing not and perplexed, much d'Urville, Dumont parts.
track. Dillon's follow to decided journals, low-class of reports the

and Tikopia, off appeared Astrolabe the 1828, February, of 10th the On
his made island; the on found deserter a interpreter and guide as took
reefs the among lay inst., 12th the on it sighted Vanikoro, to way
the within anchor cast he did 20th the until not and 14th, the until
Vanou. of harbour the in barrier

back brought and island the round went officers several 23rd, the On
denials of system a adopting natives, The trifles. unimportant some
This place. unlucky the to them take to refused evasions, and
ill-treated had natives the that believe to them led conduct ambiguous
had d'Urville Dumont that fear to seemed they indeed and castaways, the
crew. unfortunate his and Perouse La avenge to come

that understanding and presents, some by appeased 26th, the on However,
of scene the to Jacquireot M. led they fear, to reprisals no had they
wreck. the

Pacou of reefs the between water, of fathoms four or three in There,
the in embedded iron, and lead of pigs cannons, anchors, lay Vanou, and
the to belonging whaler the and boat large The concretions. limy
difficulty, some without not and, place, this to sent were Astrolabe
some gun, brass a lbs., 1,800 weighing anchor an up hauled crews their
swivel-guns. copper two and iron, of pigs

Perouse, La that too learned natives, the questioning d'Urville, Dumont
had island, this of reefs the on vessels his both losing after
no Where, time. second a lost be to only boat, smaller a constructed
knew. one

not was d'Urville Dumont that fearing Government, French the But
Bayonnaise, sloop the sent had movements, Dillon's with acquainted
been had which Vanikoro, to Tromelin, de Legoarant by commanded
anchor her cast Bayonnaise The America. of coast west the on stationed
but Astrolabe, the of departure the after months some Vanikoro before
the respected had savages the that stated but document; new no found
Captain told I what of substance the is That Perouse. La to monument
Nemo.

that perished vessel third the where now knows one "no said, he "So,"
Vanikoro?" of island the on castaways the by constructed was

knows." one "No

the into him follow to me to signed but nothing, said Nemo Captain
the and waves, the below yards several sank Nautilus The saloon. large
opened. were panels

covered coral, of crustations the under and aperture, the to hastened I
of myriads through madrepores, alcyons, syphonules, fungi, with
and diacopes, pompherides, glyphisidri, fish--girelles, charming
been not had drags the that debris certain recognised holocentres--I
capstan bullets, cannons, anchors, stirrups, up--iron tear to able
of wreck the proving clearly objects all ship, a of stem the fittings,
looking was I While flowers. living with carpeted now and vessel, some
voice: sad a in said, Nemo Captain scene, desolate this on

La vessels his with 1785, December, 7th out set Perouse La "Commander
Bay, Botany at anchor cast first He Astrolabe. the and Boussole
course his directed then Caledonia, New Isles, Friendly the visited
Then group. Hapai the of one Namouka, into put and Cruz, Santa towards
Boussole, The Vanikoro. of reefs unknown the on struck vessels his
Astrolabe The coast. southerly the on aground ran first, went which
destroyed was vessel first The too. aground ran and help, its to went
some resisted wind, the under stranded second, The immediately. almost
installed They welcome. castaways the made natives The days.
the with boat smaller a constructed and island, the in themselves
at willingly stayed sailors Some ones. large two the of debris
They Perouse. La with out set ill, and weak others, the Vanikoro;
perished, there and Islands, Solomon the towards course their directed
the of island chief the of coast westerly the on everything, with
Satisfaction." and Deception Capes between group,

that?" know you do "How

wreck." last the was where spot the on found I that this, "By

arms, French the with stamped box, tin-plate a me showed Nemo Captain
of bundle a saw I and it, opened He water. salt the by corroded and
readable. still but yellow papers,

La Commander to minister naval the of instructions the were They
handwriting. XVI's Louis in margin the in annotated Perouse,

"A last. at Nemo, Captain said sailor!" a for death fine a is it "Ah!
will comrades my and I that trust I and grave; quiet a makes tomb coral
other." no find



XIX CHAPTER

STRAITS TORRES

the left Nautilus the December, of 28th or 27th the of night the During
south-westerly, was course Her speed. great with Vanikoro of shores
it separated that leagues 750 the over gone had she days three in and
Papua. of point south-east the and group Perouse's La from

platform. the on me joined Conseil 1863, January, of 1st the on Early

Year?" New happy a you wish to me permit you will "Master,

Jardin the at study my in Paris at was I if as exactly Conseil; "What!
them. for you thank and wishes, good your accept I Well, Plantes? des
our under Year' New `Happy a by mean you what you ask will I Only,
of end the to us bring will that year the mean you Do circumstances?
strange this continue us sees that year the or imprisonment, our
voyage?"

see to sure are We master. answer, to how know not do I "Really,
for time had not have we months two last the for and things, curious
we if and, astonishing; most the always is marvel last The dullness.
my is It end. will it how know not do I progression, this continue
no with then, think I like. the see again never shall we that opinion
see could we which in one be would year happy a that master, to offence
everything."

since leagues, French 5,250 or miles, 11,340 made had we January 2nd On
stretched head ship's the Before Seas. Japan the in starting-point our
of coast north-east the on sea, coral the of shores dangerous the
on bank redoubtable the from miles some along lay boat Our Australia.
Cook which in boat The 1770. June, 10th lost, was vessel Cook's which
piece a to owing was it sink, not did it if and, rock, a on struck was
broken the in itself fixed and shock, the by broken was that coral of
keel.

the which against long, leagues 360 reef, the visit to wished had I
like noise a with violence, great with broke rough, always sea,
a to down Nautilus the drew planes inclined the then just But thunder.
to had I walls. coral high the of nothing see could I and depth, great
the by up brought fish of specimens different the with myself content
as mackerel of species a germons, some others, among remarked, I nets.
bands, transverse with striped and sides, bluish with tunny, a as large
life. animal's the with disappear that

delicate very with us furnished and shoals, in us followed fish These
half a and one about gilt-heads, of number large a also took We food.
submarine like pyrapeds flying and dorys; like tasting long, inches
water and air the alternately light nights, dark in which, swallows,
I zoophytes, and molluscs the Among light. phosphorescent their with
echini, alcyonarians, of species several net the of meshes the in found
represented was flora The hyalleae. and cerites, dials, spurs, hammers,
macrocystes, and laminariae, seaweeds, floating beautiful by
and pores; their through transudes that mucilage the with impregnated
was that Geliniarois, Nemastoma admirable an gathered I which among
museum. the of curiosities natural the among classed

the sighted we January, 4th sea, coral the crossing after days Two
his that me informed Nemo Captain occasion, this On coasts. Papuan
Torres. of Strait the by Ocean Indian the into get to was intention
there. ended communication His

are they but wide; leagues thirty-four nearly are Straits Torres The
and breakers, islets, islands, of quantity innumerable an by obstructed
Captain that so impracticable; almost navigation its make that rocks,
Nautilus, The them. cross to precautions needful all took Nemo
screw, Her pace. moderate a at went water, and wind betwixt floating
slowly. waves the beat tail, cetacean's a like

deserted the to on up went companions two my and I this, by Profiting
that expected I and cage, steersman's the was us Before platform.
had I Nautilus. the of course the directing there was Nemo Captain
I and Torres, of Straits the of charts excellent the me before
dashed sea the Nautilus the Round attentively. them consulted
to south-east from went that waves, the of course The furiously.
that coral the on broke miles, half a and two of rate the at north-west
there. and here itself showed

Land. Ned remarked sea!" bad a is "This

the like boat a suit not does that one and indeed, "Detestable
Nautilus."

of pieces there see I for route, his of sure very be must Captain "The
slightly." them touched only it if keel its for do would that coral

slide to seemed Nautilus the but dangerous, was situation the Indeed
the of routes the follow not did It rocks. these off magic like
Dumont to fatal proved they for exactly, Zelee the and Astrolabe
and Murray, of Islands the coasted northwards, more bore It d'Urville.
it thought I Passage. Cumberland towards south-west the to back came
went it north-west, to back going when, by, it pass to going was
towards known, little islets and islands of quantity large a through
Mauvais. Canal and Sound Island the

vessel his steer would imprudent, foolishly Nemo, Captain if wondered I
when, touched; corvettes two d'Urville's Dumont where pass that into
steered he west, the to through straight cutting and again, swerving
Gilboa. of Island the for

being recede, to began tide The afternoon. the in three then was It
with saw, still I that island, the approached Nautilus The full. quite
two about at it off stood He screw-pines. of border remarkable its
just Nautilus The me. overthrew shock a Suddenly distant. miles
side. port to lightly laying immovable, stayed and rock, a touched

the on lieutenant his and Nemo Captain perceived I rose, I When
and vessel, the of situation the examining were They platform.
dialect. incomprehensible their in words exchanging

appeared side, starboard the on miles, Two thus: situated was She
the Towards arm. immense an like west to north from stretching Gilboa,
run had We ebb. the by left itself, showed coral some east and south
sorry middling--a are tides the where seas those of one in and aground,
not had vessel the However, Nautilus. the of floating the for matter
neither could she if But, joined. solidly was keel her for suffered,
to fastened ever for being of risk the ran she move, nor off glide
for. done be would vessel submarine Nemo's Captain then and rocks, these

master always calm, and cool Captain, the when thus, reflecting was I
me. approached himself, of

asked. I accident?" "An

incident." an "No;

inhabitant an become to perhaps you oblige will that incident an "But
flee?" you which from land this of

as gesture, negative a made and curiously, me at looked Nemo Captain
firma terra on foot set to him force would nothing that say to as much
said: he Then again.

yet you carry will it lost; not is Nautilus the Aronnax, M. "Besides,
begun, only is voyage Our ocean. the of marvels the of midst the into
company." your of honour the of soon so deprived be to wish not do I and

turn ironical the noticing without replied, I Nemo," Captain "However,
tides the Now sea. open in aground ran Nautilus "the phrase, his of
Nautilus, the lighten cannot you if and, Pacific; the in strong not are
reinflated." be will it how see not do I

there, right are you Pacific: the in strong not are tides "The
yard a of difference a still finds one Straits Torres in but Professor;
4th is To-day seas. low and high of level the between half a and
very be shall I Now, full. be will moon the days five in and January,
water of masses these raise not does satellite that if astonished much
her to indebted be should I that service a me render and sufficiently,
for."

redescended lieutenant, his by followed Nemo, Captain this, said Having
and not, moved it vessel, the to As Nautilus. the of interior the to
with up it walled already had polypi coralline the if as immovable, was
cement. destructible in their

of departure the after me to up came who Land, Ned said sir?" "Well,
Captain. the

9th the on tide the for patiently wait will we Ned, friend "Well,
it put to goodness the have will moon the that appears it for instant;
again." off

"Really?"

"Really."

tide the since all at anchor cast to going not is Captain this "And
simply. Conseil, said suffice?" will

shoulders. his shrugged then Conseil, at looked Canadian The

will iron of piece this that you tell I when me believe may you "Sir,
sold be to fit only is it again; sea the under nor on neither navigate
part to come has time the that therefore, think, I weight. its for
Nemo." Captain with company

in and do; you as Nautilus, stout this of despair not do I Ned, "Friend
Besides, tides. Pacific the on to hold to what know shall we days four
or English the of sight in were we if possible be might flight
it and thing; another is it shores, Papuan the on but coast; Provencal
not does Nautilus the if extremity that to come to enough time be will
event." grave a as upon look I which again, itself recover

an is There circumspectly? act to how least, at know, they do "But
terrestrial trees, those under trees; are there island that on island;
willingly would I which to beef, roast and cutlets of bearers animals,
trial." a give

him. with agree I "and Conseil, said right," is Ned friend this, "In
put to Nemo Captain friend his from permission obtain master not Could
the on treading of habit the lose to not as so only if land, on us
planet?" our of parts solid

refuse." will he but him, ask can "I

rely to how know shall we "and Conseil, asked it?" risk master "Will
amiability." Captain's the upon

for, asked I permission the me gave Nemo Captain surprise, great my To
promise a me from exacting even without agreeably, very it gave he and
very be might Guinea New across flight but vessel; the to return to
it. attempt to Land Ned counselled have not should I and perilous,
the into fall to than Nautilus the board on prisoner a be to Better
natives. the of hands

the off got we hatchets, and guns with armed o'clock, eight At
land. on blew breeze slight a calm; pretty was sea The Nautilus.
the in steered Ned and quickly, along sped we rowing, I and Conseil
was boat The them. between left breakers the that passage straight
rapidly. moved and handled, well

had that prisoner a like was He joy. his restrain not could Land Ned
it. re-enter to necessary was it that not knew and prison, from escaped

replied. he meat!" what and meat; some eat to going are We "Meat!
indeed." bread, no, game! "Real

piece a but it; abuse not must we good; not is fish that say not do "I
our vary agreeably will coals, live on grilled venison, fresh of
course." ordinary

water." mouth my makes "he Conseil, said "Glutton!"

game, of full are forests these "if said, I seen," be to remains "It
himself." hunter the hunt will as such not is game the if and

seemed teeth whose Canadian, the replied Aronnax," M. said, "Well
of tiger--loin eat will I "but hatchet; a of edge the like sharpened
island." this on quadruped other no is there tiger--if

Conseil. said it," about uneasy is Ned "Friend

paws four with animal "every Land, Ned continued be," may it "Whatever
by saluted be will feathers, without paws two with or feathers, without
shot." first my

beginning." are imprudences Land's Master well! "Very

want not do "I Canadian; the replied Aronnax," M. fear, "Never
sort." my of dish, a you offer to minutes twenty-five

heavy a on aground softly ran boat Nautilus the eight half-past At
the surrounds that reef coral the passed happily having after sand,
Gilboa. of Island



XX CHAPTER

LAND ON DAYS FEW A

with soil the tried Land Ned land. touching on impressed much was I
two only was it However, it. of possession take to if as feet, his
Nemo, Captain to according become, had we that before months
its of prisoners reality, in but, Nautilus," the board on "passengers
commander.

whole The coast. the of musket-shot within were we minutes few a In
Enormous forests. of curtain beautiful a behind hidden was horizon
to tied were feet, 200 of height a attained which of trunks the trees,
a which hammocks, natural real bindweed, of garlands by other each
trees, palm and hibisci, figs, mimosas, were They rocked. breeze light
verdant their of shelter the under and profusion; in together mingled
ferns. and plants, leguminous orchids, grew vault

flora, Papuan of specimens beautiful these all noticing without But,
a discovered He useful. the for agreeable the abandoned Canadian the
the drunk we and them, broke fruit, the of some down beat coco-tree,
the against protested that satisfaction a with nut the ate and milk
Nautilus. the on food ordinary

Land. Ned said "Excellent!"

Conseil. replied "Exquisite!"

our to object would he "that Canadian, the said think," not do I "And
board." on coco-nuts of cargo a introducing

them." taste not would he but would, he think not do "I

Conseil. said him," for worse the much "So

more be will "There Land. Ned replied us," for better the much so "And
us." for

was who harpooner, the to said I Land," Master only, word "One
things, good are "Coco-nuts tree. coco-nut another ravage to beginning
reconnoitre to wise be would it them with canoe the filling before but
useful. less not substance some produce not does island the if see and
Nautilus." the board on welcome be would vegetables Fresh

three reserve to propose I "and Conseil; replied right," is "Master
the and vegetables, for other the fruits, for one vessel, our in places
smallest the seen yet not have I which of venison, the for third
specimen."

Canadian. the said despair," not must we "Conseil,

island the Although wait. in lie "and returned, I continue," us "Let
would that individuals some contain still might it uninhabited, seems
game." of nature the on we than hard less be

significantly. jaws his moving Land, Ned said ho!" "Ho!

Conseil. said Ned!" "Well,

of charms the understand to begin "I Canadian, the returned word!" "My
anthropophagy."

feel not should I man-eater? a You, saying? you are what Ned! "Ned!
wake perhaps might I cabin. your share I as especially you, with safe
devoured." half myself find to day one

you eat to enough not but much, you like I Conseil, "Friend
unnecessarily."

must We enough. "But Conseil. replied you," trust not would "I
one else or cannibal, this satisfy to game some down bring absolutely
to servant his of pieces only find will master mornings, fine these of
him." serve

of arches sombre the penetrating were we thus, talking were we While
directions. all in it surveyed we hours two for and forest, the

most the of one and vegetables, eatable for search our rewarded Chance
food precious with us furnished zones tropical the of products useful
very tree, bread-fruit the of speak would I board. on missed we that
variety the chiefly remarked I and Gilboa; of island the in abundant
"rima." of name the Malaya in bears which seeds, of destitute

his during many eaten already had He well. fruits these knew Land Ned
substance. eatable the prepare to how knew he and voyages, numerous
himself contain could he and him, excited them of sight the Moreover,
longer. no

this of little a taste not do I if die shall "I said, he "Master,"
pie." bread-fruit

make to here are We want. you as it Ned--taste friend it, "Taste
them." experiments--make

Canadian. the said long," take won't "It

that wood dead of fire a lighted he lentil, a with provided And,
best the chose I and Conseil time, this During joyously. crackled
sufficient a attained then not had Some bread-fruit. the of fruits
rather but white a covered skin thick their and maturity; of degree
waited gelatinous, and yellow number greater the Others, pulp. fibrous
picked. be to only

Land, Ned to dozen a brought Conseil kernel. no enclosed fruits These
slices, thick in them cut having after fire, coal a on them placed who
repeating: this doing while and

has one when so More is. bread this good how master, see, will "You
a "but he, added bread," even not is It long. so it of deprived been
master?" none, eaten have You pastry. delicate

Ned." "No,

for come not do you If thing. juicy a for yourself prepare well, "Very
harpooners." of king the longer no am I more,

fire the to exposed was that fruits the of part the minutes, some After
sort a pasty, white a like looked interior The roasted. completely was
artichoke. an of that like was which of flavour the crumb, soft of

with it of ate I and excellent, was bread this confessed be must It
relish. great

Canadian. the asked now?" it is time "What

Conseil. replied least," at o'clock "Two

Land. Ned sighed ground!" firm on flies time "How

Conseil. replied off," be us "Let

raid a by collection our completed and forest, the through returned We
trees, the of tops the from gathered we that cabbage-palms, the upon
yams and Malays, the of "abrou" the as recognised I that beans little
quality. superior a of

his find not did Land Ned But boat. the reached we when loaded were We
were we as Just us. favoured however, Fate, sufficient. provisions
thirty to twenty-five from trees, several perceived he off, pushing
palm-tree. of species a high, feet

we riches, our with loaded evening, the in o'clock five at last, At
No Nautilus. the hailed we after hour an half and shore, the quitted
seemed cylinder iron-plated enormous The arrival. our on appeared one
and chamber, my to descended I embarked, provisions The deserted.
soundly. slept supper after

inside, sound a Not board. on new nothing January, 6th day, next The
place same the in edge, the along rested boat The life. of sign a not
Ned island. the to return to resolved We it. left had we which in
to regard with before day the on than fortunate more be to hoped Land
forest. the of part another visit to wished and hunt, the

to flowed that waves the by on carried boat, The off. set we dawn At
minutes. few a in island the reached shore,

Canadian, the to in give to better was it that thinking and, landed, We
He us. distance to threatened limbs long whose Land, Ned followed we
he torrents, some fording then, west: the towards coast the up wound
Some forests. admirable with bordered was that plain high the gained
not would they but water-courses, the along rambling were kingfishers
that me to proved circumspection Their approached. be themselves let
I and species, our of bipeds from expect to what knew birds these
beings human least at inhabited, not was island the if that, concluded
it. frequented occasionally

a of skirts the at arrived we prairie, large rather a crossing After
large a of flight and songs the by enlivened was that wood little
birds. of number

Conseil. said birds," only are "There

harpooner. the replied eatable," are they "But

there." parrots only see I for Ned, friend you, with agree not do "I

to pheasant like is parrot "the gravely, Ned, said Conseil," "Friend
else." nothing have who those

fork." and knife worth is prepared, suitably bird, "this added, I "And,"

were parrots of world a wood, this of foliage thick the under Indeed,
speak to education careful a needing only branch, to branch from flying
parrots with chattering were they moment, the For language. human the
some upon meditate to seemed who cockatoos, grave and colours, all of
piece a like passed lories red brilliant whilst problem, philosophical
azure finest the with papuans, breeze, the by away carried bunting of
behold, to charming most things winged of variety a all in and colours,
eatable. few but

the passed never has which and lands, these to peculiar bird a However,
collection. this in wanting was islands, Papuan and Arrow the of limits
long. before me for it reserved fortune But

plain a found we copse, thick moderately a through passing After
the birds, magnificent those then saw I bushes. with obstructed
the against fly to them obliges feathers long whose of disposition
shading the and curves, aerial graceful flight, undulating Their wind.
trouble no had I looks. one's charmed and attracted colours, their of
them. recognising in

exclaimed. I paradise!" of "Birds

Chinese, the with birds these in trade great a on carry who Malays, The
Sometimes them. taking for employ not could we that means several have
paradise of birds the that trees high of top the on snares put they
birdlime viscous a with them catch they Sometimes frequent. to prefer
the poison to as far so go even They movements. their paralyses that
to obliged were we But from. drink generally birds the that fountains
them bring to chances few us gave which flight, during them at fire
ammunition. our half one exhausted vainly we indeed, and, down;

that mountains of range first the morning, the in o'clock eleven About
nothing. killed had we and traversed, was island the of centre the form
the of products the on relied had hunters The on. us drove Hunger
surprise, great his to Conseil, Happily wrong. were they and chase,
white a down brought He breakfast. secured and shot double a made
a from suspended and plucked cleverly which, wood-pigeon, a and pigeon
these While wood. dead of fire red a before roasted was skewer,
the of fruit the prepared Ned cooking, were birds interesting
and bones, the to devoured were wood-pigeons the Then bread-tree.
of habit the in are they which with nutmeg, The excellent. declared
delicious it renders and flesh their flavours crops, their stuffing
eating.

now?" miss you do what Ned, "Now,

only are pigeons these All Aronnax. M. game, four-footed "Some
cutlets with animal an killed have I until and trifles; and side-dishes
content." be not shall I

paradise." of bird a catch not do I if Ned, I, "Nor

the towards go us "Let Conseil. replied hunting," continue us "Let
I and mountains, the of declivities first the at arrived have We sea.
forests." of region the regain better had we think

one for walking After out. followed was and advice, sensible was That
serpents inoffensive Some sago-trees. of forest a attained had we hour
and approach, our at fled paradise of birds The us. from away glided
in walking was who Conseil, when one near getting of despaired I truly
me to back came and cry, triumphal a uttered down, bent suddenly front,
specimen. magnificent a bringing

Conseil!" bravo, "Ah!

good." very is "Master

these of one Take stroke. excellent an made have you boy; my "No,
hand." your in it carry and birds, living

great deserved not have I that see will he it, examine will master "If
merit."

Conseil?" "Why,

quail." a as drunk as is bird this "Because

"Drunk!"

the under devoured it that nutmegs the with drunk sir; "Yes,
the see Ned, friend See, it. found I which under nutmeg-tree,
intemperance!" of effects monstrous

two for gin drunk have I "because Canadian, the exclaimed Jove!" "By
me!" reproach needs must you months,

bird, The right. was Conseil bird. curious the examined I However,
could it fly; not could It powerless. quite was juice, the with drunk
walk. hardly

are that species eight the of beautiful most the to belonged bird This
"large the was It islands. neighbouring the in and Papua in found
length. in feet three measured It kind." rare most the bird, emerald
of opening the near placed eyes its small, comparatively was head Its
beautiful, were colour of shades the But small. also and beak, the
with wings nut-coloured claws, and feet brown beak, yellow a having
emerald and head, and neck the of back the at yellow pale tips, purple
horned, Two belly. and breast the on chestnut throat, the at colour
light long the prolonged that tail, the below from rose nets downy
this of whole the completed they and fineness, admirable of feathers
of "bird the named poetically have natives the that bird, marvellous
sun." the

of bird the of possession the by satisfied were wishes my if But
Ned o'clock, two about Happily, yet. not were Canadian's the paradise,
the those of brood the from hog; magnificent a down brought Land
procure to us for time in came animal The "bari-outang." call natives
proud very was Land Ned received. well was he and meat, quadruped real
The dead. stone fell ball, electric the by hit hog, The shot. his of
a half taken having after properly, it cleaned and skinned Canadian
the in repast grilled a with us furnish to destined cutlets, dozen
Ned by marked more still was which resumed, was hunt the Then evening.
exploits. Conseil's and

kangaroos of herd a roused bushes, the beating friends, two the Indeed,
animals these But paws. elastic their on along bounded and fled that
could capsule electric the what but rapidly so flight to take not did
course. their stop

delights the by away carried was who Land, Ned cried Professor!" "Ah,
for supply a What too! stewed, and game, excellent "what chase, the of
eat shall we that think to And down! five three! Two! Nautilus! the
crumb!" a have not shall board on idiots the that and flesh, that

not had he if Canadian, the joy, his of excess the in that, think I
himself contented he But all. them killed have would much, so talked
animals These marsupians. interesting these of dozen single a with
live that rabbits" "kangaroo those of species a were They small. were
but extreme; is speed whose and trees, of hollows the in habitually
We food. estimable least, at furnish, and fat, moderately are they
proposed Ned Happy hunt. the of results the with satisfied very were
to wished he for day, next the island enchanting this to return to
reckoned had he But quadrupeds. eatable the all of it depopulate
host. his without

was boat our shore; the regained had we evening the in o'clock six At
emerged rock, long a like Nautilus, The place. usual the to moored
waiting, without Land, Ned beach. the from miles two waves the from
understood He business. dinner important the about himself occupied
soon coals, the on grilled "bari-outang," The well. cooking about all
odour. delicious a with air the scented

this completed wood-pigeons Two excellent. was dinner the Indeed,
some bread, artocarpus the pasty, sago The menu. extraordinary
some from fermented liquor the and pineapples, dozen a half mangoes,
ideas companions' worthy my that think even I us. overjoyed coco-nuts,
desirable. plainness the all not had

Conseil. said evening?" this Nautilus the to return not do we "Suppose

Land. Ned added return?" never we "Suppose

harpooner's the short cut and feet our at fell stone a then Just
proposition.



XXI CHAPTER

THUNDERBOLT NEMO'S CAPTAIN

in stopping hand my rising, without forest the of edge the at looked We
office. its completing Land's Ned mouth, my to it putting of action the

would they "or Conseil, remarked sky," the from fall not do "Stones
aerolites." name the merit

fall leg pigeon's savoury a made that aimed, carefully stone, second A
all We observation. his to weight more still gave hand, Conseil's from
attack. any to reply to ready were and guns, our shouldered arose, three

Land. Ned cried apes?" they "Are

savages." are nearly--they "Very

sea. the to hurrying said, I boat!" the "To

natives twenty about for retreat, a beat to necessary indeed was It
that copse a of skirts the on appeared slings and bows with armed
us. from steps hundred a hardly right, the to horizon the masked

approached savages The us. from feet sixty about moored was boat Our
arrows and Stones demonstrations. hostile making but running, not us,
thickly. fell

his of spite in and, provisions; his leave to wished not had Land Ned
he other, the on kangaroos and side one on pig his danger, imminent
the load To shore. the on were we minutes two In fast. tolerably went
the ship and sea, to out it push to arms, and provisions with boat
cable-lengths, two gone not had We instant. an of work the was oars,
up water the entered gesticulating, and howling savages, hundred a when
attract would apparition their if see to watched I waists. their to
enormous The no. But platform. the to on Nautilus the from men some
deserted. absolutely was off, lying machine,

After open. were panels The board. on were we later minutes Twenty
Nautilus. the of interior the into entered we fast, boat the making

chords. some heard I whence from drawing-room, the to descended I
a in plunged and organ, his over bending there, was Nemo Captain
ecstasy. musical

"Captain!"

me. hear not did He

hand. his touching said, I "Captain!"

Professor? you, is it "Ah! said, round, turning and, shuddered, He
successfully?" botanised you have hunt, good a had you have Well,

bipeds, of troop a brought unfortunately have we but Captain; "Yes
me." troubles vicinity whose

bipeds?" "What

"Savages."

Professor, astonished, are you "So ironically. echoed, he "Savages!"
Savages! savages? finding and land strange a on foot set having at
these others, than worse they are Besides, any? not there are where
savages?" call you whom

Captain----" "But

counted?" you have many "How

least." at hundred "A

organ the on fingers his placing Nemo, Captain replied Aronnax," "M.
the shore, this on assembled are Papua of natives the all "when stops,
attacks." their from fear to nothing have will Nautilus

the of keys the over running then were fingers Captain's The
which keys, black the only touched he that remarked I and instrument,
had he Soon character. Scotch essentially an melodies his gave
not did I that reverie a into plunged had and presence, my forgotten
fallen; already had night platform: the to on again up went I disturb.
twilight. without and rapidly sets sun the latitude, low this in for,
fires, numerous the but indistinctly; island the see only could I
leaving of think not did natives the that showed beach, the on lighted
the of thinking sometimes hours, several for alone was I it.
imperturbable the for them, of dread any without natives--but
to them forgetting catching--sometimes was Captain the of confidence
remembrances My tropics. the in night the of splendours the admire
in shine would that stars zodiacal those of train the in France to went
of constellations the of midst the in shone moon The time. hours' some
zenith. the

frightened islanders the mischance, any without away slipped night The
were panels The bay. the in aground monster a of sight the at doubt no
the of interior the to access easy an offered have would and open,
Nautilus.

the to on up went I January 8th the of morning the in o'clock six At
itself showed soon island The breaking. was dawn The platform.
summits. the then shore, the first fogs, dissipating the through

or before--five day the on than numerous more there, were natives The
come had water, low the by profiting them, of perhaps--some hundred six
I Nautilus. the from cable-lengths two than less at coral, the to on
athletic with Papuans, true were they easily; them distinguished
broad not but large, foreheads, high large race, good of men figures,
tinge, reddish a with hair, woolly Their teeth. white and flat, and
Nubians. the of those like bodies shining black their on off showed
of chaplets hung distended, and cut ears, their of lobes the From
remarked I them, Amongst naked. were savages these of Most bones.
of crinoline a quite in knees to hips the from dressed women, some
had chiefs Some waistband. vegetable a sustained that herbs,
red beads, glass of collars and crescent a with necks their ornamented
and shields and arrows, bows, with armed were all nearly white; and
stones round those containing net of sort a shoulders their on carried
these of One skill. great with slings their from cast they which
was, He attentively. it examined Nautilus, the to near rather chiefs,
of mat a in draped was he for rank, high of "mado" a perhaps,
brilliant with off set and edges, the round notched banana-leaves,
colours.

short a within was who native, this down knocked have easily could I
hostile real for wait to better was it that thought I but length;
the for proper is it savages, and Europeans Between demonstrations.
attack. to not sharply, parry to Europeans

were but Nautilus, the near about roamed natives the water low During
and "Assai," word the repeat frequently them heard I troublesome; not
an land, on go to me invited they that understood I gestures their by
declined. I that invitation

great the to off, push not did boat the day, that on that, So
provisions. his complete not could who Land, Master of displeasure

meat and viands the preparing in time his employed Canadian adroit This
returned they savages, the for As island. the off brought had he that
coral the as soon as morning, the in o'clock eleven about shore the to
numbers their saw I but tide; rising the under disappear to began tops
the from came they Probably shore. the on considerably increased had
not had I However, Papua. from likely very or islands, neighbouring
of thought I do, to better nothing Having canoe. native single a seen
profusion a saw I which under waters, limpid beautiful these dragging
day last the was it Moreover, plants. marine and zoophytes, shells, of
sea open in float it if parts, these in pass would Nautilus the that
promise. Nemo's Captain to according day, next the

very drag, light little a me brought who Conseil, called therefore I
we hours two For work! to Now fishery. oyster the for those like
was drag The rarities. any up bringing without but unceasingly, fished
most the particularly and melames, harps, midas-ears, with filled
sea-slugs, some up brought also We seen. ever have I hammers beautiful
the for reserved were that turtles little dozen a and pearl-oysters,
board. on pantry

might I wonder, a on hand my put I least, it expected I when just But
just was Conseil with. met rarely very deformity, natural a say
when, shells, ordinary divers with filled up came net his and dragging,
out draw to net, the into quickly arm my plunge me saw he once, at all
cry. a utter me heard and shell, a

been master "Has surprise. in asked he sir?" matter, the is "What
bitten?"

my for finger a given have willingly would I but boy; my "No,
discovery."

discovery?" "What

triumph. my of object the up holding said, I shell," "This

the of order olive, genus porphyry, olive an simply is "It
mollusca." sub-class gasteropods, of class pectinibranchidae,

this left, to right from rolled being of instead but, Conseil; "Yes,
right." to left from turns olive

possible?" it "Is

shell." left a is it boy; my "Yes,

chance by when and, exceptions; rare with right-handed, all are Shells
gold. in weight their pay to ready are amateurs left, is spiral their

I and treasure, our of contemplation the in absorbed were I and Conseil
stone a when it, with museum the enrich to myself promising was
the broke, and against, struck native a by thrown unfortunately
despair! of cry a uttered I hand. Conseil's in object precious
his poising was who savage a at aimed and gun, his up took Conseil
blow his but him, stopped have would I him. from yards ten at sling
arm the encircled which amulets of bracelet the broke and effect took
savage. the of

"Conseil!" I. cried "Conseil!"

attack?" the commenced has cannibal the that see not you do sir! "Well,

I. said man," a of life the worth not is shell "A

my broken had he rather would "I Conseil; cried scoundrel!" the "Ah!
shoulder!"

the However, opinion. his of not was I but earnest, in was Conseil
A perceived. not had we and before, minutes some changed had situation
of out scooped canoes, These Nautilus. the surrounded canoes of score
were speed, for adapted well narrow, long, tree, a of trunk the
water. the on floated which pole, bamboo long a of means by balanced
their watched I and paddlers, half-naked skilful, by managed were They
had Papuans these that evident was It uneasiness. some with advance
this But ships. their knew and Europeans the with dealings had already
what chimneys, or masts without bay, the in anchored cylinder iron long
a at kept they first at for good, Nothing it? of think they could
they degrees by motionless, it seeing However, distance. respectful
this Now it. with themselves familiarise to sought and courage, took
arms, Our avoid. to necessary was it what precisely was familiarity
the on effect moderate a produce only could noiseless, were which
The things. blustering but aught for respect little have who savages,
man frighten would thunder of reverberations the without thunderbolt
noise. the in not lightning, the in lies danger the though little, but

of shower a and Nautilus, the approached canoes the moment this At
her. on alighted arrows

knock to ventured I there. one no found but saloon, the to down went I
the was in," "Come room. Captain's the into opened that door the at
answer.

of calculations algebraical in deep Nemo Captain found and entered, I
quantities. other and _x_

sake. courtesy's for I, said you," disturbing am "I

have you think I "but Captain; the replied Aronnax," M. true, is "That
me?" see to wishing for reasons serious

and canoes, their in us surrounding are natives the ones; grave "Very
of hundreds many by attacked be certainly shall we minutes few a in
savages."

canoes?" their with come are "they quietly, Nemo Captain said "Ah!"

sir." "Yes,

hatches." the close must we sir, "Well,

you----" to say to came I and "Exactly,

an pressing And, Nemo. Captain said simple," more be can "Nothing
crew. ship's the to order an transmitted he button, electric

is pinnace "The moments. some after he, said sir," done, all is "It
that imagine, I fear, not do You closed. are hatches the and ready,
frigate your of balls the which on walls in stave could gentlemen these
effect?" no had have

exists." still danger a but Captain; "No,

sir?" that, is "What

to hatches the open must we hour, this about at to-morrow, that is "It
Papuans the moment, this at if, Now, Nautilus. the of air the renew
them prevent could you how see not do I platform, the occupy should
entering." from

us?" board will they that suppose you sir, "Then,

it." of certain am "I

After them. hindering for reason no see I come. them let sir, "Well,
visit my that unwilling am I and creatures, poor are Papuans these all,
wretches." these of one single a of life the cost should island the to

me asked and me, detained Nemo Captain But away; going was I that Upon
our about interest with me questioned He him. by down sit to
the understand to not seemed and hunting; our and shore, on excursions
conversation the Then Canadian. the possessed that meat for craving
communicative, more being without and, subjects, various on turned
amiable. more himself showed Nemo Captain

the of situation the of speak to happened we things, other Amongst
where strait this in spot same the exactly in aground run Nautilus,
this: of Apropos lost. nearly was d'Urville Dumont

me, to Captain the said sailors," great your of one was D'Urville "This
of Cook Captain the is He navigators. intelligent most your of "one
the braved having after science, of man Unfortunate Frenchmen. you
cannibals the Oceania, of reefs coral the Pole, South the of icebergs
this If train! railway a in miserably perish to Pacific, the of
life, his of moments last the during reflected have could man energetic
suppose?" you do thoughts, last his in uppermost been have must what

a me gave emotion his and moved, seemed Nemo Captain speaking, So
of travels the reviewed we hand, in chart Then, him. of opinion better
double his circumnavigation, of voyages his navigator, French the
and Adelaide of discovery the to led which Pole, South the at detention
principal the of bearings hydrographical the fixing and Philippe, Louis
Oceania. of islands

said seas," the of surface the on done has D'Urville your which "That
more easily, more and them, under done I have "that Nemo, Captain
tossed incessantly Zelee, the and Astrolabe The he. than completely
quiet Nautilus, the worth be not could hurricane, the by about
the of midst the in motionless truly is, she that labour of repository
waters.

minutes twenty at "to-morrow, rising, Captain, the added "To-morrow,"
Torres of Strait the leave and float, shall Nautilus the p.m., three to
uninjured."

slightly. bowed Nemo Captain words, these pronounced curtly Having
room. my to back went I and me, dismiss to was This

interview my of result the know to wished who Conseil, found I There
Captain. the with

was Nautilus his that believe to feigned I "when I, said boy," "My
very me answered Captain the Papua, of natives the by threatened
in confidence Have you: to say to thing one but have I sarcastically.
peace." in sleep to go and him,

sir?" services, my of need no you "Have

doing?" Land Ned is What friend. my "No,

busy is Ned "friend Conseil, answered sir," me, excuse will you "If
marvel." a be will which kangaroo-pie a making

the heard I indifferently. slept but bed, to went and alone remained I
deafening uttering platform, the on stamped who savages, the of noise
repose ordinary the disturbing without thus, passed night The cries.
more no them affected cannibals these of presence The crew. the of
over crawl that ants the for care battery masked a of soldiers the than
front. its

The opened. been not had hatches The rose. I morning the in six At
any for ready filled reservoirs, the but renewed, not was air inner
of feet cubic several discharged and to, resorted now were emergency,
Nautilus. the of atmosphere exhausted the into oxygen

even Nemo, Captain seen having without noon, till room my in worked I
visible. were departure for preparations no board On instant. an for

clock The saloon. large the into went then time, some still waited I
if and, high-tide: be would it minutes ten In two. half-past marked
be would Nautilus the promise, rash a made not had Nemo Captain
could she ere pass would months many not, If detached. immediately
coral. of bed her leave

I vessel. the in felt be to began vibrations warning some However,
coral the of bottom calcareous rough the against grating keel the heard
reef.

the in appeared Nemo Captain three, to minutes five-and-twenty At
saloon.

he. said start," to going are "We

I. replied "Ah!"

hatches." the open to order the given have "I

Papuans?" the "And

shoulders. his shrugging slightly Nemo, Captain answered Papuans?" "The

Nautilus?" the inside come not they "Will

"How?"

opened." have you hatches the over leaping by "Only

the enter not will "they Nemo, Captain answered quietly Aronnax," "M.
open." were they if even way, that in Nautilus the of hatches

Captain. the at looked I

he. said understand?" not do "You

"Hardly."

see." will you and come "Well,

and Land Ned There staircase. central the towards steps my directed I
opening were who crew, ship's the of some watching slyly were Conseil
resounded vociferations fearful and rage of cries while hatches, the
outside.

faces horrible Twenty outside. down pulled were lids port The
stair-rail, the on hand his placed who native first the But appeared.
fled, what, not know I force, invisible some by behind from struck
contortions. wildest the making and cries fearful most the uttering

fate. same the with met They him. followed companions his of Ten

violent his by away carried Land, Ned ecstasy. in was Conseil
the seized he moment the But staircase. the to on rushed instincts,
overthrown. was turn, his in he, hands, both with rail

oath. an with he, cried thunderbolt," a by struck am "I

with charged cable metallic a but rail; no was It all. explained This
Whoever platform. the with communicating deck the from electricity
mortal been have would shock this shock--and powerful a felt it touched
of force whole the conductor the into discharged had Nemo Captain if
and assailants his between that said be truly might It current. the
pass could none which electricity of network a stretched had he himself
impunity. with

with paralysed retreat a beaten had Papuans exasperated the Meanwhile,
the rubbed and consoled we laughing, half us, for As terror.
possessed. one like swore who Land, Ned unfortunate

tide, the of waves last the by raised Nautilus, the moment this at But
the by fixed minute fortieth the at exactly bed coral her quitted
Her majestically. and slowly waters the swept screw Her Captain.
ocean, the of surface the on sailing and, gradually, increased speed
of Straits the of passes dangerous the sound and safe quitted she
Torres.



XXII CHAPTER

SOMNIA" "AEGRI

course her continued Nautilus the January, 10th day following The
not could I that speed remarkable such with but seas, two between
of rapidity The hour. an miles thirty-five than less at it estimate
its count nor follow neither could I that such was screw her
agent, electric marvellous this that reflected I When revolutions.
still Nautilus, the to light and heat, motion, afforded having after
of ark an into her transformed and attack, outward from her protected
thunderstricken, being without touch might hand profane no which safety
the to extended it structure the from and unbounded, was admiration my
existence. into it called had who engineer

we January of 11th the on and west, the to directed was course Our
lat., S. 10 and long. 135 in situation Wessel, Cape doubled
were reefs The Carpentaria. of Gulf the of point east the forms which
with chart the on marked and equalised, more but numerous, still
Money of breakers the avoided easily Nautilus The precision. extreme
long. 130 at placed starboard, to reefs Victoria the and port to
followed. strictly we which parallel, 10th the on and

and Timor, of Sea the in arrived Nemo Captain January, of 13th the On
long. 122 in name that of island the recognised

the towards inclined Nautilus the of direction the point this From
the would Where Ocean. Indian the for set was head Her south-west.
of coast the to return he Would next? us carry Nemo Captain of fancy
Improbable Europe? of shores the again approach he would or Asia
Then continents. inhabited from fled who man a to both, conjectures
Good of Cape the double to going he Was south? the to descend he would
pole? Antarctic the as far as go finally and Horn, Cape then Hope,
could Nautilus his where Pacific, the to last at back come he Would
show. would Time independently? and free sail

Seringapatam, Hibernia, of Cartier, of sands the skirted having After
the on element, liquid the against solid the of efforts last Scott, and
the of speed The altogether. land of sight lost we January of 14th
she course irregular with and abated, considerably was Nautilus
their on floated sometimes waters, the of bosom the in swam sometimes
surface.

interesting some made Nemo Captain voyage, the of period this During
beds. different in sea, the of temperature varied the on experiments
of means by made are observations these conditions ordinary Under
by results, doubtful somewhat with and instruments, complicated rather
breaking often glasses the sounding-leads, thermometrical of means
the on grounded apparatus an or water, the of pressure the under
currents. electric the to metals of resistance the of variations
the On calculated. correctly be not could obtained so Results
the in temperature the test to himself went Nemo Captain contrary,
with communication in placed thermometer, his and sea, the of depths
immediately degree required the him gave water, of sheets different the
accurately. and

descending by or reservoirs her overloading by either that, thus was It
successively Nautilus the planes, inclined her of means by obliquely
thousand ten and nine, seven, five, four, three, of depth the attained
sea the that was experience this of result definite the and yards,
depth a at half a and degrees four of temperature average an preserved
latitudes. all under fathoms thousand five of

yards few a only becalmed seemed Nautilus the January, of 16th the On
remained apparatus electric Her waves. the of surface the beneath
the of mercy the at drift to her left screw motionless her and inactive
repairs, interior with occupied was crew the that supposed I currents.
the of movements mechanical the of violence the by necessary rendered
machine.

of hatches The spectacle. curious a witnessed then I and companions My
not was Nautilus the of light beacon the as and, open, were saloon the
I waters. the of midst the in reigned obscurity dim a action, in
largest the and conditions, these under sea, the of state the observed
the when shadows, defined scarcely than more no me to appeared fish
thought I light. full into transported suddenly herself found Nautilus
electric its casting was and lighted, been had beacon the that first at
rapid a after and mistaken, was I mass. liquid the into radiance
error. my perceived survey

in which, bed phosphorescent a of midst the in floated Nautilus The
of myriads by produced was It dazzling. quite became obscurity, this
glided they as increased was brilliancy whose animalculae, luminous
in lightning by surprised was I vessel. the of hull metallic the over
of rivulets been had they though as sheets, luminous these of midst the
white a to brought masses metallic or furnace ardent an in melted lead
appeared light of portions certain contrast, of force by that, so heat,
all which from ignition, general the of midst the in shade a cast to
our of irradiation calm the not was this No; banished. seemed shade
truly was this vigour: and life unusual was There lightning. ordinary
light! living

of infusoria, coloured of agglomeration infinite an was it reality, In
and tentacle, threadlike a with provided jelly, of globules veritable
than less in counted been have thousand twenty-five as many as which of
water. of half-inches cubic two

and waves, brilliant these in floated Nautilus the hours several During
disporting monsters marine the watched we as increased admiration our
fire this of midst the in there saw I salamanders. like themselves
clown indefatigable (the porpoise elegant and swift the not burns that
prophetic those long, feet ten swordfish some and ocean), the of
then and now would sword formidable whose hurricane the of heralds
the fish, smaller the appeared Then saloon. the of glass the strike
others hundred a and wolf-thorn-tails, mackerel, leaping the balista,
dazzling This swam. they as atmosphere luminous the striped which
increased condition atmospheric some Perhaps enchanting! was spectacle
the agitated storm some Perhaps phenomenon. this of intensity the
Nautilus the yards, some of depth this at But waves. the of surface
water. still in peacefully reposed and fury its by unmoved was

days The marvel. new some by charmed incessantly progressed, we So
to according Ned, them. of account no took I and away, rapidly passed
to fixed were we snails, Like board. on diet the vary to tried habit,
life. snail's a lead to easy is it declare I and shells, our

the of longer no thought we and natural, and easy seemed life this Thus
the to us recall to happened something but land; on led we life
situation. our of strangeness

15 and long. 105 in was Nautilus the January, of 18th the On
There rolling. and rough sea the threatening, was weather The lat. S.
for down going been had which barometer, The wind. east strong a was
just platform the to on up went I storm. coming a foreboded days, some
angles, horary the of measure the taking was lieutenant second the as
on But said. was phrase daily the till habit to according waited, and
incomprehensible. less not phrase another for exchanged was it day this
looking glass, a with appear Nemo Captain saw I directly, Almost
horizon. the towards

point the off eye his taking without immovable, was he minutes some For
words few a exchanged and glass his lowered he Then observation. of
emotion some to victim a be to seemed latter The lieutenant. his with
command more having Nemo, Captain repress. to vain in tried he that
objections some making be to too, seemed, He cool. was himself, over
I least At assurances. formal by replied lieutenant the which to
For gestures. and tones their of difference the by so concluded
without indicated direction the in carefully looked had I myself,
the of line clear the in lost were water and sky The anything. seeing
horizon.

other, the to platform the of end one from walked Nemo Captain However,
firm, was step His me. seeing without perhaps me, at looking without
arms, his crossed sometimes, stopped He usual. than regular less but
immense that on for looking be he could What sea. the observed and
expanse?

coast. nearest the from miles of hundreds some then was Nautilus The

horizon the examined and glass the up taken had lieutenant The
more showing and foot his stamping coming, and going steadfastly,
mystery this Besides, officer. superior his than agitation nervous
from order an upon for, long; before and solved, be necessarily must
the made power, propelling its increasing engine, the Nemo, Captain
rapidly. more turn screw

The again. attention Captain's the drew lieutenant the then Just
place the towards glass his directed and walking stopped latter
to descended and puzzled, much very felt I long. looked He indicated.
generally I that telescope excellent an out took and drawing-room, the
out jutted that watch-light the of cage the on leaning Then, used.
of line the all over look to myself set platform, the of front the from
sea. and sky the

quickly was it than glass the to applied sooner no was eye my But
hands. my of out snatched

him. know not did I but me, before was Nemo Captain round. turned I
were teeth his sullenly; flashed eyes His transfigured. was face His
his between shrunk head and fists, clenched body, stiff his set;
whole his pervaded that agitation violent the betrayed shoulders,
rolled had hands, his from fallen glass, My move. not did He frame.
feet. his at

this Did anger? of fit this provoked unwittingly I Had
forbidden some discovered had I that imagine person incomprehensible
not was he for hatred, this of object the not was I No; secret?
point impenetrable the upon fixed steadily was eye his me; at looking
agitation His himself. recovered Nemo Captain last At horizon. the of
his to language foreign a in words some addressed He subsided.
an rather in said, he Aronnax," "M. me. to turned then lieutenant,
bind that conditions the of one keep to you require "I tone, imperious
me." to you

Captain?" it, is "What

to fit think I until companions, your with confined, be must "You
you." release

I may "But him. at steadily looking replied, I master," the are "You
question?" one you ask

sir." "None,

been have would it command, imperious this resisting no was There
Conseil, and Land Ned by occupied cabin the to down went I useless.
this how judge may You determination. Captain's the them told and
Canadian. the by received was communication

the at waited crew the of Four altercation. for time not was there But
night first our passed had we where cell that to us conducted and door,
Nautilus. the board on

him. upon shut was door the but remonstrated, have would Land Ned

Conseil. asked means?" this what me tell master "Will

as astonished much as were They passed. had what companions my told I
it. for account to how loss a at equally and I,

of think could and reflections, own my in absorbed was I Meanwhile,
I countenance. Captain's the in depicted fear strange the but nothing
were cogitations my when it, for account to loss a at utterly was
Land: Ned from words these by disturbed

ready." is breakfast "Hallo!

this given had Nemo Captain Evidently laid. was table the indeed And
Nautilus. the of speed the hastened had he that time same the at order

Conseil. asked recommendation?" a make to me permit master "Will

boy." my "Yes,

know not do we for prudent, is It breakfasts. master that is it "Well,
happen." may what

Conseil." right, are "You

ship's the us given only have "they Land, Ned said "Unfortunately,"
fare."

breakfast the if said have you would "what Conseil, asked Ned," "Friend
forgotten?" entirely been had

recriminations. harpooner's the short cut argument This

silence. in eaten was meal The table. to down sat We

left and out, went cell the lighted that globe luminous the then Just
me astonished what and asleep, soon was Land Ned darkness. total in us
what thinking was I slumber. heavy a into off went Conseil that was
brain my felt I when drowsiness, irresistible his caused have could
they open, eyes my keep to efforts my of spite In stupefied. becoming
soporific Evidently me. seized suspicion painful A close. would
taken. just had we food the with mixed been had substances
us, from projects Nemo's Captain conceal to enough not was Imprisonment
The shut. panels the heard then I necessary. more was sleep
ceased. motion, rolling slight a caused which sea, the of undulations
to back gone it Had ocean? the of surface the quitted Nautilus the Had
was It sleep. resist to tried I water? of bed motionless the
my freeze cold mortal a felt I weak. grew breathing My impossible.
caps, leaden like lids, eye My limbs. half-paralysed and stiffened
of full sleep, morbid a them; raise not could I eyes. my over fell
disappeared, visions the Then being. my of me bereft hallucinations,
insensibility. complete in me left and



XXIII CHAPTER

KINGDOM CORAL THE

great my To clear. singularly head my with woke I day next The
been had doubt, no companions, My room. own my in was I surprise,
I. than more any it perceived having without cabin, their in reinstated
and was, I as ignorant as were they night the during passed had what Of
the of chances the upon reckoned only I mystery this penetrate to
future.

prisoner? a or again free I Was room. my quitting of thought then I
the up went half-deck, the to went door, the opened I free. Quite
I open. were before, evening the shut panels, The stairs. central
platform. the to on went

knew they them; questioned I me. for there waited Conseil and Land Ned
totally been had they which in sleep heavy a in Lost nothing.
their in themselves finding at astonished been had they unconscious,
cabin.

It ever. as mysterious and quiet seemed it Nautilus, the for As
seemed Nothing pace. moderate a at waves the of surface the on floated
board. on changed

usual the gave and platform, the to on came then lieutenant second The
below. order

appear. not did he Nemo, Captain for As

me served who steward, impassive the saw only I board, on people the Of
regularity. dumb usual his with

my arranging in busied drawing-room, the in was I o'clock, two About
He bowed. I appeared. and door the opened Captain the when notes,
my resumed I speaking. without return, in inclination slight a made
the of explanation some me give perhaps would he that hoping work,
He him. at looked I none. made He night. preceding the of events
his sleep; by refreshed been not had eyes heavy his fatigued; seemed
up got and down sat fro, and to walked He sorrowful. very looked face
instruments his consulted down, it put book, chance a took again,
At uneasy. and restless seemed and notes, habitual his taking without
said: and me, to up came he last,

Aronnax?" M. doctor, a you "Are

him at time some stared I that question a such expected little so I
answering. without

have colleagues your of "Several repeated. he doctor?" a you "Are
medicine." studied

I hospital. the to surgeon resident and doctor a am "I I, said "Well,"
museum." the entering before years several practised

sir." well, "Very

what knowing not But, Captain. the satisfied evidently had answer My
answers my reserving questions, other for waited I next, say would he
circumstances. to according

asked. he men?" my of one for prescribe to consent you will Aronnax, "M.

ill?" he "Is

"Yes."

you." follow to ready am "I

then." "Come,

connection certain saw I why. know not do I beat, heart my own I
day the of events the and crew the of one of illness the between
man. sick the as much as least at me interested mystery this and before;

into me took and Nautilus, the of poop the to me conducted Nemo Captain
quarters. sailors' the near situated cabin a

resolute a with age, of years forty about man a lay bed, a on There,
Anglo-Saxon. an of type true a countenance, of expression

head, His wounded. was he ill, only not was He him. over leant I
the undid I pillow. a on lay blood, with covered bandages in swathed
gave and eyes large his with me at looked man wounded the and bandages,
skull, The wound. horrible a was It it. did I as pain of sign no
much was which exposed, brain the left weapon, deadly some by shattered
in mass, broken and bruised the in formed had blood of Clots injured.
wine. of dregs the like colour

was breathing His brain. the of suffusion and contusion both was There
I face. his agitated muscles the of movements spasmodic some and slow,
were body the of extremities The intermittent. was It pulse. his felt
After ensue. inevitably must death saw I and already, cold growing
his on bandages the readjusted I wounds, man's unfortunate the dressing
Nemo. Captain to turned and head,

asked. I wound?" this caused "What

one broken has shock "A evasively. replied, he signify?" it does "What
as opinion your But myself. struck which engine, the of levers the of
state?" his to

it. giving before hesitated I

understand not does man "This Captain. the said speak," may "You
French."

man. wounded the at look last a gave I

hours." two in dead be will "He

him?" save nothing "Can

"Nothing."

eyes, his in glistened tears some and contracted, hand Nemo's Captain
any. shedding of incapable thought I which

ebbed life whose man, dying the watched still I moments some For
shed was that light electric the under increased pallor His slowly.
with furrowed forehead, intelligent his at looked I death-bed. his over
I sorrow. and misfortune by probably produced wrinkles, premature
escaped that words last the from life his of secret the learn to tried
lips. his

Captain. the said Aronnax," M. now, go can "You

much room my to returned and cabin, man's dying the in him left I
by haunted was I day, whole the During scene. this by affected
my between and badly, slept I night at and suspicions, uncomfortable
a of notes the like sighs distant heard I fancied I dreams broken
that in murmured dead, the of prayers the they Were psalm. funeral
understand? not could I that language

there was Nemo Captain bridge. the to on went I morning next The
me. to came he me perceived he as soon As me. before

excursion submarine a make to you to convenient be it will "Professor,
to-day?"

asked. I companions?" my "With

like." they "If

Captain." orders, your obey "We

jackets?" cork your on put to as then good so be you "Will

and Land Ned rejoined I dying. or dead of question a not was It
hastened Conseil proposition. Nemo's Captain of them told and Conseil,
follow to willing quite seemed Canadian the time this and it, accept to
example. our

were we eight half-past At morning. the in o'clock eight was It
for contrivances two with provided and excursion, new this for equipped
by accompanied and, open; was door double The breathing. and light
at foot, set we crew, the of dozen a by followed was who Nemo, Captain
Nautilus the which on bottom solid the on feet, thirty about of depth a
rested.

depth. fathoms fifteen at bottom, uneven an in ended declivity slight A
first my on visited had I one the from entirely differed bottom This
no was there Here, Ocean. Pacific the of waters the under excursion
immediately I sea-forest. no prairies, submarine no sand, fine
Captain the day, that on which, in region marvellous that recognised
kingdom. coral the was It us. to honours the did

midst the in playing varieties, charming thousand a produced light The
the see to seemed I coloured. vividly so were that branches the of
the of undulation the beneath tremble tubes cylindrical and membraneous
with ornamented petals, fresh their gather to tempted was I waters.
small a while budding, others the blown, just some tentacles, delicate
birds. of flights like slightly, them touched swiftly, swimming fish,
animated, these flowers, living these approached hand my if But
petals white The alarm. took colony whole the plants, sensitive
bush the and looked, I as faded flowers the cases, red their re-entered
knobs. stony of block a into changed

the of specimens precious most the by just me thrown had Chance
the in found that than valuable more was coral This zoophyte.
tints Its Barbary. and Italy France, of coasts the on Mediterranean,
of "Froth and Blood," of "Flower of names poetical the justified
Coral productions. beautiful most its to given has trade that Blood,"
make would beds watery the place this in and ounce; per L20 for sold is
often matter, precious This coral-divers. of company a of fortunes the
called plots inextricable the then formed polypi, other with confused
pink of specimens beautiful several noticed I which on and "macciota,"
coral.

Real increase. arborisations the and contract, bushes the soon But
were architecture, fantastic of joints long thickets, petrified
gallery, dark a under himself placed Nemo Captain us. before disclosed
The yards. hundred a of depth a reached we declivity slight a by where
the following effects, magical sometimes produced lamps our from light
like disposed pendants and arches natural the of outlines rough
fire. of points with tipped were that lustres,

about of depth a attained had we hours, two walking after last, At
coral which on limit extreme the say, to is that yards, hundred three
brushwood, modest nor bush, isolated no was there But form. to begins
large of forest immense an was It trees. lofty of bottom the at
of garlands by united trees, petrified enormous vegetations, mineral
We reflections. and clouds with adorned all sea-bindweed, elegant
waves. the of shade the in lost branches, high their under freely passed

turning and, halted, companions my and I stopped. had Nemo Captain
chief. their round semi-circle a forming were men his saw I round,
their on carried them of four that observed I attentively, Watching
shape. oblong an of object an shoulders

by surrounded glade vast a of centre the place, this in occupied, We
this over threw lamps Our forest. submarine the of foliage lofty the
on shadows the elongated singularly that twilight clear of sort a place
was and increased, darkness the glade the of end the At ground. the
coral. of points the by reflected sparks little by relieved only

was I thought I and watched, We me. near were Conseil and Land Ned
that saw I ground, the observing On scene. strange a witness to going
with encrusted excrescences slight by places certain in raised was it
of hand the betrayed that regularity a with disposed and deposits, limy
man.

up, piled roughly rocks of pedestal a on glade, the of midst the In
have might one that arms long its extended that coral of cross a stood
Nemo Captain from sign a Upon blood. petrified of made were thought
to began he cross the from feet some at and advanced; men the of one
understood I belt. his from took he that pickaxe a with hole a dig
object oblong this tomb, a hole this cemetery, a was glade This all!
men his and Captain The night! the in died had who man the of body the
the at resting-place, general this in companion their bury to come had
ocean! inaccessible this of bottom

their while sides all on fled fish the slowly; dug being was grave The
pickaxe, the of strokes the heard I disturbed; thus being was retreat
the of bottom the at lost flint some upon hit it when sparkled which
body. the receive to enough deep and large soon was hole The waters.
white of tissue a in enveloped body, the approached; bearers the Then
arms his with Nemo, Captain grave. damp the into lowered was linen,
them, loved had who him of friends the all and breast, his on crossed
prayer. in knelt

ground, the from taken rubbish the with in filled then was grave The
his and Nemo Captain done, was this When mound. slight a formed which
all and again, knelt they grave, the approaching then, rose; men
funeral the Then adieu. last a of sign in hands their extended
the of arches the under passing Nautilus, the to returned procession
on still and bushes, coral the along thickets, of midst the in forest,
luminous its and appeared, ship the of light the last At ascent. the
returned. had we o'clock one At Nautilus. the to us guided track

and, platform, the to on up went I clothes my changed had I as soon As
Captain binnacle. the near down sat I emotions, conflicting to prey a
him: to said and rose I me. joined Nemo

night?" the in died man this would, he said I as "So,

Aronnax." M. "Yes,

cemetery?" coral the in companions, his near now, rests he "And

the and grave, the dug We us. by not but else, all by forgotten "Yes,
face his burying And, eternity." for dead our seal to undertake polypi
he Then sob. a suppress to vain in tried he hands, his in quickly
the below feet hundred some there, is cemetery peaceful "Our added:
waves." the of surface

of reach the of out Captain, least, at quietly, sleep dead "Your
sharks."

Captain. the replied gravely men," and sharks of sir, "Yes,



TWO PART



I CHAPTER

OCEAN INDIAN THE

first The sea. the under journey our of part second the to come now We
a such left which cemetery coral the in scene moving the with ended
sea, great this of midst the in Thus, mind. my on impression deep
had he which grave, his to even passing, was life Nemo's Captain
ocean's the of one not There, abysses. deepest its of one in prepared
of Nautilus, the of crew the of sleep last the trouble could monsters
man, any "Nor life. in as death in other each to riveted friends those
implacable fierce, same the Still Captain. the added had either,"
society! human towards defiance

satisfied which theory the with myself content longer no could I
Conseil.

Nautilus the of Commander the in seeing in persisted fellow worthy That
for contempt mankind return who _savants_ unknown those of one
of tired who, genius misunderstood a was he him, For indifference.
where medium, inaccessible this in refuge taken had deceptions, earth's
but explains this mind, my To freely. instincts his follow might he
last that of mystery the Indeed, character. Nemo's Captain of side one
the and sleep, the prison, in chained been had we which during night
eyes my from snatching of Captain the by taken violently so precaution
the of wound mortal the horizon, the sweep to raised had I glass the
new a on me put all Nautilus, the of shock unaccountable an to due man,
His man. shunning with satisfied not was Nemo Captain No; track.
but freedom, of instinct his suited only not apparatus formidable
retaliation. terrible some of design the also perhaps

light of glimpse a but catch I me; to clear is nothing moment this At
events as writing to myself confine must I and darkness, the all amidst
dictate. shall

came officer second the noon, at 1868, January, of 24th the day, That
cigar, a lit platform, the mounted I sun. the of altitude the take to
not did man the that me to seemed It operation. the watched and
voice, loud a in remarks made I times several for French; understand
if attention, of sign involuntary some him from drawn have must which
dumb. and undisturbed remained he but them; understood had he

of sailors the of one sextant, the with observations taking was he As
first our on us accompanied had who man strong (the Nautilus the
glasses the clean to came Crespo) of Island the to excursion submarine
strength the apparatus, the of fittings the examined I lantern. the of
placed rings, lenticular by hundredfold a increased was which of
brilliance their projected which and lighthouse, a in those to similar
as way a such in combined was lamp electric The plane. horizontal a in
vacuo, in produced was it Indeed, light. powerful most its give to
vacuum This intensity. its and steadiness its both insured which
was arc luminous the which between points graphite the economised
could who Nemo, Captain for economy of point important developed--an
waste their conditions these under and them; replaced have easily not
its continue to ready was Nautilus the When imperceptible. was
closed, was panel The saloon. the to down went I journey, submarine
west. direct marked course the and

plain, liquid vast a Ocean, Indian the of waters the furrowing were We
clear so are waters whose and acres, of 1,200,000,000 of surface a with
The giddy. turn would them over leaning one any that transparent and
We deep. fathoms hundred a and fifty between floated usually Nautilus
love great a had who myself, but anyone To days. some for so on went
the but monotonous; and long seemed have would hours the sea, the for
air reviving the in myself steeped I when platform, the on walks daily
the of windows the through waters rich the of sight the ocean, the of
up took memoirs, my of compiling the library, the in books the saloon,
weariness. or ennui of moment a not me left and time, my all

or sea-mews birds, aquatic of number great a saw we days some For
made way, certain a in prepared and, killed cleverly were Some gulls.
long a carried birds, large-winged Amongst water-game. acceptable very
of fatigue the from waves the upon resting and lands all from distance
discordant uttering albatrosses, magnificent some saw I flight, their
of family the to belonging birds and ass, an of braying the like cries
long-wings. the

surprised we when admiration our provoked always they fish, the to As
many saw I panels. open the through life aquatic their of secrets the
observing. of chance a had before never I which kinds

Indian the Sea, Red the to peculiar ostracions chiefly notice shall I
These America. tropical of coast the washes which part that and Ocean,
the and sea-hedgehog, the armadillo, the tortoise, the like fishes,
nor chalky neither is which breastplate a by protected are Crustacea,
in triangle, solid a of form the takes it some In bone. real but stony,
inch an some saw I triangular the Amongst quadrangle. solid a of others
flavour; delicious a and flesh wholesome with length, in half a and
recommend I and fins, the at yellow and tail, the at brown are they
of number certain a which to water, fresh into introduction their
quadrangular mention also would I themselves. accustom easily sea-fish
over dotted some tubercles; large four back the on having ostracions,
tamed be may which and body, the of part lower the on spots white with
of lengthening the by formed spikes with provided trigons birds; like
called are gruntings, strange their from which, and shell, bony their
cone, a of shape the in humps large with dromedaries also "seapigs";
leathery. and tough very is flesh whose

of fish "Certain Conseil. Master of notes daily the from borrow now I
white and backs red with seas, those to peculiar petrodon genus the
longitudinal of rows three by distinguished are which chests,
the in decked long, inches seven electrical, some and filaments;
ovoides, some kinds, other of specimens as Then, colours. liveliest
and bands, white with marked colour, brown dark a of egg an resembling
and spikes, with furnished sea-porcupines, real diodons, tails; without
bristling cushions like look to as way a such in swelling of capable
with pegasi some ocean; every to common hippocampi, darts; with
and elongated much being fins, pectoral their which snouts, lengthened
shoot to least at fly, to not if allow, wings, of shape the in formed
of rings many with covered tails with spatulae, pigeon air; the into
long, inches nine fish, excellent an jaws, long with macrognathi shell;
with calliomores, pale-coloured colours; agreeable most with bright and
muzzles, tubular and long with chaetpdons, of plenty and heads; rugged
single a with air-gun, an from as them, shooting by insects kill which
seas. the of flycatchers the call may we These water. of drop

to belonging Lacepede, by classed fishes, of genus eighty-ninth the "In
and opercules by characterised bony, of class lower second the
is which of head the scorpaena, the remarked I membranes, bronchial
these fin; dorsal one but has which and spikes, with furnished
the to according shells, little with not, or covered, are creatures
specimens us gives sub-class second The belong. they which to sub-class
rays, yellow with length, in inches fifteen or fourteen didactyles of
it sub-class, first the to As appearance. fantastic most a of heads and
appropriately fish looking singular that of specimens several gives
holes, with pierced sometimes head, large with 'seafrog,' a called
and spikes, with bristling protuberances, with swollen sometimes
body its horns; hideous and irregular has it tubercles; with covered
dangerous a makes sting its callosities; with covered are tail and
at." look to horrible and repugnant both is it wound;

of rate the at went Nautilus the January of 23rd the to 21st the From
hundred five being hours, twenty-four in leagues fifty and hundred two
many so recognised we If hour. an miles twenty-two or miles, forty and
electric the by attracted because, was it fish, of varieties different
soon were however, part, greater the us; follow to tried they light,
of waters the in place their kept some though speed, our by distanced
S. 5' 12 in 24th, the of morning The time. a for Nautilus the
coral a Island, Keeling observed we long., 33' 94 and lat.,
visited been had which and cocos, magnificent with planted formation,
of shores the skirted Nautilus The Fitzroy. Captain and Darwin Mr. by
numerous up brought nets Its distance. little a for island desert this
precious Some mollusca. of shells curious and polypi of specimens
of treasures the enriched delphinulae of species the of productions
of kind a punctifera, astraea an added I which to Nemo, Captain
shell. a to fixed found often polypus parasite

was course our and horizon, the from disappeared Island Keeling Soon
Peninsula. Indian the of direction the in north-west the to directed

often variable, more and slower was course our Island Keeling From
the of use made they times Several depths. great into us taking
the to obliquely placed levers internal certain which planes, inclined
ever without but miles, two about went we way that In waterline.
of soundings which Sea, Indian the of depths greatest the obtaining
of temperature the to As reached. never have fathoms thousand seven
above 4 indicated invariably thermometer the strata, lower the
always was water the regions upper the in that observed only I zero.
sea. the of surface the at than levels high the in colder

Nautilus the deserted; entirely was ocean the January of 25th the On
powerful its with waves the beating surface, the on day the passed
such under Who height. great a to rebound them making and screw
Three cetacean? gigantic a for it taken have not would circumstances
Nothing sea. the watched I platform. the on spent I day this of parts
our on west running steamer a o'clock four about till horizon, the on
see not could she but instant, an for visible were masts Her counter.
steamboat this fancied I water. the in low too being Nautilus, the
Sydney, to Ceylon from runs which Company, P.O. the to belonged
Melbourne. and Point George's King at touching

which twilight fleeting that before evening, the in o'clock five At
by astonished were I and Conseil zones, tropical in day to night binds
spectacle. curious a

the of surface the on along travelling argonauts of shoal a was It
tubercle the to belonged They hundreds. several count could We ocean.
seas. Indian the to peculiar are which kind

locomotive their of means by backwards moved molluscs graceful These
Of in. drawn already water the propelled they which through tube,
floating out stretched and elongated, were six tentacles, eight their
the to spread were flat, up rolled two, other the whilst water, the on
shells, fluted and spiral-shaped their saw I sail. light a like wing
It indeed! boat A skiff. elegant an to compares justly Cuvier which
it. to adhering its without it secretes which creature the bears

of shoal this of midst the in floated Nautilus the hour an nearly For
at if as But took. they fright sudden what not know I Then molluscs.
the in, drawn body the folded, arms the furled, was sail every signal a
whole the and gravity, of centre their changing over, turned shells
squadron a of ships the did Never waves. the under disappeared fleet
unity. more with manoeuvre

by raised scarcely reeds, the and suddenly, fell night moment that At
Nautilus. the of sides the under peaceably lay breeze, the

eighty-second the at equator the cut we January, of 26th day, next The
a day the During hemisphere. northern the entered and meridian
which creatures, terrible us, accompanied sharks of troop formidable
were They dangerous. very them make and seas these in multiply
bellies, whitish and backs brown with sharks, philippi" "cestracio
marked being throat sharks--their teeth--eyed of rows eleven with armed
were There eye. an like white with surrounded spot black large a with
spots. dark with marked snouts rounded with sharks, Isabella some also
the of windows the at themselves hurled often creatures powerful These
such At insecure. very feel us make to as violence such with saloon
the to go to wanted He himself. of master longer no was Land Ned times
smooth-hound certain particularly monsters, the harpoon and surface
large and mosaic; a like teeth with studded is mouth whose sharks,
to seemed which of named last the long, yards six nearly tiger-sharks
her accelerating Nautilus, the But particularly. more him excite
behind. them of rapid most the left easily speed,

met we Bengal, of Bay vast the of entrance the at January, of 27th The
surface the on floating bodies dead spectacle, forbidding a repeatedly
by carried villages, Indian the of dead the were They water. the of
only the vultures, the which and sea, the of level the to Ganges the
the But devour. to able been not had country, the of undertakers
work. funeral their at them help to fail not did sharks

was half-immersed, Nautilus, the evening, the in o'clock seven About
lactified. seemed ocean the sight first At milk. of sea a in sailing
two scarcely moon, the for No; rays? lunar the of effect the it Was
the of rays the in horizon the under hidden lying still was old, days
by black seemed rays, sidereal the by lit though sky, whole The sun.
waters. the of whiteness the with contrast

cause the to as me questioned and eyes, his believe not could Conseil
him. answer to able was I Happily phenomenon. strange this of

white of extent large "A explained. I sea," milk a called is "It
parts these in and Amboyna, of coasts the on seen be to often wavelets
sea." the of

effect? an such causes what me tell you "can Conseil, said sir," "But,
milk." into turned really not is water the suppose I for

by only caused is you surprises which whiteness the and boy; my "No,
worm, little luminous of sort a infusoria, of myriads of presence the
whose and hair, a of thickness the of colour, without and gelatinous
insects These inch. an of seven-thousandths than more not is length
leagues." several for sometimes another one to adhere

Conseil. exclaimed leagues!" "Several

these of number the compute to try not need you and boy; my "Yes,
have ships mistaken, not am I if for, able, be not will You infusoria.
miles." forty than more for seas milk these on floated

behind but colour; usual its resumed suddenly sea the midnight Towards
whitened the reflected sky the horizon, the of limits the to even us,
vague the with impregnated seemed time long a for and waves,
borealis. aurora an of glimmerings



II CHAPTER

NEMO'S CAPTAIN OF PROPOSAL NOVEL A

surface the to came Nautilus the noon at when February, of 28th the On
eight about sight in land was there lat., N. 4' 9 in sea, the of
mountains of range a was noticed I thing first The westward. to miles
capricious. most were which of shapes the high, feet thousand two about
of island the nearing were we that knew I bearings, the taking On
Peninsula. Indian the of lobe the from hangs which pearl the Ceylon,

Captain The moment. this at appeared second his and Nemo Captain
said: me, to turning Then map. the at glanced

to like you Would pearl-fisheries. its for noted Ceylon, of Island "The
Aronnax?" M. them, of one visit

Captain." "Certainly,

shall we fisheries, the see we if Though, easy. is thing the "Well,
begun. yet not has exportation annual The fishermen. the see not
we where Manaar, of Gulf the for make to orders give will I mind, Never
night." the in arrive shall

out. went immediately who second, his to something said Captain The
manometer the and element, native her to returned Nautilus the Soon
deep. feet thirty about was she that showed

visit shall companions your and "you Nemo, Captain said sir," "Well,
we there, be should fisherman some chance by if and Manaar, of Bank the
work." at him see shall

Captain!" "Agreed,

sharks?" of afraid not are you Aronnax M. bye, the "By

I. exclaimed "Sharks!"

one. hard very a seemed question This

Nemo. Captain continued "Well?"

of kind that with familiar very yet not am I that Captain, admit, "I
fish."

you time in "and Nemo, Captain replied them," to accustomed are "We
be may we road the on and armed, be shall we However, too. be will
till So, interesting. is It tribe. the of some hunt to able
early." and sir, to-morrow,

if Now, saloon. the left Nemo Captain tone, careless a in said This
what Switzerland, of mountains the in bear the hunt to invited were you
say? you would

asked were you If bear." the hunt and go will we to-morrow well! "Very
Indian the in tiger the or Atlas, of plains the in lion the hunt to
say? you would what jungles,

when But lion!" the or tiger the hunt to going are we seems it ha! "Ha!
would you element, natural its in shark the hunt to invited are you
I myself, for As invitation. the accepting before reflect perhaps
cold of drops large stood which on forehead, my over hand my passed
Hunting time. our take "and I, said reflect," us "Let perspiration.
will Crespo, of Island the in did we as forests, submarine in otters
is one where sea, the of bottom the at down and up going but pass;
well know I thing! another quite is sharks, meet to certain almost
the Islands, Andaman the in particularly countries, certain in that
a and hand one in dagger a with them attack to hesitate never negroes
those affront who few that know also I but other; the in noose running
were I if and negro, a not am I However, alive. return ever creatures
ill-timed." be not would case this in hesitation little a think I

and composed, quite entered, Canadian the and Conseil moment this At
them. awaited what not knew They joyous. even

take devil Nemo--the Captain "your Land, Ned said sir," "Faith,
offer." pleasant very a us made just him!--has

know?" "you I, said "Ah!"

the of commander "the Conseil, interrupted sir," you, to agreeable "If
fisheries Ceylon magnificent the visit to us invited has Nautilus
real a like behaved and kindly, it did he company; your in to-morrow,
gentleman."

more?" nothing said "He

this of you to spoken already had he that except sir, more, "Nothing
walk." little

pearl the of details some us give you "would Conseil, said "Sir,"
fishery?"

which?" incidents, the "or asked, I itself," fishing the to "As

the upon entering "before Canadian; the replied fishing," the "On
it." about something know to well as is it ground,

you." teach will I and friends, my down, sit well; "Very

thing first the and ottoman, an on themselves seated Conseil and Ned
was: asked Canadian the

pearl?" a is what "Sir,

the of tear a is pearl a poet, the "to answered, I Ned," worthy "My
ladies, the to solidified; dew of drop a is it Orientals, the to sea;
mother-of-pearl of brilliancy a of shape, oblong an of jewel a is it
their or necks, their fingers, their on wear they which substance,
of carbonate and phosphate of mixture a is it chemist the for ears;
simply is it naturalists, for lastly, and gelatine; little a with lime,
mother-of-pearl the produces that organ the of secretion morbid a
bivalves." certain amongst

Conseil. said molluscs," of "Branch

the testacea these amongst and, Conseil; learned my so, "Precisely
which those all word, a in turbots, the tridacnae, the earshell,
white or violet, bluish, blue, the is, that mother-of-pearl, secrete
of capable are shells, their of interior the lines which substance
pearls." producing

Canadian. the asked too?" "Mussels

Saxony, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, in waters certain of mussels "Yes,
France." and Bohemia,

Canadian. the replied attention," pay shall I future the For "Good!

is pearl the secretes which mollusc particular "the continued, I "But,"
precious that margaritiferct, meleagrina the pearl-oyster, the
in deposited formation, nacreous a but nothing is pearl The pintadine.
the in buried or shell, oyster the to adhering either form, globular a
is it flesh the in fast; is it shell the On creature. the of folds
a be may substance, hard small a kernel a for has always but loose;
matter pearly the which around sand, of grain a be may egg, barren
concentric thin by and successively, year after year itself deposits
layers."

Conseil. asked oyster?" same the in found pearls many "Are

been has oyster One casket. perfect a are Some boy. my "Yes,
no contained having as it, doubt to myself allow I though mentioned,
sharks." fifty and hundred a than less

Land. Ned exclaimed sharks!" fifty and hundred "A

and hundred a say to meant "I hurriedly. I said sharks?" say I "Did
sense." be not would Sharks pearls. fifty

means what by now us tell you will "but Conseil; said not," "Certainly
pearls?" these extract they

the shell, the to adhere they When ways. various in proceed "They
is way common most the but pincers; with off them pull often fishermen
Thus banks. the covers which seaweed the of mats on oysters the lay to
a in are they days ten of end the at and air; open the in die they
large into plunged then are They decomposition. of state forward
washed." and opened are they then sea-water; of reservoirs

asked size?" their to according varies pearls these of price "The
Conseil.

to according also "but answered, I size," their to according only "Not
lustre: their and colour), their is, (that water their shape, their
charming so them makes which sparkle diapered and bright that is, that
paragons. or pearls, virgin called are beautiful most The eye. the to
often white, are mollusc, the of tissue the in alone formed are They
are they opal; an of transparency the have sometimes and opaque,
oval the bracelets, into made are round The oval. or round generally
Those singly. sold are precious, more being and, pendants, into
and shape, in irregular more are oyster the of shell the to adhering
small those classed are order lower a in Lastly, weight. by sold are
measure, by sold are they seed-pearls; of name the under known pearls
ornaments." church for embroidery in used especially are and

dangerous?" pearl-fishery this "is Conseil, said "But,"

are precautions certain if "particularly quickly; answered, I "No,"
taken."

swallowing "the Land, Ned said calling?" a such in risk one does "What
sea-water?" of mouthfuls some of

Nemo's Captain take to trying I, said bye," the By Ned. say, you "As
Ned?" brave sharks, of afraid you "are tone, careless

trade my is It profession? by harpooner "a Canadian; the replied "I!"
them." of light make to

an with them for fishing of question a not is "it I, said "But,"
tails their off cutting vessel, the into them hoisting iron-swivel,
heart their throwing and up, them ripping chopper, a of blow a with
sea!" the into

of----" question a is it "Then,

"Precisely."

water?" the "In

water." the "In

are sharks these sir, know, You harpoon! good a with "Faith,
in and you, seize to bellies their on turn They beasts. ill-fashioned
time----" that

cold. run blood my made which "seize" saying of way a had Land Ned

sharks?" of think you do what Conseil, you, and "Well,

sir." frank, be will "I Conseil. said "Me!"

I. thought better," the much "So

faithful your why see not do I sharks, the face to mean sir, you, "If
you." with them face not should servant



III CHAPTER

MILLIONS TEN OF PEARL A

whom steward the by awakened was I o'clock four at morning next The
and dressed, hurriedly, rose I service. my at placed had Nemo Captain
saloon. the into went

me. awaiting was Nemo Captain

start?" to ready you "are he, said Aronnax," "M.

ready." am "I

me." follow to please "Then

Captain?" companions, my "And

waiting." are and told been have "They

I. asked dresses?" diver's our on put to not we "Are

coast, this near too come to Nautilus the allowed not have I yet. "Not
ready, is boat the but Bank; Manaar the from distance some are we and
us save will which disembarking, of point exact the to us take will and
when on put will we which apparatus, diving our carries It way. long a
journey." submarine our begin we

the on led which staircase, central the to me conducted Nemo Captain
of idea the at delighted there, already were Conseil and Ned platform.
the from sailors Five preparing. was which party" "pleasure the
fast made been had which boat, the in waited oars, their with Nautilus,
side. the against

allowing sky, the covered clouds of Layers dark. still was night The
and lay, land the where side the on looked I seen. be to stars few but
from horizon, the of parts three enclosing line dark a but nothing saw
the during returned having Nautilus, The west. north to south-west
or bay, the of west now was Ceylon, of coast western the up night
There, Manaar. of Island the and mainland the by formed gulf, rather
inexhaustible an bank, pintadine the stretched waters, dark the under
miles. twenty than more is which of length the pearls, of field

of stern the in places our took I and Conseil, Land, Ned Nemo, Captain
on leaned companions four his tiller; the to went master The boat. the
off. sheered we and off, cast was painter the oars, their

noticed I hurry. not did oarsmen the south; the towards went boat The
every other each followed only water, the in strong strokes, their that
navy. the in adopted generally method the to according seconds, ten
drops liquid the velocity, own its by running was craft the Whilst
lead. melted of spats like crisply waves the of depths dark the struck
and boat, the to roll slight a gave wide, spreading billow, little A
it. before flapped reeds samphire some

the of Perhaps of? thinking Nemo Captain was What silent. were We
contrary him, to near too found he which and approaching, was he land
Conseil, to As off. far too it thought who opinion, Canadian's the to
curiosity. from there merely was he

upper the showed horizon the on tints first the five half-past About
a rose it east, the in enough Flat distinctly. more coast of line
was it and us, between lay still miles Five south. the to little
became it o'clock six At water. the on mist the to owing indistinct
regions, tropical to peculiar rapidity that with daylight, suddenly
the pierced rays solar The twilight. nor dawn neither know which
orb radiant the and horizon, eastern the on up piled clouds, of curtain
here scattered trees few a with distinctly, land saw I rapidly. rose
the to rounded was which Island, Manaar neared boat The there. and
sea. the watched and seat his from rose Nemo Captain south.

ran, scarcely chain the but dropped, was anchor the him from sign a At
the of one was spot this and deep, yard a than more little was it for
pintadines. of bank the of points highest

enclosed that see "You Nemo. Captain said Aronnax," M. are, we "Here
of boats fishing numerous the assembled be will month a in Here, bay?
so ransack will divers their waters the are these and exporters, the
fishing. of kind that for situated well is bay this Happily, boldly.
rough very never is sea the winds; strongest the from sheltered is It
put now will We work. diver's the for favourable it makes which here,
walk." our begin and dresses, our on

with began waves, suspected the watching while and, answer, not did I
and Nemo Captain sea-dress. heavy my on put to sailors the of help the
to were men Nautilus the of None dressing. also were companions my
excursion. new this on us accompany

air the clothing; india-rubber in throat the to enveloped were we Soon
apparatus, Ruhmkorff the to As braces. by backs our to fixed apparatus
copper the into head my putting Before it. for necessity no was there
Captain. the of question the asked had I cap,

depth, great no to going are "We replied. he useless," be would "They
would it Besides, walk. our light to enough be will rays solar the and
its waters; these in light electric the carry to prudent be not
coast the of inhabitants dangerous the of some attract might brilliancy
inopportunely." most

Ned and Conseil to turned I words, these pronounced Nemo Captain As
metal the in heads their encased already had friends two my But Land.
answer. nor hear neither could they and cap,

Nemo. Captain of ask to remained question last One

guns?" "our I; asked arms?" our "And

in dagger a with bear the attack mountaineers not Do for? What "Guns!
blade; strong a is Here lead? than surer steel not is and hand, their
start." we and belt, your in it put

than more and, us, like armed were they companions; my at looked I
placed had he which harpoon, enormous an brandishing was Land Ned that,
Nautilus. the leaving before boat the in

dressed be to myself allowed I example, Captain's the following Then,
in once at were air of reservoirs our and helmet, copper heavy the in
in other, the after one landed, were we after instant An activity.
sign a made Nemo Captain sand. even an upon water of yards two about
we till declivity gentle a by him followed we and hand, his with
waves. the under disappeared

of fish, of shoals rose bog, a in snipe of coveys like feet, our Over
I tail. their but fins other no have which monoptera, genus the
a of long, feet half a and two serpent real a Javanese, the recognized
a for mistaken be easily might which and underneath, colour livid
the In side. its on stripes golden the for not were it if eel conger
of some saw I oval, and flat very are bodies whose stromateus, genus
an scythe; a like fin dorsal their carrying colours, brilliant most the
name the by known is pickled, and dried which, fish, eating excellent
genus the to belonging tranquebars, some then Karawade; of
eight of cuirass shell a with covered is body whose apsiphoroides,
plates. longitudinal

soil The more. and more waters of mass the lit sun heightening The
of causeway perfect a succeeded sand fine the To degrees. by changed
the Amongst zoophytes. and molluscs of carpet a with covered boulders,
unequal thin with placenae, some noticed I branches these of specimens
Indian the and Sea Red the to peculiar ostracion of kind a shells,
and feet three rockfish shells; rounded with lucinae orange some Ocean;
ready hands like waves the under themselves raised which long, half a
and luminous; slightly panopyres, some also were There one. seize to
the of one forming fans, magnificent like oculines, some lastly,
seas. these of vegetations richest

the of arbours the under and plants, living these of midst the In
some particularly articulates, clumsy of layers were hydrophytes,
some and triangle; rounded slightly a formed carapace whose raninae,
parthenopes. looking horrible

the surveying last at ourselves found we o'clock seven about At
millions. by reproduced are pearl-oysters the which on oyster-banks

and oysters; of heap enormous the to hand his with pointed Nemo Captain
Nature's for inexhaustible, was mine this that understand well could I
Land, Ned destruction. of instinct man's beyond far is power creative
by carried he which net a fill to hastened instinct, his to faithful
We stop. not could we But specimens. finest the of some with side his
known paths by self him guide to seemed who Captain, the follow must
on sometimes, and rising, sensibly was ground The himself. to only
level the Then sea. the of surface the above was it arm, my up holding
rocks high rounded we Often capriciously. sink would bank the of
perched crustacea, huge fractures dark their In pyramids. into scarped
fixed with us watched war-machine, some like claws high their upon
annelides. of kinds various crawled feet our under and eyes,

a in dug grotto large a us before opened there moment this At
the of warp thick the all with carpeted and rocks of heap picturesque
rays solar The me. to dark very seemed it first At flora. submarine
vague its until gradations, successive by extinguished be to seemed
Nemo Captain light. drowned than more nothing became transparency
this to themselves accustomed soon eyes My followed. we entered;
springing arches the distinguish could I darkness. of state relative
granite their upon broad standing pillars, natural from capriciously
our had Why architecture. Tuscan of columns heavy the like base,
I crypt? submarine this of bottom the to us led guide incomprehensible
feet our declivity, sharp rather a descending After know. to soon was
stopped, Nemo Captain There pit. circular of kind a of bottom the trod
was It perceived. yet not had I object an indicated hand his with and
goblet a tridacne, gigantic a dimensions, extraordinary of oyster an
the basin a holy-water, of lake whole a contained have could which
consequently and half, a and yards two than more was which of breadth
approached I Nautilus. the of saloon the ornamenting that than larger
of table a to filaments its by adhered It mollusc. extraordinary this
of waters calm the in itself developed it isolated, there, and granite,
Such lb. 600 at tridacne this of weight the estimated I grotto. the
stomach the have must one and meat; of lb. 30 contain would oyster an
them. of dozens some demolish to Gargantua a of

this of existence the with acquainted evidently was Nemo Captain
actual the verifying in motive particular a have to seemed and bivalve,
Captain the open; little a were shells The tridacne. this of state
then closing; from them prevent to between dagger his put and near came
which edges, fringed its with membrane the raised he hand his with
I plaits, folded the between There, creature. the for cloak a formed
globular Its coco-nut. a of that equalled size whose pearl, loose a saw
a altogether it made lustre admirable and clearness, perfect shape,
stretched I curiosity, my by away Carried value. inestimable of jewel
Captain the but it; touch and it, weigh it, seize to hand my out
dagger, his withdrew quickly and refusal, of sign a made me, stopped
Nemo's Captain understood then I suddenly. closed shells two the and
tridacne the of mantle the in hidden pearl this leaving In intention.
the of secretions the year Each slowly. grow to it allowing was he
at value its estimated I circles. concentric new add would mollusc
least. at L500,000

had he thought I suddenly. stopped Nemo Captain minutes ten After
crouch us bade he gesture a by No; returning. to previously halted
part one to pointed hand his rock, the of fracture deep a in him beside
attentively. watched I which mass, liquid the of

ground. the to sank and appeared, shadow a me from yards five About
was I but mind, my through shot sharks of idea disquieting The
had we that ocean the of monster a not was it again once and mistaken;
with. do to anything

I who, devil poor a fisherman, a Indian, an man, living a man, a was It
bottom the see could I harvest. the before glean to come had suppose,
up went and dived He head. his above feet some anchored canoe his of
a of shape the in cut feet, his between held stone A successively.
to him helped boat, his to him fastened rope a whilst loaf, sugar
the Reaching apparatus. his all was This rapidly. more descend
bag his filled and knees his on went he deep, yards five about bottom,
pulled it, emptied up, went he Then random. at up picked oysters with
thirty lasted which more, once operation the began and stone, his up
seconds.

sight. from us hid rock the of shadow The us. see not did diver The
like beings men, that dream ever Indian poor this should how And
and movements his watching water the under there be should himself,
way, this in up went he times Several fishing? the of detail no losing
plunge, each at ten than more away carry not did He again. dived and
by adhered they which to bank the from them pull to obliged was he for
which for oysters those of many how And byssus. strong their of means
his closely; him watched I them! in pearl no had life his risked he
danger no hour an half of space the for and regular; were manoeuvres
him. threaten to appeared

interesting this of sight the to myself accustom to beginning was I
make him saw I ground, the on was Indian the as suddenly, when fishing,
surface the to return to spring a make and rise, terror, of gesture a
sea. the of

the above just appeared shadow gigantic A dread. his understood I
advancing size enormous of shark a was It diver. unfortunate
with mute was I open. jaws his and fire, on eyes his diagonally,
move. to unable and horror

on himself threw who Indian, the towards shot creature voracious The
his struck it for tail, its not but fins; shark's the avoid to side one
ground. the on him stretched and chest

turning and, returned, shark the seconds: few a but lasted scene This
saw I when two, in Indian the cutting for himself prepared back, his on
to straight walk hand, in dagger then, and suddenly, rise Nemo Captain
the moment very The him. with face to face fight to ready monster, the
his perceived he two, in fisherman unhappy the snap to going was shark
him. towards straight made over, turning and, adversary, new

well himself Holding position. Nemo's Captain see still can I
it when and, coolness; admirable with shark the for waited he together,
quickness, wonderful with side one on himself threw him, at rushed
it But side. its into deep dagger his burying and shock, the avoiding
ensued. combat terrible A over. all not was

in rushed blood The so. say might I if roar, to seemed had shark The
opaque the through and red, dyed was sea The wound. its from torrents
moment the until more Nothing more. nothing distinguish could I liquid
of one to on hanging Captain undaunted the saw I lightning, like when,
the with hand to hand were, it as struggling, fins, creature's the
to unable still yet enemy, his at blows successive dealing and monster,
one. decisive a give

the that fury such with water the agitated struggles shark's The
me. upset to threatened rocking

spot the to nailed but, assistance, Captain's the to go to wanted I
stir. not could I horror, with

The fight. the of phases different the saw I eye; haggard the saw I
upon leant which mass enormous the by upset earth, the to fell Captain
and shears, factory of pair a like wide, opened jaws shark's The him.
thought, as quick but, Captain; the with over all been have would it
with it struck and shark the towards rushed Land Ned hand, in harpoon
point. sharp its

the under rocked They blood. of mass a with impregnated were waves The
Land Ned fury. indescribable with them beat which movements, shark's
to Struck death-rattle. monster's the was It aim. his missed not had
which of shock the convulsions, dreadful in struggled it heart, the
Conseil. overthrew

any without up getting who, Captain, the disentangled had Land Ned But
him held which cord the cut quickly Indian, the to straight went wound,
heel, his of blow sharp a with and, arms, his in him took stone, his to
surface. the to mounted

reached and miracle, a by saved seconds, few a in followed three all We
boat. fisherman's the

life to man unfortunate the recall to was care first Nemo's Captain
poor the for so, hoped I succeed. could he think not did I again.
tail shark's the from blow the but long; not was immersion creature's
death-blow. his been have might

saw I friction, sharp Conseil's and Captain's the with Happily,
his was What eyes. his opened He degrees. by return consciousness
leaning heads copper great four seeing at even, terror his surprise,
Nemo, Captain when thought have he must what all, above And, him! over
his in it placed pearls, of bag a dress his of pocket the from drawing
poor the to waters the of man the from charity munificent This hand!
eyes wondering His hand. trembling a with accepted was Cingalese
fortune both owed he beings super-human what to not knew he that showed
life. and

the following and, bank, the regained we Captain the from sign a At
which anchor the to hour an half about in came traversed, already road
earth. the to Nautilus the of canoe the held

the of rid got sailors, the of help the with each, we board, on Once
helmet. copper heavy

Canadian. the to was word first Nemo's Captain

he. said Land," Master you, "Thank

that." you owed "I Land. Ned replied Captain," revenge, in was "It

all. was that and lips, Captain's the across passed smile ghastly A

he. said Nautilus," the "To

shark's the met we after minutes Some waves. the over flew boat The
fins, its of extremity the of marking black the By floating. body dead
the of Seas, Indian the of melanopteron terrible the recognised I
feet twenty-five than more was It called. properly so shark of species
an was It body. its of one-third occupied mouth enormous its long;
isosceles an in placed teeth of rows six its by known was as adult,
jaw. upper the in triangle

voracious these of dozen a mass, inert this contemplating was I Whilst
threw us, noticing without and, boat; the round appeared beasts
the for another one with fought and body dead the upon themselves
pieces.

I There Nautilus. the board on again were we eight half-past At
to excursion our in place taken had which incidents the on reflected
Bank. Manaar the

the upon bearing it--one from draw inevitably must I conclusions Two
a to devotion his upon other the Nemo, Captain of courage unparalleled
beneath fled he which from race that of representative a being, human
succeeded yet not had man strange this say, might he Whatever sea. the
heart. his crushing entirely in

moved slightly a in answered he him, to observation this made I When
tone:

am I and country; oppressed an of inhabitant an is sir, Indian, "That
them!" of one breath, last my to be, shall and still,



IV CHAPTER

SEA RED THE

Ceylon of island the January, of 29th the of day the of course the In
twenty of speed a at Nautilus, the and horizon, the under disappeared
the separate which canals of labyrinth the into slid hour, an miles
a Kiltan, of Island the even coasted It Laccadives. the from Maldives
one and 1499, in Gama da Vasco by discovered coraline, originally land
Archipelago, Laccadive the of islands principal nineteen the of
72" 50' 69 and lat., N. 30' 14 and 10 between situated
long. E.

our from leagues (French) 7,500 or miles, 16,220 made had We
Seas. Japanese the in starting-point

of surface the to went Nautilus the when January), (30th day next The
the in N.N.E., was course Its sight. in land no was there ocean the
Peninsula, Indian the and Arabia between Oman, of Sea the of direction
a evidently was It Gulf. Persian the to outlet an as serves which
us taking Nemo Captain was Where egress. possible any without block
who Canadian, the satisfy not did however, This, say. not could I to?
going. were we where asking me to came day that

Ned." Master us, takes fancy Captain's our where going are "We

Persian "The Canadian. the said then," far, us take cannot fancy "His
we before long be not will it in, go do we if and, outlet: no has Gulf
again." out are

after if, and Land; Master again, out come will we then, well, "Very
the Sea, Red the visit to like would Nautilus the Gulf, Persian the
entrance." us give to there are Bab-el-mandeb of Straits

much as is Sea Red the "that Land, Ned said sir," you, tell not need "I
it if and, cut; yet not is Suez of Isthmus the as Gulf, the as closed
cut canal a in itself risk not would ours as mysterious as boat a was,
back us take to road the not is Sea Red the again, And sluices. with
Europe." to

Europe." to back going were we said never I "But

then?" suppose, you do "What

Egypt, and Arabia of coasts curious the visiting after that, suppose "I
the cross perhaps again, Ocean Indian the down go will Nautilus the
the gain to as so Mascarenhas, the off perhaps Mozambique, of Channel
Hope." Good of Cape

peculiar with Canadian, the asked Hope?" Good of Cape the at once "And
emphasis.

know. yet not do we which Atlantic that into penetrate shall we "Well,
sea; the under journey this of tired getting are you Ned, friend Ah!
submarine of spectacle varying incessantly the with surfeited are you
voyage a of end the see to sorry be shall I part, my For wonders.
make." to men few so to given is it which

Sea the scoured Nautilus the February, of 3rd the till days, four For
at go to seemed It depths. various at and speeds various at Oman, of
we but follow, should it road which to as hesitating if as random,
Cancer. of Tropic the passed never

most the of one instant, an for Muscat sighted we sea this quitting In
aspect, strange its admired I Oman. of country the of towns important
stood forts and houses white its which upon rocks black by surrounded
points elegant the mosques, its of domes rounded the saw I relief. in
a only was it But terraces. verdant and fresh its minarets, its of
sea. the of part that of waves the under sank soon Nautilus The vision!

a for Hadramaut, and Mahrah of coast Arabian the along passed We
being mountains of line undulating its miles, six of distance
at we February of 5th The ruin. ancient some by relieved occasionally
the into introduced funnel perfect a Aden, of Gulf the entered last
Red the entered waters Indian the which through Bab-el-mandeb, of neck
Sea.

perched Aden, of sight in floated Nautilus the February, of 6th The
kind a mainland, the to joins isthmus narrow a which promontory a upon
by rebuilt were which of fortifications the Gibraltar, inaccessible of
the of glimpse a caught I 1839. in possession taking after English the
richest the time one at was which town, this of minarets octagon
coast. the on magazine commercial

would point, this at arrived Nemo, Captain that thought certainly I
to much thing, such no did he for mistaken, was I but again; out back
surprise. my

of Straits the entered we February, of 7th the day, next The
of Gate The means tongue, Arab the in which, of name the Bab-el-mandeb,
Tears.

for And length. in thirty-two only is it breadth, in miles twenty To
the scarcely was crossing the speed, full at starting Nautilus, the
with Perim, of Island the even not nothing, saw I But hour. an of work
There Aden. of position the fortified has Government British the which
Bombay, to Suez of line the of steamers French or English many too were
furrowing Mauritius, the to Bourbon from and Melbourne, to Calcutta
it So itself. show to venture to Nautilus the for passage, narrow this
of waters the in were we noon, about last At below. prudently remained
Sea. Red the

decided had which caprice the understand to seek even not would I
the of approved quite I But gulf. the entering upon Nemo Captain
on kept it sometimes lessened: was speed Its it. entering Nautilus
able was I thus and vessel, a avoid to dived it sometimes surface, the
sea. curious this of parts lower and upper the observe to

sight, in came Mocha day, of dawn first the from February, of 8th The
which yet gunshot, a at fall would walls whose town, ruined a now
important an once date-trees; verdant some there and here shelters
whose and mosques, twenty-six and markets, public six containing city,
in miles two of girdle a formed forts, fourteen by defended walls,
circumference.

the of depth the where shore, African the approached then Nautilus The
through crystal, as clear waters two between There, greater. was sea
of bushes beautiful the contemplate to allowed were we panels open the
of fur splendid a with clothed rock of blocks large and coral brilliant
algae and sandbanks these along landscapes and sites of variety green
sites of variety what and spectacle, indescribable an What fuci. and
bound which islands volcanic and sandbanks these along landscapes and
beauty their all in appeared shrubs these where But coast! Libyan the
on was It gained. soon Nautilus the which coast, eastern the on was
zoophytes of display this did only not there for Tehama, of coast the
picturesque formed also they but sea, the of level the beneath flourish
the above feet sixty about themselves unfolded which interlacings
whose those than coloured highly less but capricious more surface,
waters. the of power vital the by up kept was freshness

What saloon! the of window the at thus passed I hours charming What
the under admire I did fauna and flora submarine of specimens new
lantern! electric our of brightness

the of part broadest the in floated Nautilus the February of 9th The
and coast, west the on Souakin, between comprised is which Sea, Red
miles. ninety of diameter a with coast, east the on Komfidah,

mounted Nemo Captain taken, were bearings the after noon, at day That
let to not determined was I and be, to happened I where platform, the
ulterior his regarding him pressing least at without again down go him
me offered graciously and approached he me saw he as soon As projects.
cigar. a

sufficiently you Have you? please Sea Red this does sir, "Well,
its zoophytes, its fishes, its covers, it wonders the observed
a catch you Did coral? of forests its and sponges, of parterres
borders?" its on towns the of glimpse

fitted wonderfully is Nautilus the "and replied; I Nemo," Captain "Yes,
boat!" intelligent an is it Ah! study. a such for

terrible the neither fears It invulnerable. and intelligent sir, "Yes,
sandbanks." its nor currents, its nor Sea, Red the of tempests

in and worst, the of one as quoted is sea "this I, said "Certainly,"
was reputation its mistaken, not am I if ancients, the of time the
detestable."

speak not do historians Latin and Greek The Aronnax. M. "Detestable,
the during dangerous very is it says Strabo and it, of favourably
it portrays Edrisi Arabian The season. rainy the in and winds Etesian
vessels that relates and Colzoum, of Gulf the of name the under
would one no that and sandbanks the on numbers great in there perished
to subject sea a pretends, he is, It night. the in sailing risk
offers `which and islands, inhospitable with strewn hurricanes, fearful
depths.'" its in or surface its on either good nothing

board on sailed never historians these "that replied, I see," may "One
Nautilus." the

moderns respect that in "and smiling; Captain, the replied so," "Just
find to ages many required It ancients. the than advanced more not are
hundred another in if, knows Who steam. of power mechanical the out
Aronnax." M. slow, is Progress Nautilus? second a see not may we years,

its before century a least at is boat "your answered; I true," is "It
an such of secret the that misfortune a What era. an perhaps time,
inventor!" its with die should invention

continued: he silence minutes' some After reply. not did Nemo Captain

the upon historians ancient of opinions the of speaking were "You
Sea." Red the of navigation dangerous

exaggerated?" fears their not were "but I; said true," is "It

the know to seemed who Nemo, Captain replied Aronnax," M. no, and "Yes
modern a for dangerous longer no is which "That heart. by Sea Red
course, own its of master and built, strongly rigged, well vessel,
of ships the to perils of sorts all offered steam, obedient to thanks
in venturing navigators first those yourself to Picture ancients. the
saturated palmtree, the of cords the with sewn planks of made ships
They resin! powdered with covered and seadog, the of grease the with
they and bearings, their take to wherewith instruments even not had
anything. knew scarcely they which of currents amongst guess by went
numerous. been, have must and were, shipwrecks conditions such Under
have Seas South the and Suez between running steamers time, our in But
contrary of spite in gulf, this of fury the from fear to more nothing
their for prepare not do passengers and captain The trade-winds.
return, their on and, sacrifices; propitiatory offering by departure
the thank to fillets gilt and wreaths with ornamented go longer no they
temple." neighbouring the in gods

all killed have to seems steam "and I; said you," with agree "I
to seem you since Captain, But, sailors. of hearts the in gratitude
its of origin the me tell you can sea, this studied especially have
name?"

Would Aronnax. M. subject, the on explanations several exist "There
century?" fourteenth the of chronicler a of opinion the know to like you

"Willingly."

the after it to given was name its that pretends writer fanciful "This
which waves the in perished Pharaoh when Israelites, the of passage
Moses." of voice the at closed

content cannot I "but replied; I Nemo," Captain explanation, poet's "A
opinion." personal your for you ask I that. with myself

this in see must we idea, my to According Aronnax. M. is, it "Here
and `Edom'; word Hebrew the of translation a Sea Red the of appellation
particular the of account on was it name, that it gave ancients the if
waters." its of colour

and waves transparent but nothing seen have I time this to up "But
colour." particular any without

see will you gulf, the of bottom the to advance we as but likely; "Very
entirely Tor of Bay the seeing remember I appearance. singular this
blood." of sea a like red,

microscopic a of presence the to colour this attribute you "And
seaweed?"

"Yes."

Red the overrun have you time first the not is it Nemo, Captain "So,
Nautilus?" the board on Sea

sir." "No,

the of and Israelites the of passage the of ago while a spoke you "As
the with met have you whether ask will I Egyptians, the to catastrophe
fact?" historical great this of water the under traces

reason." good a for and sir; "No,

it?" is "What

so now is passed people his and Moses where spot the that is "It
there. legs their bathe barely can camels the that sand with up blocked
my for enough water be not would there that understand well can You
Nautilus."

asked. I spot?" the "And

arm the in Suez, of Isthmus the above little a situated is spot "The
the to extended Sea Red the when estuary, deep a made formerly which
the not, or miraculous were passage this whether Now, Lakes. Salt
and Land, Promised the reach to there crossed nevertheless, Israelites,
that think I and spot; that on precisely perished army Pharaoh's
large a light to bring would sand the of middle the in made excavations
origin." Egyptian of instruments and arms of number

let archaeologists of sake the for "and replied; I evident," is "That
new when later, or sooner made be will excavations these that hope us
the of construction the after isthmus, the on established are towns
the like vessel a to useless very however, canal, a Canal; Suez
Nautilus."

"The Nemo. Captain said world," whole the to useful but likely; "Very
Red the between communication a of utility the understood well ancients
did they but affairs: commercial their for Mediterranean the and Sea
an as Nile the took and direct, canal a digging of think not
Red the to Nile the united which canal the probably Very intermediate.
is thing One tradition. believe may we if Sesostris, by begun was Sea
the undertook Necos Christ, Jesus before 615 year the in that certain,
plain the across Nile the of waters the to canal alimentary an of works
this up go to days four took It Arabia. towards looking Egypt, of
was It abreast. go could triremes two that wide so was it and canal,
by finished probably and Hystaspes, of son the Darius, by on carried
point the from decline its but navigated: it saw Strabo II. Ptolemy
was it that slight so was Sea Red the to Bubastes, near departure, of
all answered canal This year. the in months few a for navigable only
and abandoned was it when Antonius, of age the to purposes commercial
was it Omar, Caliph the of order by Restored sand. with up blocked
to wished who Al-Mansor, Caliph by 762 or 761 in destroyed definitely
had who Mohammed-ben-Abdallah, to provisions of arrival the prevent
General your Egypt, into expedition the During him. against revolted
and, Suez; of Desert the in works the of traces discovered Bonaparte
Hadjaroth, regaining before perished nearly he tide, the by surprised
before years thousand three encamped had Moses where place very the at
him."

junction this undertake, not dared ancients the what Captain, "Well,
India, to Cadiz from road the shorten will which seas, two the between
changed have will he long before and doing; in succeeded has Lesseps M.
island." immense an into Africa

countryman. your of proud be to right the have you Aronnax; M. "Yes,
He captains. great than nation a to honour more brings man a Such
has he but rebuffs; and disgust with others, many so like began,
that think to sad is it And will. of genius the has he for triumphed,
and work international an been have to ought which that, like work a
have should illustrious, reign a make to sufficed have would which
Lesseps!" M. to honour All man. one of energy the by succeeded

manner the by surprised replied, I citizen," great the to honour "Yes!
spoken. just had Nemo Captain which in

Suez the through you take cannot "I continued, he "Unfortunately,"
after Said Port of jetty long the see to able be will you but Canal;
Mediterranean." the in be shall we when to-morrow,

exclaimed. I Mediterranean!" "The

you?" astonish that does sir; "Yes,

after day the there be shall we that think to is me astonishes "What
to-morrow."

"Indeed?"

myself accustomed have to ought I time this by although Captain, "Yes,
boat." your board on been have I since nothing at surprised be to

surprise?" this of cause the "But

if Nautilus, the on put to have will you speed fearful the is it "Well!
made having Mediterranean, the in be to is she to-morrow after day the
Hope!" Good of Cape the doubled and Africa, of round the

the double and Africa of round the make would she that you told "Who
sir?" Hope, Good of Cape

the above passes and land, dry on sails Nautilus the unless "Well,
isthmus----"

Aronnax." M. it, beneath "Or

it?" "Beneath

Nature ago time long "A quietly. Nemo Captain replied "Certainly,"
its on made day this has man what land of tongue this under made
surface."

exists?" passage a such "What!

Tunnel. Arabian the named have I which passage, subterranean a "Yes;
Pelusium." of Gulf the into opens and Suez beneath us takes It

sands?" quick but nothing of composed is isthmus this "But

solid a is there only yards fifty-five at But depth. certain a "To
rock." of layer

more and more asked I chance?" by passage this discover you "Did
surprised.

chance. by than more even reasoning by and sir; reasoning, and "Chance
several it by profited have I but exist, passage this does only Not
the into day this ventured have not should I that Without times.
the in and Sea Red the in that noticed I Sea. Red impassable
kind a of fishes of number certain a existed there Mediterranean
it was myself asked I fact, the of Certain identical. perfectly
If seas? two the between communication no was there that possible
Red the from run necessarily must current subterranean the was, there
level. of difference of cause sole the from Mediterranean, the to Sea
I Suez. of neighbourhood the in fishes of number large a caught I
the into back them threw and tails, their through ring copper a passed
my of some caught I Syria, of coast the on later, months Some sea.
two the between communication the Thus ring. the with ornamented fish
it, discovered I Nautilus; my with it for sought then I proved. was
passed have will too you sir, long, before and it, into ventured
tunnel!" Arabian my through



V CHAPTER

TUNNEL ARABIAN THE

the on floated Nautilus the lat., N. 30' 21 in evening, same That
the Djeddah, saw I coast. Arabian the approaching sea, the of surface
I India. and Turkey, Syria, Egypt, of counting-house important most
the at anchored vessels the buildings, its enough clearly distinguished
the in anchor to them obliged water of draught whose those and quays,
houses the on full struck horizon, the on low rather sun, The roads.
wooden some Outside, whiteness. their out bringing town, the of
the by inhabited quarter the showed reeds, of made some and cabins,
night, of shadows the by view from out shut was Djeddah Soon Bedouins.
phosphorescent. slightly water under herself found Nautilus the and

to running ships several sighted we February, of 10th the day, next The
at but navigation; submarine its to returned Nautilus The windward.
rose she deserted, being sea the taken, were bearings her when noon,
waterline. her to again

The platform. the on myself seated I Conseil, and Ned by Accompanied
a upon printed faintly mass a like looked side eastern the on coast
fog. damp

and thing one of talking pinnace, the of sides the on leaning were We
the on spot a towards hand his out stretching Land, Ned when another,
said: sea,

sir?" there, anything see you "Do

know." you eyes, your not have I "but replied; I Ned," "No,

height the about beam, starboard the on "there, Ned, said well," "Look
move?" to seems which mass a see not you Do lantern! the of

a like something see "I attention; close after I, said "Certainly,"
water." the of top the on body black long

mile a than more not was object black the long before certainly And
sea. open the in deposited sandbank great a like looked It us. from
dugong! gigantic a was It

sight the at covetousness with shone eyes His eagerly. looked Land Ned
have would One it. harpoon to ready seemed hand His animal. the of
and sea the into himself throw to moment the awaiting was he thought
element. its in it attack

the saw He platform. the on appeared Nemo Captain instant this At
said: him, addressing and, attitude, Canadian's the understood dugong,

your burn not it would Land, Master now, just harpoon a held you "If
hand?"

sir." so, "Just

a of trade your to day, one for back, go to sorry be not would you "And
have you those of list the to cetacean this add to and fisherman
killed?" already

sir." not, should "I

try." can you "Well,

flaming. eyes his Land, Ned said sir," you, "Thank

to not sake own your for you advise "I Captain, the continued "Only,"
creature." the miss

the of spite in asked, I attack?" to dangerous dugong the "Is
shoulders. the of shrug Canadian's

its upon turns animal the "sometimes Captain; the replied "Yes,"
danger this Land Master for But boat. their overturns and assailants
sure." arm his prompt, is eye His feared. be to not is

ever, as immovable and mute crew, the of men seven moment this At
to similar line a and harpoon a carried One platform. the mounted
the from lifted was pinnace The whales. catching in employed those
oarsmen Six sea. the into down let and socket, its from pulled bridge,
Conseil, Ned, tiller. the to went coxswain the and seats, their took
boat. the of back the to went I and

asked. I Captain?" coming, not are "You

sport." good you wish I but sir; "No,

towards rapidly drew rowers, six the by lifted and, off, put boat The
Nautilus. the from miles two about floated which dugong, the

and slackened, speed the cetacean, the from cables-length some Arrived
harpoon Land, Ned waters. quiet the into noiselessly dipped oars the
for used harpoon The boat. the of part fore the in stood hand, in
runs which cord long very a to attached generally is whale the striking
the here But him. after it draws creature wounded the as rapidly out
attached was extremity the and long, fathoms ten than more not was cord
dugong the course the show to was floating, by which, barrel small a to
water. the under took

dugong, This adversary. Canadian's the watched carefully and stood I
the resembles closely halicore, the of name the bears also which
its and tail, lengthened a in terminated body oblong its manatee;
manatee the from difference Its fingers. perfect in fins lateral
pointed and long two with armed was which jaw, upper its in consisted
tusks. diverging side each on formed which teeth

colossal of was attack to preparing was Land Ned which dugong This
and move, not did It long. yards seven than more was it dimensions;
easier it made circumstance which waves, the on sleeping be to seemed
capture. to

on rested oars The animal. the of yards six within approached boat The
back, little a thrown body his Land, Ned rose. half I rowlocks. the
hand. experienced his in harpoon the brandished

The disappeared. dugong the and heard, was noise hissing a Suddenly
struck only apparently had force; great with thrown although harpoon,
water. the

it!" missed have "I furiously; Canadian the exclaimed it!" "Curse

your but blood; the at wounded--look is creature "the I; said "No,"
body." his in stuck not has weapon

Land. Ned cried harpoon!" my harpoon! "My

barrel. floating the for made coxswain the and on, rowed sailors The
animal. the of pursuit in followed we regained, harpoon The

had wound Its breathe. to surface the to then and now came latter The
rapidity. great with onwards shot it for it, weakened not

it times Several track. its on flew arms, strong by rowed boat, The
strike, to ready was Canadian the and yards, few some within approached
to impossible was it and plunge, sudden a with off made dugong the but
it. reach

the at hurled He Land! Ned impatient excited which passion the Imagine
English the in expletives energetic most the creature unfortunate
our all escape dugong the see to vexed only was I part, my For tongue.
attacks.

it think to began I and hour, an for relaxation without it pursued We
the with possessed animal, the when capture, to difficult prove would
upon turned repent, to cause had he which of vengeance of idea perverse
turn. its in us assailed and pinnace the

Canadian. the escape not did manoeuvre This

cried. he out!" "Look

doubtless tongue, outlandish his in words some said coxswain The
guard. their on keep to men the warning

the sniffed stopped, boat, the of feet twenty within came dugong The
but extremity, the at pierced (not nostrils large its with briskly air
threw he spring, a taking Then, muzzle). its of part upper the in
us. upon himself

least at shipped upset, half and shock, the avoid not could pinnace The
the to thanks but, emptied; be to had which water, of tons two
quite not were we so front, full not sideways, it caught we coxswain,
the belaboured bows, the to clinging Land, Ned While overturned.
were teeth creature's the harpoon, his from blows with animal gigantic
water, the of out thing whole the lifted it and gunwale, the in buried
know I and another, one over upset were We roebuck. a does lion a as
enraged still Canadian, the if ended, have would adventure the how not
heart. the to it struck not had beast, the with

disappeared, dugong the and plate, iron the on grind teeth its heard I
the to returned soon barrel the But him. with harpoon the carrying
back. its on turned animal, the of body the after shortly and surface,
the for straight made and tow, in it took it, with up came boat The
Nautilus.

the to on dugong the hoist to strength enormous of tackle required It
lb. 10,000 weighed It platform.

by enriched was Nautilus the of larder the February, 11th day, next The
the on rested sea-swallows of flight A game. delicate more some
Egypt; to peculiar nilotica, Sterna the of species a was It Nautilus.
white by surrounded eye the pointed, and grey head black, is beak its
and belly the colour, greyish a of tail and wings, back, the spots,
ducks, Nile of dozen some took also They red. claws and white, throat
head the of part upper and throat its flavour, high of bird wild a
spots. black with white

of Cape the north the to sighted we evening the in o'clock five About
Petraea, Arabia of extremity the forms cape This Ras-Mohammed.
Acabah. of Gulf the and Suez of Gulf the between comprised

the to leads which Jubal, of Straits the into penetrated Nautilus The
the between towering mountain, high a saw distinctly I Suez. of Gulf
of top the at Sinai that Horeb, Mount was It Ras-Mohammed. of gulfs two
face. to face God saw Moses which

immersed, sometimes floating, sometimes Nautilus, the o'clock six At
the bay, the of end the at situated Tor, from distance some passed
by made already observation an red, with tinted seemed which of waters
silence, heavy a of midst the in fell night Then Nemo. Captain
and night-birds, other and pelican the of cries the by broken sometimes
the against chafing shore, the upon breaking waves the of noise the
the of waters the beating steamer far-off some of panting the or rocks,
paddles. noisy its with Gulf

the under fathoms some remained Nautilus the o'clock nine to eight From
Suez. near very been have must we calculation my to According water.
rocks the of bottom the saw I saloon the of panel the Through
the leaving be to seemed We lamp. electric our by up lit brilliantly
more. and more us behind Straits

I surface, the to returned having vessel the nine, quarter-past a At
Nemo's Captain through pass to impatient Most platform. the mounted
fresh the breathe to came so place, one in stay not could I tunnel,
air. night

fog, the by discoloured half light, pale a saw I shadow the in Soon
us. from mile a about shining

me. near someone said lighthouse!" floating "A

Captain. the saw and turned, I

long be not will "It continued. he Suez," of light floating the is "It
tunnel." the of entrance the gain we before

easy?" be cannot entrance "The

steersman's the into go to accustomed am I reason that for sir; "No,
M. down, go will you if now, And course. our direct myself and cage
to return not will and waves, the under going is Nautilus the Aronnax,
Tunnel." Arabian the through passed have we until surface the

he down way half staircase; central the towards me led Nemo Captain
pilot's the in landed and deck, upper the traversed door, a opened
platform. the of extremity the at rose remembered be may it which cage,
occupied that like much very square, feet six measuring cabin a was It
the In Hudson. or Mississippi the of steamboats the on pilot the by
tiller-rope, the to caught and vertically, placed wheel, a worked midst
with light-ports Four Nautilus. the of back the to ran which
cabin, the of partition the in groove a in let glasses, lenticular
directions. all in see to wheel the at man the allowed

the to themselves accustomed eyes my soon but dark; was cabin This
hands his with man, strong a pilot, the perceived I and obscurity,
vividly appeared sea the Outside, wheel. the of spokes the on resting
cabin the of back the from rays its shed which lantern, the by up lit
platform. the of extremity other the to

passage." our make to try us "let Nemo, Captain said "Now,"

and room, machinery the with cage pilot's the connected wires Electric
Nautilus his to simultaneously communicate could Captain the there from
the once at and knob, metal a pressed He speed. the and direction the
diminished. screw the of speed

at by running were we wall straight high the at silence in looked I
followed We coast. sandy massive a of base immovable the moment, this
off. yards few some only hour an for thus it

two its by suspended knob, the from eye his take not did Nemo Captain
pilot the gesture, simple a At cabin. the in circles concentric
instant. every Nautilus the of course the modified

magnificent some saw and port-scuttle, the at myself placed had I
their agitating fucus, and seaweed, zoophytes, coral, of substructures
rock. the of fissures the from out stretched which claws, enormous

large A helm. the took himself Captain the ten, quarter-past a At
boldly went Nautilus The us. before opened deep, and black gallery,
the was It sides. its round heard was roaring strange A it. into
precipitated tunnel the of incline the which Sea, Red the of waters
the with went Nautilus The Mediterranean. the towards violently
machinery, the of efforts the of spite in arrow, an as rapid torrent,
with waves the beat resistance, effective more offer to order in which,
screw. reversed

brilliant but nothing see could I passage narrow the of walls the On
under speed, great the by traced fire, of furrows lines, straight rays,
fast. beat heart My light. electric brilliant the

and, helm, the quitted Nemo Captain ten, past minutes thirty-five At
said: me, to turning

Mediterranean!" "The

the by along carried Nautilus, the minutes, twenty than less In
Suez. of Isthmus the through passed had torrent,



VI CHAPTER

ARCHIPELAGO GRECIAN THE

Nautilus the day, of dawn the at February, of 12th the day, next The
to miles Three platform. the to on hastened I surface. the to rose
had torrent A seen. be to was Pelusium of outline dim the south the
and Ned o'clock seven About another. to sea one from us carried
me. joined Conseil

tone, jovial slightly a in Canadian, the said Naturalist," Sir "Well,
Mediterranean?" the "and

Ned." friend surface, its on floating are "We

night." very "this Conseil, said "What!"

impassable this passed have we minutes few a in night; very this "Yes,
isthmus."

Canadian. the replied it," believe not do "I

which coast low "this continued; I Land," Master wrong, are you "Then
such have who you And coast. Egyptian the is south the to off rounds
the into stretching Said Port of jetty the see can you Ned, eyes, good
sea."

attentively. looked Canadian The

man. first-rate a is Captain your and sir, right, are you "Certainly
of talk us let please, you if Now, Good! Mediterranean. the in are We
us." hears one no that so but affair, little own our

better it thought I case, any in and, wanted, Canadian the what saw I
down sat and went three all we so it; wished he as talk, him let to
blades. the of spray the to exposed less were we where lantern, the near

us?" tell to you have what listen; we Ned, "Now,

before and Europe; in are We simple. very is you tell to have I "What
Polar the of bottom the to more once us drag caprices Nemo's Captain
Nautilus." the leave to ask I Oceania, into us lead or Seas,

I but companions, my of liberty the shackle to way no in wished I
Nemo. Captain leave to desire no felt certainly

the nearer day each was I apparatus, his to thanks and him, to Thanks
of book my rewriting was I and studies; submarine my of completion
an such have again ever I Should element. very its in depths submarine
not! certainly No, ocean? the of wonders the observing of opportunity
Nautilus the abandoning of idea the to myself bring not could I And
accomplished. was investigation of cycle the before

Are board? on being of tired you are frankly, me answer Ned, "Friend
hands?" Nemo's Captain into us thrown has destiny that sorry you

crossing Then, answering. without moments some remained Canadian The
said: he arms, his

glad be shall I seas. the under journey this regret not do I "Frankly,
it. with done have us let made, is it that now but, it; made have to
idea." my is That

Ned." end, an to come will "It

when?" and "Where

will it suppose I rather, or, say; cannot I know--when not do I "Where
us." teach to more nothing have seas these when end

Canadian. the demanded for?" hope you do what "Then

which by now as hence months six well as occur may circumstances "That
profit." to ought and may we

you if months, six in be we shall where "and Land, Ned said "Oh!"
Naturalist?" Sir please,

goes It traveller. rapid a is Nautilus the know you China; in "Perhaps
the on express an as or air, the through swallows as water through
not may it that say can who seas; frequented fear not does It land.
be may flight which on America, or England, France, of coasts the beat
here." as advantageously as attempted

the at rotten are arguments "your Canadian, the replied Aronnax," "M.
be shall we there! be shall `We future, the in speak You foundation.
by profit must we and here, are `We present, the in speak I here!'
it.'"

that on beaten myself felt I and hard, me pressed logic Land's Ned
favour. my in tell now would argument what not knew I ground.

Nemo Captain if impossibility: an suppose us "let Ned, continued "Sir,"
it?" accept you would liberty; your you offer day this should

answered. I know," not do "I

be to never was day this you made offer "the added, he if," "And
it?" accept you would renewed,

must We me. against is reasoning Your answer. my is this Ned, "Friend
to him forbids prudence Common good-will. Nemo's Captain on rely not
the by profit us bids prudence side, other the On liberty. at us set
Nautilus." the leave to opportunity first

said." wisely is that Aronnax, M. "Well,

our and serious, be must occasion The one. observation--just one "Only
another, find never shall we fails, it if succeed; must attempt first
us." forgive never will Nemo Captain and

observation your "But Canadian. the replied true," is that "All
time, years' two in whether flight, at attempts all to equally applies
favourable a If this: still is question the But days'. two in or
seized." be must it itself, presents opportunity

favourable a by mean you what me tell you will Ned, now, And "Agreed!
opportunity?"

a Nautilus the bring will night, dark a on which, that be will "It
coast." European some from distance short

swimming?" by yourself save and try will you "And

was vessel the if and bank, the to enough near were we if "Yes,
was boat the and away, far was bank the if Not time. the at floating
water." the under

case?" that in "And

I pinnace. the of master myself make to seek should I case, that "In
drawn, once bolts the and inside, get must We worked. is it how know
who pilot, the even without water, the of surface the to come shall we
flight." our perceiving bows, the in is

hitch a that forget not do but opportunity; the for watch Ned, "Well,
us." ruin will

sir." forget, not will "I

project?" your of think I what know to like you would Ned, now, "And

Aronnax." M. "Certainly,

favourable this that think hope--I I say not do think--I I "Well,
itself." present never will opportunity

not?" "Why

given not have we that himself from hide cannot Nemo Captain "Because
guard, his on be will he and liberty, our regaining of hope all up
coasts." European of sight the in and seas the in all, above

determinedly. head his shaking Land, Ned replied see," shall "We

on word another Not here. stop us "let added, I Land," Ned now, "And
we and know, us let and come ready, are you that day The subject. the
you." upon entirely rely I you. follow will

such to led time, distant very no at which, conversation a ended Thus
my confirm to seemed facts that here say must I results. grave
distrust Nemo Captain Did despair. great Canadian's the to foresight,
from himself hide to wish only he did or seas? frequented these in us
Mediterranean? the ploughed which nations, all of vessels, numerous the
the from far and waters between oftener were we but tell; not could I
the but seen be to was nothing emerge, did Nautilus the if Or, coast.
the between for, depths, great to went it sometimes and cage; pilot's
by bottom the touch not could we Minor Asia and Archipelago Grecian
fathoms. thousand a than more

the of one Carpathos, of Island the near were we knew only I Thus
Virgil: from lines these reciting Nemo Captain by Sporades,

vates, gurgite Neptuni Carpathio "Est
Proteus," Caeruleus

planisphere. the on spot a to pointed he as

of shepherd old the Proteus, of abode ancient the indeed was It
Rhodes between situated Scarpanto, of Island the now flocks, Neptune's
panels glass the through base granite the but nothing saw I Crete. and
saloon. the of

in hours some employ to resolved I February, of 14th the day, next The
other or reason some for but Archipelago; the of fishes the studying
the of course the taking Upon sealed. hermetically remained panels the
Isle ancient the Candia, towards going were we that found I Nautilus,
of whole the Lincoln, Abraham the on embarked I time the At Crete. of
the of despotism the against insurrection in risen had island this
was I time that since fared had insurgents the how But Turks.
land all of deprived Nemo, Captain not was it and ignorant, absolutely
me. tell could who communications,

alone myself found I night that when event this to allusion no made I
and taciturn be to seemed he Besides, saloon. the in him with
to panels both ordered he custom, his to contrary Then, preoccupied.
of mass the observed other, the to one from going and, opened, be
I side, my on so, guess; not could I end what To attentively. waters
eyes. my before passing fish the studying in time my employed

his at carrying diver, a appeared, man a waters the of midst the In
it waves; the to abandoned body a not was It purse. leathern a belt
disappearing hand, strong a with swimming man, living a was
surface. the at breath take to occasionally

exclaimed: voice agitated an in and Nemo, Captain towards turned I

price!" any at saved be must He shipwrecked! man "A

panel. the against leaned and came but me, answer not did Captain The

glass, the against flattened face his with and, approached, had man The
us. at looking was

answered diver The him. to signed Nemo Captain amazement, great my To
did and water, the of surface the to immediately mounted hand, his with
again. appear not

Cape of Nicholas is "It Nemo. Captain said uncomfortable," be not "Do
bold A Cyclades. the all in known well is He Pesca. surnamed Matapan,
land, on than it in more lives he and element, his is water diver!
Crete." as far as even another, to island one from continually going

Captain?" him, know "You

Aronnax?" M. not, "Why

standing furniture of piece a towards went Nemo Captain which, Saying
saw I furniture, of piece this Near saloon. the of panel left the near
plate, copper a was which of cover the on iron, with bound chest a
device. its with Nautilus the of cypher the bearing

the opened presence, my noticing without Captain, the moment, that At
many great a held which box, strong of sort a furniture, of piece
ingots.

which metal, precious this came whence From gold. of ingots were They
gold this gather Captain the did Where sum? enormous an represented
it? with do to going he was what and from?

by one ingots the took Nemo Captain looked. I word. one say not did I
filled he which chest, the in methodically them arranged and one,
of weight lb. 4,000 than more at contents the estimated I entirely.
L200,000. nearly say, to is that gold,

on address an wrote Captain the and fastened, securely was chest The
Greece. Modern to belonged have must which characters in lid, the

communicated which of wire the knob, a pressed Nemo Captain done, This
without not and, appeared, men Four crew. the of quarters the with
them heard I Then saloon. the of out chest the pushed trouble, some
pulleys. of means by staircase iron the up it hoisting

me. to turned Nemo Captain moment, that At

he. said sir?" saying, were you "And

Captain." nothing, saying was "I

night." good you wish will I me, allow will you if sir, "Then,

saloon. the left and turned he Whereupon

vainly I believe. may one as troubled, much room my to returned I
of apparition the between link connecting the sought sleep--I to tried
certain by felt I Soon, gold. with filled chest the and diver the
the leaving was Nautilus the that tossing and pitching of movements
surface. the to returning and depths

unfastening were they knew I and platform; the upon steps heard I Then
struck it instant one For waves. the upon it launching and pinnace the
ceased. noise all then Nautilus, the of side the

renewed; was coming and going same the noise, same the after, hours Two
Nautilus the and socket, its in replaced board, on hoisted was boat the
waves. the under plunged again

point what To address. their to transported been had millions these So
correspondent? Nemo's Captain was Who continent? the of

the of events the Canadian the and Conseil to related I day next The
My degree. highest the to curiosity my excited had which night,
myself. than surprised less not were companions

Land. Ned asked to?" millions his take he does where "But

after saloon the to returned I answer. possible no was there that To
I evening the in o'clock five Till work. to set and breakfast having
to I moment--(ought that At notes. my arranging in myself employed
heat a great so felt idiosyncrasy)--I peculiar some to it attribute
were we for strange, was It coat. my off take to obliged was I that
was, it as submerged Nautilus, the then even and latitudes; low under
the at looked I temperature. of change no experience to ought
heat atmospheric which to feet, sixty of depth a showed it manometer;
attain. never could

be to as pitch a such to rose temperature the but work, my continued I
intolerable.

myself. asked I board?" on fire be there "Could

the approached he entered; Nemo Captain when saloon, the leaving was I
said: me, to turning and, it, consulted thermometer,

degrees." "Forty-two

we hotter much gets it if "and replied; I Captain," it, noticed have "I
it." bear cannot

it." wish not do we if better get not will it sir, "Oh,

then?" please, you as it reduce can "You

it." produces which stove the from farther go can I but "No;

then!" outward, is "It

water." boiling of current a in floating are we "Certainly;

exclaimed. I possible!" it "Is

"Look."

A round. all white entirely sea the saw I and opened, panels The
in water like boiled which waves, the amid curling was smoke sulphurous
heat the but glass, of panes the of one on hand my placed I copper. a
again. off it took quickly I that great so was

asked. I we?" are "Where

to wished "I Captain. the replied sir," Santorin, of Island the "Near
eruption." submarine a of spectacle curious the of sight a you give

was islands new these of formation the "that I, said thought," "I
ended."

replied sea," the of parts volcanic the in ended ever is "Nothing
subterranean by worked being always is globe the "and Nemo; Captain
to according era, our of year nineteenth the in Already, fires.
in appeared divine), (the Theia island, new a Pliny, and Cassiodorus
they Then formed. been recently have islets these where place very the
again they when 69, year the in again rise to waves, the under sank
been has work Plutonian the days our to time that Since subsided.
they which island, new a 1866, February, of 3rd the on But suspended.
vapour sulphurous the of midst the from emerged Island, George named
Seven month. same the of 6th the again settled and Kamenni, Nea near
appeared, Aphroessa of Island the February, of 13th the after, days
was I broad. yards ten canal a itself and Kamenni Nea between leaving
to therefore able was I and occurred, phenomenon the when seas these in
round of Aphroessa, of Island The phases. different the all observe
was It height. in feet 30 and diameter, in feet 300 measured form,
felspar. of fragments with mixed lava, vitreous and black of composed
showed Reka, called island, smaller a March, of 10th the on lastly, And
joined have three these then since and Kamenni, Nea near itself
island." same the and one but forming together,

asked. I moment?" this at are we which in canal the "And

the of map a me showing Nemo, Captain replied is," it "Here
islands." new the marked have I see, "You Archipelago.

heat the moving, longer no was Nautilus The glass. the to returned I
was white, been had now till which sea, The unbearable. becoming was
ship's the of spite In iron. of salts of presence the to owing red,
the filled sulphur of smell insupportable an sealed, hermetically being
extinguished entirely was electricity the of brilliancy the and saloon,
was I choking, was I bath, a in was I flames. scarlet bright by
broiled.

Captain. the to I said water," boiling this in longer no remain can "We

Nemo. Captain impassive the replied prudent," be not would "It

it furnace the left and about tacked Nautilus the given; was order An
were we after hour an of quarter A impunity. with brave not could
that, me struck then thought The surface. the on air fresh breathing
should we flight, our for sea the of part this chosen had Land Ned if
fire. of sea this of out alive come have never

between which, basin the left we February, of 16th the day, next The
and depth, in fathoms 1,500 about reckoned is Alexandria, and Rhodes
Grecian the quitted Cerigo, from distance some passing Nautilus, the
Matapan. Cape doubled having after Archipelago



VII CHAPTER

HOURS FORTY-EIGHT IN MEDITERRANEAN THE

the of sea" great "the excellence, par sea blue the Mediterranean, The
Romans, the of nostrum" "mare the Greeks, the of sea" "the Hebrews,
with embalmed sea-pines; and cacti, aloes, orange-trees, by bordered
with saturated mountains, rude by surrounded myrtle, the of perfume the
fires; underground by worked incessantly but air, transparent and pure
the dispute still Pluto and Neptune which in battlefield perfect a
world! the of empire

is man that Michelet, says waters, these on and banks, these upon is It
But, globe. the of climates powerful most the of one in renewed
basin the at glance rapid a take only could I was, it as beautiful
Captain Even yards. square of million two is area superficial whose
not did person puzzling this for me, to lost was knowledge Nemo's
course the estimated I speed. full at passage our during once appear
hundred six about at sea the of waves the under took Nautilus the which
the on Starting hours. forty-eight in accomplished was it and leagues,
had we Greece, of shores the from February of 16th the of morning
18th. the on sunrise by Gibraltar of Straits the crossed

of midst the in enclosed Mediterranean, this that me to plain was It
Captain to distasteful was avoid, to wished he which countries those
many too back brought breezes those and waves Those Nemo.
that longer no had he Here regrets. many too not if remembrances,
open the in when had he which gait of liberty that and independence
of shores close the between cramped itself felt Nautilus his and seas,
Europe. and Africa

understood well be may It hour. an miles twenty-five now was speed Our
his renounce to obliged was disgust, great his to Land, Ned that
of rate the at going pinnace, the launch not could He flight. intended
such under Nautilus the quit To second. every yards thirteen or twelve
full at going train a from jumping as bad as be would conditions
vessel our Besides, it. of least the say to thing, imprudent speed--an
of stock its renew to night at waves the of surface the to mounted only
log. the and compass the by entirely steered was it air;

by traveller a than Mediterranean this of interior the of more no saw I
eyes; his before flies which landscape the of perceives train express
which objects nearer the not and horizon, distant the say, to is that
lightning. of flash a like pass

the In Tunis. of coast the and Sicily between passing then were We
of bottom the Messina of Straits the and Bon Cape between space narrow
there which on bank, perfect a was There suddenly. almost rose sea the
the side either on whilst water, of fathoms nine than more not was
fathoms. ninety was depth

strike to not as so carefully very manoeuvre to had Nautilus The
barrier. submarine this against

by occupied spot the Mediterranean, the of map the on Conseil, showed I
reef. this

isthmus real a like is "it Conseil, observed sir," please, you if "But
Africa." to Europe joining

the and Lybia, of Straits the to bar perfect a forms it boy, my "Yes,
continents the times former in that proved have Smith of soundings
joined." were Furina Cape and Boco Cape between

Conseil. said it," believe well can "I

between exists barrier similar a "that continued, I add," will "I
entire the formed times geological in which Ceuta, and Gibraltar
Mediterranean."

barriers two these raise day one should burst volcanic some if "What
waves?" the above

Conseil." probable, not is "It

should phenomenon this if sir; please, finish, to me allow but "Well,
so taken has who Lesseps, M. for troublesome be will it place, take
isthmus." the pierce to pains much

never will phenomenon this Conseil, repeat, I but you; with agree "I
diminishing. ever is force subterranean of violence The happen.
being are world, the of days first the in plentiful so Volcanoes,
temperature the weakened, is heat internal the degrees; by extinguished
quantity perceptible a by lowered is globe the of strata lower the of
life." its is heat its for globe, our of detriment the to century every

sun?" the "But

body?" dead a to heat give it Can Conseil. sufficient, not is sun "The

of." know I that "Not

will it corpse; cold that be day one will earth this friend, my "Well,
long has which moon, the like uninhabited and uninhabitable become
heat." vital its all lost since

centuries?" many how "In

boy." my years, of thousands of hundreds some "In

journey--that our finish to time have shall "we Conseil, said "Then,"
it." with interfere not does Land Ned if is,

the which bank, the of study the to returned reassured, Conseil, And
speed. moderate a at skirting was Nautilus

the entered had we February 17th and 16th the of night the During
1,450 was which of depth greatest the basin, Mediterranean second
the down slid crew, its of action the by Nautilus, The fathoms.
sea. the of depths lowest the in itself buried and planes inclined

at were we morning, the in o'clock three about February, of 18th the On
two existed once There Gibraltar. of Straits the of entrance the
waters the conveys which recognised, since long one, upper an currents:
lower a and Mediterranean; the of basin the into ocean the of
the Indeed, exist. to shown now has reasoning which counter-current,
waves the by to added incessantly Mediterranean, the in water of volume
raise year each would it, into falling rivers by and Atlantic the of
restore to sufficient not is evaporation its for sea, this of level the
the admit necessarily must we so, not is it As equilibrium. the
the of basin the into empties which under-current, an of existence
the of waters surplus the Gibraltar of Straits the through Atlantic
which by counter-current this was it and indeed; fact A Mediterranean.
For pass. narrow the by rapidly advanced It profited. Nautilus the
of temple the of ruins beautiful the of glimpse a caught I instant one
low the with and Pliny, to according ground, the in buried Hercules,
on floating were we later minutes few a and it; supports which island
Atlantic. the



VIII CHAPTER

BAY VIGO

covers area superficial whose water of sheet vast a Atlantic! The
nine is which of length the miles, square of millions twenty-five
hundred--an seven thousand two of breadth mean a with miles, thousand
circumference, immense an embrace shores winding parallel whose ocean
the Lawrence, St. the world, the of rivers largest the by watered
the Niger, the Orinoco, the Plata, the Amazon, the Mississippi,
the from water carry which Rhine, the and Loire, the Elbe, the Senegal,
countries! savage, most the from as well as civilised, most
every of vessels by ploughed incessantly water, of field Magnificent
in terminates which and nation, every of flags the by sheltered nation,
the and Horn Cape mariners, by dreaded so points terrible two those
Tempests. of Cape

having after spur, sharp its with water the piercing was Nautilus The
a half, a and months three in leagues thousand ten nearly accomplished
we were Where earth. the of circle great the than greater distance
leaving Nautilus, The future? the for reserved was what and now, going
surface the to returned It out. far gone had Gibraltar, of Straits the
us. to restored were platform the on walks daily our and waves, the of

distance a At Conseil. and Land Ned by accompanied once, at mounted I
forming seen, be to dimly was Vincent St. Cape miles, twelve about of
southerly strong A peninsula. Spanish the of point south-western the
the made it billowy; and swollen was sea The blowing. was gale
foot one's keep to impossible almost was It violently. rock Nautilus
every over beat sea the of rolls heavy the which platform, the on
air. fresh of mouthfuls some inhaling after descended we So instant.

a with Canadian, the but cabin; his to Conseil room, my to returned I
the across passage rapid Our me. followed air, preoccupied
execution, into project his put to him allowed not had Mediterranean
my of door the When disappointment. his showing help not could he and
silently. me at looked and down sat he shut, was room

reproach cannot you but you; understand "I I, said Ned," "Friend
the under Nautilus the leave to attempted have To yourself.
folly." been have would circumstances

showed brow frowning and lips compressed his answer; not did Land Ned
mind. his of taken had idea fixed this possession violent the him with

up going are We yet. despair not need "we continued; I see," us "Let
where off, far not are England and France again; Portugal of coast the
Straits the leaving on Nautilus, the if Now refuge. find easily can we
towards us carried had it if south, the to gone had Gibraltar, of
uneasiness. your share should I continents, no were there where regions
and seas, civilised from fly not does Nemo Captain that now know we But
security." with act can you think I days some in

parted, lips fixed his length at fixedly; me at looked still Land Ned
to-night." for is "It said, he and

this for prepared little admit, I was, I suddenly. up myself drew I
not would words but Canadian, the answer to wanted I communication.
come.

the "and Land, Ned continued opportunity," an for wait to agreed "We
from miles few a but be shall we night This arrived. has opportunity
your have I freely. blows wind The cloudy. is It coast. Spanish the
you." upon rely I and Aronnax, M. word,

me. approached Canadian the silent, was I As

that At Conseil. warned have "I he. said o'clock," nine at "To-night,
bed. in probably room, his in up shut be will Nemo Captain moment
I and Conseil us. see can crew ship's the nor engineers the Neither
in remain will Aronnax, M. you, and staircase, central the gain will
mast, the oars, The signal. my waiting us, from steps two library, the
some getting in succeeded even have I canoe. the in are sail the and
bolts the unfasten to wrench, English an procured have I provisions.
till ready, is all So Nautilus. the of shell the to it attach which
to-night."

bad." is sea "The

Liberty that. risk must we "but Canadian; the replied allow," I "That
with miles few a and strong, is boat the besides, for; paying worth is
to-morrow by but knows Who thing. great no is us carry to wind fair a
us, favour only circumstances Let away? leagues hundred a be may we
terra of spot some on landed have shall we o'clock eleven or ten by and
to-night." till now adieu But dead. or alive firma,

had I dumb. almost me leaving withdrew, Canadian the words these With
and reflect to time have should I gone, chance the that, imagined
and, time; no me given had companion obstinate My matter. the discuss
perfectly was Land Ned him? to said have I could what all, after
retract I Could by. profit to opportunity the almost was There right.
the compromising of responsibility the myself upon take and word, my
from far us take might Nemo Captain To-morrow companions? my of future
land. all

reservoirs the that me told noise hissing loud rather a moment that At
the of waves the under sinking was Nautilus the that and filling, were
Atlantic.

of liberty my regaining of desire the between passed, I day sad A
my leaving and Nautilus, wonderful the abandoning of and action
incomplete. studies submarine

and myself seeing Sometimes thus! passed I hours dreadful What
reason, my of spite in wishing, sometimes landed, safely companions
Ned of realisation the prevent would circumstance, unforeseen some that
project. Land's

wished I compass. the consult to wished I saloon. the to went I Twice
nearer us bringing was taking was Nautilus the direction the if see to
in kept Nautilus the no; But coast. the from farther us taking or
waters. Portuguese

was luggage My flight. for prepare and part my take therefore must I
more. nothing notes, my heavy; not

escape; our of think would he what myself asked I Nemo, Captain to As
in do might he what and him cause might it wrong what trouble, what
complain to cause no had I Certainly failure. or discovery its of case
In his. than freer hospitality was never contrary, the on him; of
to us bound oath No ingratitude. with taxed be not could I him leaving
upon not and relied, he circumstances of strength the on was It him.
ever. for us fix to word, our

Santorin. of Island the to visit our since Captain the seen not had I
wished I departure? our before presence his to me bring chance Would
him hear could I if listened I time. same the at it feared I and it,
felt I ear. my reached sound No mine. to contiguous room the walking
Hours eternal. seemed waiting of day This uneasiness. unbearable an
impatience. my with pace keep to slowly too struck

too was I little; but ate I usual. as room my in served was dinner My
twenty and hundred A o'clock. seven at table the left I preoccupied.
I which in moment the from me separated still them) counted (I minutes
beat pulse My redoubled. agitation My Land. Ned join to was
calm to hoping came, and went I quiet. remain not could I violently.
our in failure of idea The movement. constant by spirit troubled my
thought the but anxieties; my of painful least the was enterprise bold
being of Nautilus, the leaving before discovered project our seeing of
saddened, worse) was (what or irritated, Nemo, Captain before brought
beat. heart my made desertion, my at

stairs the descended I time. last the for saloon the see to wanted I
and useful many so passed had I where museum, the in arrived and
a like treasures, its all riches, its all at looked I hours. agreeable
return. to never leaving was who exile, eternal an of eve the on man

for which amongst art, of masterpieces these Nature, of wonders These
them abandon to going was I concentrated, been had life my days many so
windows the through look last a taken have to like should I ever! for
were panels the but Atlantic: the of waters the into saloon the of
ocean that from me separated steel of cloak a and closed, hermetically
explored. yet not had I which

angle the into let door the near came I saloon, the through passing In
door this surprise, great my To room. Captain's the into opened which
his in be should Nemo Captain If involuntarily. back drew I ajar. was
room The nearer. drew I sound, no hearing But, me. see could he room,
forward. steps some took and door the open pushed I deserted. was
aspect. of severity monklike same the Still

the on hammer the of beat first The eight. struck clock the Suddenly
had eye invisible an if as trembled I dreams. my from me awoke bell
room. the from hurried I and thoughts, secret most my into plunged

The north. still was course Our compass. the upon fell eye my There
feet. sixty about of depth a manometer the speed, moderate indicated log

otterskin an boots, warmly--sea myself clothed room, my to returned I
was I ready, was I sealskin; with lined byssus, of coat great a cap,
which silence deep the broke alone screw the of vibration The waiting.
voice loud no Would attentively. listened I board. on reigned
projected his in surprised been had Land Ned that me inform suddenly
my regain to tried vainly I and me, over hung dread mortal A flight.
coolness. accustomed

No door. Captain's the to ear my put I nine, to minutes few a At
in half was which saloon, the to returned and room my left I noise.
deserted. but obscurity,

same The library. the with communicating door the opened I
door the near myself placed I solitude. same the light, insufficient
Land's Ned for waited there and staircase, central the to leading
signal.

it then diminished, sensibly screw the of trembling the moment that At
beatings the by disturbed only now was silence The entirely. stopped
the that knew I and felt; was shock slight a Suddenly heart. own my of
uneasiness My ocean. the of bottom the at stopped had Nautilus
to inclined felt I come. not did signal Canadian's The increased.
we that felt I attempt. his off put to him of beg and Land Ned join
conditions. usual our under sailing not were

Nemo Captain and opened, saloon large the of door the moment this At
amiable an in began preamble further without and me, saw He appeared.
voice: of tone

of history the know you Do you. for looking been have I sir! "Ah,
Spain?"

in but heart; by country own one's of history the know might one Now,
quite head and mind troubled with time, the at was I condition the
it. of word a said have not could I lost,

know you Do question! my heard "you Nemo, Captain continued "Well,"
Spain?" of history the

answered. I slightly," "Very

"Come, Captain. the said learn," to having men learned are here "Well,
Sir, history. this in episode curious a you tell will I and down, sit
for side, one on you interest will history "this he; said well," listen
to able been not have you doubtless which question a answer will it
solve."

was interlocutor my what knowing not I, said Captain," listen, "I
our on bearing was incident this if myself asking and at, driving
flight. projected

be cannot You 1702. to back go will we objection, no have you if "Sir,
a of gesture the that thinking XIV, Louis king, your that ignorant
had yoke, his under Pyrenees the bring to sufficient was potentate
prince This Spaniards. the on grandson, his Anjou, of Duke the imposed
strong a had and V, Philip of name the under badly less or more reigned
houses royal the year, preceding the Indeed, abroad. him against party
at alliance of treaty a concluded had England and Austria, Holland, of
the from Spain of crown the plucking of intention the with Hague, the
they whom to archduke an of that on it placing and V, Philip of head
III. Charles of title the gave prematurely

entirely almost was she but coalition; this resist must "Spain
not would money However, sailors. or soldiers either with unprovided
silver and gold with laden galleons, their that provided them, fail
they 1702 of end the about And ports. their entered once America, from
of fleet a with escorting was France which convoy rich a expected
the for Chateau-Renaud, Admiral by commanded vessels, twenty-three
convoy This Atlantic. the beating already were coalition the of ships
was fleet English an that hearing Admiral, the but Cadiz, to go to was
port. French a for make to resolved waters, those in cruising

They decision. this to objected convoy the of commanders Spanish "The
Vigo into Cadiz, to not if and, port, Spanish a to taken be to wanted
not was which and Spain, of coast northwest the on situated Bay,
blocked.

and injunction, this obey to rashness the had Chateau-Renaud "Admiral
Bay. Vigo entered galleons the

in defended be not could which road open an formed it "Unfortunately,
the before galleons the unload to hasten therefore must They way. any
had them failed have not would time and fleet; combined the of arrival
arisen. suddenly rivalry of question miserable a not

Nemo. Captain asked events?" of chain the following are "You

historical this by proposed end the knowing not I, said "Perfectly,"
lesson.

a had Cadiz of merchants The passed. what is This continue. will "I
merchandise all receiving of right the had they which by privilege
the at ingots these disembark to Now, Indies. West the from coming
at complained They rights. their of them depriving was Vigo of port
the that Philip weak-minded the of consent the obtained and Madrid,
the in sequestered remain should cargo, its discharging without convoy,
disappeared. had enemy the until Vigo of roads

the 1702, October, of 22nd the on decision, this to coming whilst "But
in Chateau-Renaud, Admiral when Bay, Vigo in arrived vessels English
the that seeing But, bravely. fought forces, inferior of spite
every scuttled and burnt he hands, enemy's the into fall must treasure
riches." immense their with bottom the to went which galleon,

history this why yet see not could I admit I stopped. Nemo Captain
me. interest should

asked. I "Well?"

and Bay; Vigo that in are "we Nemo, Captain replied Aronnax," M. "Well,
mysteries." its penetrate will you whether yourself with rests it

recover. to time had had I him. follow to me telling rose, Captain The
the glass transparent the through but dark, was saloon The obeyed. I
looked. I sparkling. were waves

in bathed seemed waters the Nautilus, the around mile a half For
the of Some bright. and clean was bottom sandy The light. electric
half-rotten away clearing were diving-dresses their in crew ship's
From wrecks. blackened the of midst the from cases empty and barrels
silver, and gold of ingots escaped barrels these from and cases these
them. with up heaped was sand The jewels. and piastres of cascades
Nautilus, the to returned men the booty, precious their with Laden
fishery inexhaustible this to back went and burden, their of disposed
silver. and gold of

of 22nd the of battle the of scene the was This now. understood I
the for laden galleons the spot very this on Here 1702. October,
his to according came, Nemo Captain Here sunk. had Government Spanish
Nautilus. the burdened he which with millions those up pack to wants,
metals. precious her up given had America alone him and him for was It
torn treasures those in share, to anyone without direct, heir was He
Cortez. Ferdinand of conquered the from and Incas the from

such contained sea the "that smiling, asked, he sir," know, you "Did
riches?"

in suspension in held money value they "that answered, I knew," "I
millions." two at waters these

than greater be would expense the money this extract to but "Doubtless;
has man what up pick to but have I contrary, the on Here, profit. the
where ports other thousand a in but Bay, Vigo in only not lost--and
map. submarine my on marked are which and happened, have shipwrecks
worth?" am I millions the of source the now understand you Can

exploring in that you tell to me allow But Captain. understand, "I
society." rival a with beforehand been only have you Bay Vigo

which?" "And

privilege the Government Spanish the from received has which society "A
the by on led are shareholders The galleons. buried those seeking of
shipwrecks rich these value they for bounty, enormous an of allurement
millions." hundred five at

are they "but Nemo, Captain answered were," they millions hundred "Five
longer." no so

act an be would shareholders those to warning a "and I; said so," "Just
gamblers What received? well be would it if knows who But charity. of
their of than money their of loss the less is all above regret usually
of thousands the than less them pity I all, After hopes. foolish
been have would well-distributed riches much so whom to unfortunates
barren." ever for be will they them for whilst profitable,

have must it that felt I than regret this expressed sooner no had I
Nemo. Captain wounded

that sir, then, think you "Do animation. with exclaimed, he "Barren!"
alone, myself for it Is them? gather I because lost are riches these
these collect to trouble the take I that idea, your to according
you Do it? of use good a make not did I that you told Who treasures?
races oppressed and beings suffering are there that ignorant am I think
Do avenge? to victims console, to creatures miserable earth, this on
understand?" not you

he that perhaps regretting words, last these at stopped Nemo Captain
which motive the whatever that, guessed had I But much. so spoken had
him left had it sea, the under independence seek to him forced had
humanity, of sufferings the for beat still heart his that man, a still
as well as races oppressed for was charity immense his that and
were millions those whom for understood then I And individuals.
was Nautilus the when Nemo Captain by forwarded were which destined
Crete. of waters the in cruising



IX CHAPTER

CONTINENT VANISHED A

my enter Canadian the saw I February, of 19th the morning, next The
disappointed. very looked He visit. this expected I room.

he. said sir?" "Well,

yesterday." us against was fortune Ned, "Well,

intended we hour the at exactly stop needs must Captain that "Yes;
vessel." his leaving

bankers." his at business had he Ned, "Yes,

bankers!" "His

his where ocean, the mean I that by banking-house; his rather "Or
State." the of chests the in than safer are riches

night, preceding the of incidents the Canadian the to related then I
but Captain; the abandoning not of idea the to back him bring to hoping
regret expressed energetically an than result other no had recital my
of battlefield the on walk a take to able been not had he that Ned from
account. own his on Vigo

the of blow a only is It ended. not is "all he, said "However,"
if to-night, and succeed; must we time Another lost. harpoon
necessary----"

asked. I going?" Nautilus the is direction what "In

Ned. replied know," not do "I

point." the see shall we noon at "Well,

went I dressed, was I as soon As Conseil. to returned Canadian The
the of course The reassuring. not was compass The saloon. the into
Europe. on backs our turning were We S.S.W. was Nautilus

the on pricked was place ship's the till impatience some with waited I
our and emptied, were reservoirs the eleven half-past about At chart.
the towards rushed I ocean. the of surface the to rose vessel
Nothing sight. in land more No me. preceded had Land Ned platform.
going those doubtless horizon, the on sails Some sea. immense an but
of Cape the doubling for winds favourable of search in Roque San to
Ned preparing. was wind of gale A cloudy. was weather The Hope. Good
that hoped still He horizon. cloudy the pierce to tried and raved,
for. longed so he land the stretched fog that all behind

by profited second The instant. an for itself showed sun the noon At
more becoming sea the Then, height. its take to brightness this
closed. panel the and descended, we billowy,

the of position the saw I chart, the consulting upon after, hour An
150 at lat., 22' 33 and long., 17' 16 at marked was Nautilus
I and flight, of means no was There coast. nearest the from leagues
of him informed I when Canadian the of rage the imagine to you leave
situation. our

load the of lightened felt I sorry. particularly not was I myself, For
of degree some with return to able was and me, oppressed had which
work. accustomed my to calmness

visit unexpected most a received I o'clock, eleven about night, That
from fatigued felt I if graciously very me asked He Nemo. Captain from
negative. the in answered I night. preceding the of watch my

excursion." curious a propose I Aronnax, M. "Then,

Captain?" "Propose,

under daylight, by depths submarine the visited only hitherto have "You
the in them see to you suit it Would sun. the of brightness the
night?" the of darkness

willingly." "Most

and walk, to far have shall We tiring. be will way the you, warn "I
kept." well not are roads The mountain. a climb must

to ready am I curiosity; my heightens only Captain, say, you "What
you." follow

diving-dresses." our on put will we sir, then, "Come

any nor companions my of neither that saw I robing-room, the at Arrived
Nemo Captain excursion. this on us follow to were crew ship's the of
Conseil. or Ned either me with taking my proposed even not had

our on placed they diving-dresses; our on put had we moments few a In
lamps electric no but air, with filled abundantly reservoirs, the backs
fact. the to attention Captain's the called I prepared. were

replied. he useless," be will "They

my repeat not could I but aright, heard not had I thought I
its in disappeared already had head Captain's the for observation,
an put them felt I myself. harnessing finished I case. metal
going after later, minutes some and hand, my into stick iron-pointed
a at Atlantic the of bottom the on foot set we form, usual the through
profoundly were waters The near. was Midnight fathoms. 150 of depth
a spot, reddish a distance the in out pointed Nemo Captain but dark,
the from miles two about brilliantly shining light large of sort
it how and why it, feed could what be, might fire this What Nautilus.
our light did it case, any In say. not could I mass, liquid the up lit
peculiar the to myself accustomed soon I but true, is it vaguely, way,
uselessness the circumstances, such under understood, I and darkness,
apparatus. Ruhmkorff the of

noise The head. my above pattering of kind a heard I advanced, we As
understood soon I shower, continual a producing sometimes redoubling,
of surface the crisping and violently, falling rain was It cause. the
I that mind my across flashed thought the Instinctively waves. the
I water! the of midst the in water! the By through! wet be should
thick the in indeed, But, idea. odd the at laughing help not could
seems only one and felt, longer no is element liquid the diving-dress,
atmosphere. terrestrial the than denser somewhat atmosphere an in be to
more. Nothing

microscopic Medusae, stony. became soil the walk hour's an half After
phosphorescent their with slightly it lit pennatules and crustacea,
of millions with covered stone of pieces of glimpse a caught I gleam.
this upon slipped often feet My weed. sea of masses and zoophytes
should I stick iron-tipped my without and weed, sea of carpet sticky
the see still could I round, turning In once. than more fallen have
distance. the in pale to beginning Nautilus the of lantern whitish

horizon. the up lit and increased us guided which light rosy the But
degree. highest the in me puzzled water under fire this of presence The
_savants_ the to unknown yet as phenomenon natural a towards going I Was
hand the had brain) my crossed thought this (for even Or earth? the of
flame? this fanned he Had conflagration? this with do to aught man of
Nemo Captain of friends and companions depths these in meet to I Was
strange this led him, like who, and visit, to going was he whom
who, exiles of colony whole a there down find I Should existence?
independence found and sought had earth, this of miseries the of weary
pursued ideas unreasonable and foolish these All ocean? deep the in
of succession the by over-excited mind, of condition this in And me.
been have not should I eyes, my before passing continually wonders
towns submarine those of one sea the of bottom the at meet to surprised
dreamed. Nemo Captain which of

from rays in came glimmer white The lighter. and lighter grew road Our
was saw I what But high. feet 800 about mountain a of summit the
The waters. the of clearness the by developed reflection, a simply
of side opposite the on fire a was light inexplicable this of source
mountain. the

Atlantic, the of bottom the furrowing maze stony this of midst the In
road. dreary this knew He hesitation. without advanced Nemo Captain
himself. lose not could and it, over travelled often had he Doubtless
genie a like me to seemed He confidence. unshaken with him followed I
his admiring help not could I me, before walked he as and, sea; the of
horizon. luminous the on black in outlined was which stature,

the of slopes first the at arrived we when morning the in one was It
the through venture must we them to access gain to but mountain;
copse. vast a of paths difficult

trees sap, without leaves, without trees, dead of copse a Yes;
by overtopped there and here and water the of action the by petrified
the by holding standing, still coal-pit a like was It pines. gigantic
paper black fine like branches, whose and soil, broken the to roots
yourself to Picture ceiling. watery the on distinctly showed cuttings,
a but mountain, the of sides the to on hanging Hartz the in forest a
fucus, and seaweed with encumbered were paths The up. swallowed forest
along, went I crustacea. of world whole a grovelled which between
sea the breaking trunks, extended over striding rocks, the climbing
the frightening and other; the to tree one from hung which bind-weed
no felt I onward, Pressing branch. to branch from flew which fishes,
spectacle! a What tired. never was who guide, my followed I fatigue.
in rocks and woods those of aspect the paint how it? express I can How
with coloured upper the wild, and dark parts under medium--their this
waters the of powers reflecting the which light that by tints, red
gigantic with after directly fell which rocks climbed We doubled?
ran left and right To avalanche. an of growling low the and bounds
glades vast opened Here lost. was sight where galleries, dark long,
asked sometimes I and worked; have to seemed man of hand the which
suddenly not would regions submarine these of inhabitant some if myself
me. to appear

I behind. stay not could I mounting. still was Nemo Captain But
have would step false A help. good me gave stick My boldly. followed
the of sides the to down sloping passes narrow the on dangerous been
Now giddiness. any feeling without step, firm with walked I but gulfs;
had hesitate me made have would which of depth the crevice, a jumped I
unsteady the on ventured I now land; the on glaciers the among been it
without other, the to abyss one from across thrown tree a of trunk
of sites wild the admire to eyes only having feet, my under looking
region. this

seemed bases, regularly-cut their on leaning rocks, monumental There,
trees knees stony their between From equilibrium. of laws all defy to
upheld which others upheld and pressure, heavy under jet a like sprang,
a like perpendicularly, cut scarps, large towers, Natural them.
could gravitation of laws the which angle an at inclined "curtain,"
regions. terrestrial in tolerated have never

trees, of line the crossed had we Nautilus the quitting after hours Two
which mountain, the of top the rose heads our above feet hundred a and
Some slope. opposite the of irradiation brilliant the on shadow a cast
under up got Fishes there. and here fantastically ran shrubs petrified
rent were rocks massive The grass. long the in birds like feet our
at holes, unfathomable and grottos, deep fractures, impenetrable with
My moving. heard be might creatures formidable which of bottom the
some or road, my blocking antennae enormous saw I when curdled blood
cavity. some of shadow the in noise a with closing claw frightful
darkness. the of midst the in brightly shone spots luminous of Millions
giant holes; their in crouched crustacea giant of eyes the were They
claws their moving and halberdiers, like up themselves setting lobsters
gun a like pointed crabs, titanic pincers; of sound clicking the with
their interweaving poulps, frightful-looking and carriage; its on
serpents. of nest living a like tentacles

awaited surprises other where platform, first the on arrived now had We
of hand the betrayed which ruins, picturesque some lay us Before me.
stone, of heaps vast were There Creator. the of that not and man
castles of forms shadowy and vague the traced be might which amongst
over and zoophytes, blossoming of world a with clothed temples, and
vegetable thick a threw fucus and sea-weed ivy, of instead which,
been had which globe the of portion this was what But mantle.
like stones and rocks those placed had Who cataclysms? by swallowed
Captain had Whither I? was Where times? prehistoric of cromlechs
me? hurried fancy Nemo's

seized him--I stopped I to, able being not him; asked have fain would I
of point highest the to pointing and head, his shaking But, arm. his
say: to seemed he mountain, the

higher!" come along; come "Come,

a for which top, the to climbed had I minutes few a in and followed, I
rock. of mass whole the commanded yards ten of circle

rise not did mountain The climbed. just had we side the down looked I
but plain; the of level the above feet hundred eight or seven than more
of depths the height that twice from commanded it side opposite the on
lit space large a over far ranged eyes My Atlantic. the of part this
volcano. a was mountain the fact, In fulguration. violent a by

and stones of rain a of midst the in peak, the above feet fifty At
fell which lava of torrents forth vomiting was crater large a scoriae,
situated, Thus mass. liquid the of bosom the into fire of cascade a in
the to even torch, immense an like plain lower the lit volcano this
threw crater submarine the that said I horizon. the of limits extreme
feed to air the of oxygen the require Flames flames. no but lava, up
having lava, of streams but water; under developed be cannot and upon
white a attain can incandescence, their of principles the themselves in
to it turn and element, liquid the against vigorously fight heat,
contact. by vapour

of torrents and diffusion in gases these all bearing currents Rapid
on Vesuvius of eruption an like mountain the of bottom the to slid lava
Greco. del Terra another

roofs town--its a lay destroyed, ruined, eyes, my under indeed There
columns its dislocated, arches its fallen, temples its sky, the to open
massive the recognise still would one which from ground, the on lying
a of remains some on, Further architecture. Tuscan of character
the with Acropolis, an of base high the here aqueduct; gigantic
an if as quay, a of traces there Parthenon; a of outline floating
and ocean, the of borders the on abutted formerly had port ancient
on Farther war-galleys. its and vessels merchant its with disappeared
streets--a deserted broad, and walls sunken of lines long again,
that sight the was Such waters. the beneath escaped Pompeii perfect
eyes! my before brought Nemo Captain

speak, to tried I cost. any at know must I I? was Where I? was Where
of piece a up picking and, gesture, a by me stopped Nemo Captain but
one the traced and basalt, black of rock a to advanced chalk-stone,
word:


ATLANTIS


Plato, of Atlantis the Atlantis! mind! my through shot light a What
its placed who Humbolt, and Origen by denied continent that
before now there it had I tales. legendary the amongst disappearance
its of testimony unexceptionable the it upon bearing eyes, my
and Asia, Europe, beyond was engulfed thus region The catastrophe.
the people, powerful those where Hercules, of columns the beyond Lybia,
were Greeks ancient of wars first the whom against lived, Atlantides,
waged.

the foot under treading was I destiny, strangest the by led Thus,
a ruins those hand my with touching continent, this of mountains
epochs. geological the with contemporary and old generations thousand
first the of contemporaries the where spot very the on walking was I
walked. had man

grand this of detail every mind my in fix to trying was I Whilst
mute in petrified if as motionless, remained Nemo Captain landscape,
those of dreaming he Was stone. mossy a on leaning ecstasy,
of secret the them asking he Was disappeared? since long generations
in himself steep to came man strange this here it Was destiny? human
who life--he ancient this again live and recollections, historical
his know to given have not I would What one? modern no wanted
hour an for remained We them! understand to them, share to thoughts,
of brightness the under plains vast the contemplating place, this at
tremblings Rapid intense. wonderfully times some was which lava, the
noise, deep bubblings, internal by caused mountain the along ran
with echoed were medium liquid the through transmitted distinctly
mass the through appeared moon the moment this At grandeur. majestic
but was It continent. buried the on rays pale her threw and waters of
one cast rose, Captain The effect! indescribable an what but gleam, a
him. follow me bade then and plain, immense the on look last

passed, once forest mineral the and, rapidly, mountain the descended We
Captain The star. a like shining Nautilus the of lantern the saw I
light of rays first the as board on got we and it, to straight walked
ocean. the of surface the whitened



X CHAPTER

COAL-MINES SUBMARINE THE

of fatigues the late: very awoke I February, of 20th the day, next The
I o'clock. eleven until sleep my prolonged had night previous the
was Nautilus the course the find to hastened and quickly, dressed
a with south, the toward still be to it showed instruments The taking.
fathoms. fifty of depth a and hour an miles twenty of speed

already those from much differ not did here fishes of species The
endowed and long, yards five size, giant of rays were There noticed.
the above shoot to them enabled which strength, muscular great with
long, feet fifteen one others, amongst kinds; many of sharks waves;
almost it rendered transparency whose and teeth, sharp triangular with
water. the in invisible

at armed long, yards three about some noticed Conseil fish bony Amongst
creatures, bright-coloured other sword; piercing a with jaw upper the
are which sea-dragon, the of name the by Aristotle of time the in known
back. their on spikes the of account on capture to dangerous

mixed mud thick a of composed generally soil, the o'clock, four About
and stony, more became it and degrees, by changed wood, petrified with
sprinkling a with basalt, of pieces and conglomerate with strewn seemed
long the succeeding was region mountainous a that thought I lava. of
saw I Nautilus, the of evolutions few a after accordingly, and plains;
all close to seemed which wall high a by blocked horizon southerly the
be must It ocean. the of level the passed evidently summit Its exit.
Cape the of or Canaries, the of island--one an least at or continent, a
I designedly, perhaps taken, yet being not bearings The Islands. Verde
to seemed wall a such case, any In position. exact our of ignorant was
reality in had we which of Atlantis, that of limits the mark to me
part. smallest the only over passed

beauties the admiring window the at remained have I should longer Much
Nautilus the moment this At closed. panels the but sky, and sea of
would it What wall. perpendicular high, this of side the at arrived
I moved. longer no it room; my to returned I guess. not could I do,
hours' few a after waking of intention full the with down myself laid
saloon. the entered I when day next the o'clock eight was it but sleep;
floating was Nautilus the that me told It manometer. the at looked I
platform. the on steps heard I Besides, ocean. the of surface the on
I as daylight, broad of instead but, open; was It panel. the to went I
I Was we? were Where darkness. profound by surrounded was I expected,
night and shining was star a not No; night? still it Was mistaken?
darkness. utter that not has

said: me near voice a when think, to what not knew I

Professor?" you, that "Is

we?" are "where answered, I Captain," "Ah!

sir." "Underground,

still?" floating Nautilus the "And exclaimed. I "Underground!"

floats." always "It

understand." not do I "But

light like you if and, lit, be will lantern our minutes, few a "Wait
satisfied." be will you places,

that complete so was darkness The waited. and platform the on stood I
exactly zenith, the to looking but, Nemo; Captain see even not could I
twilight of kind a gleam, undecided an catch to seemed I head, my above
its and lit, was lantern the instant this At hole. circular a filling
an for eyes dazzled my closed I light. faint the dispelled vividness
floating stationary, was Nautilus The again. looked then and instant,
then, lake, The quay. of sort a formed which mountain a near
two measuring walls, of circle a by imprisoned lake a was it supporting
manometer (the level Its circumference. in six and diameter in miles
must there for level, outside the as same the be only could showed)
high The sea. the and lake the between communication a be necessarily
roof vaulted a into grew base, their on forward leaning partitions,
height the down, upside turned funnel immense an of shape the bearing
circular a was summit the At yards. hundred six or five about being
evidently light, of gleam slight the caught had I which by orifice,
daylight.

asked. I we?" are "Where

has which of interior the volcano, extinct an of heart very the "In
earth. the of convulsion great some after sea, the by invaded been
this to penetrated Nautilus the Professor, sleeping, were you Whilst
the beneath yards ten about opens which canal, natural a by lagoon
sure, a refuge, of harbour its is This ocean. the of surface
if me, Show gales. all from sheltered one, mysterious and commodious,
road a islands, or continents your of any of coasts the on can, you
storms." all from refuge perfect such give can which

Who Nemo. Captain here, safety in are "you replied, I "Certainly,"
an see not I did But volcano? a of heart the in you reach could
summit?" its at opening

and flames, and vapour, lava, with filled formerly crater, its "Yes;
breathe." we air life-giving the to entrance gives now which

mountain?" volcanic this is what "But

is sea this which with islands numerous the of one to belongs "It
Chance cavern. immense an us sandbank--to simple a vessels strewn--to
well." me served chance and it, discover to me led

port." no wants Nautilus The Captain? refuge, this is use what of "But

wherewithal the and move, it make to electricity wants it but sir; "No,
which from coal elements, the feed to electricity--sodium the make to
on exactly And coal. the supply to coal-mine a and sodium, the get to
geological the during embedded forests entire covers sea the spot this
an are they me for coal; into transformed and mineralised now periods,
mine." inexhaustible

Captain?" then, here, miners of trade the follow men "Your

of mines the like waves the under extend mines These so. "Exactly
hand, in shovel and axe pick diving-dresses, their in Here, Newcastle.
the of mines the from ask even not do I which coal, the extract men my
the sodium, of manufacture the for combustible this burn I When earth.
the it gives mountain, the of crater the from escaping smoke,
volcano." still-active a of appearance

work?" at companions your see shall we "And

our continue to hurry a in am I for least; at time this not "No;
drawing with myself content shall I So earth. the of tour submarine
is loading for time The possess. already I sodium of reserve the from
over go to wish you if So, voyage. our continue we and only, day one
of advantage take must you lagoon, the of round the make and cavern the
Aronnax." M. to-day,

not had who companions, my for look to went and Captain the thanked I
where saying without me follow to them invited I cabin. their left yet
at astonished was who Conseil, platform. the mounted They were. we
wake should he that natural quite as it upon look to seemed nothing,
Ned But waves. the under asleep fallen having after mountain, a under
exit. any had cavern the whether finding but nothing of thought Land
mountain. the to on down went we o'clock, ten about breakfast, After

Conseil. said land," on more once are, we "Here

not are we besides, "And Canadian. the said land," this call not do "I
it." beneath but it, on

a lay lake the of waters the and mountains the of walls the Between
feet. hundred five measured breadth, greatest its at which, shore sandy
base the But lake. the of tour the make easily might one soil this On
and locks volcanic with ground, stony was partitions high the of
detached these All heaps. picturesque in lying pumice-stones enormous
the of action the by polished enamel, with covered masses,
electric our of light the by resplendent shone fires, subterraneous
flew feet, our under rising shore, the from dust mica The lantern.
soon we and sensibly, rose now bottom The sparks. of cloud a like
us took which planes, inclined or slopes, circuitous long at arrived
these among carefully walk to obliged were we but degrees; by higher
glassy the on slipping feet the cement, no by bound conglomerates,
quartz. and felspar, crystal,

all on confirmed was excavation enormous this of nature volcanic The
companions. my to out it pointed I and sides,

when been have must crater this "what I, said yourselves," to "Picture
liquid incandescent the of level the when and lava, boiling with filled
a of top the on melted though as mountain, the of orifice the to rose
plate." hot

tell you will sir, "But, Conseil. said perfectly," it picture can "I
that is it how and operations, suspended has Architect Great the why me
lake?" the of waters quiet the by replaced is furnace the

ocean the beneath convulsion some because Conseil, probably, "Most
the for passage a as served has which opening very that produced
of interior the into rushed Atlantic the of waters the Then Nautilus.
two the between struggle terrible a been have must There mountain. the
many But Neptune. of victory the in ended which struggle a elements,
a now is volcano submerged the and then, since out run have ages
grotto." peaceable

in but, sir; explanation, the accept "I Land; Ned replied well," "Very
not was speak you which of opening the that regret I interests, own our
sea." the of level the above made

the under been not had passage the "if Conseil, said Ned," friend "But,
it." through gone have not could Nautilus the sea,

perpendicular more and more became steps The ascending. continued We
them cut cross, to obliged were we which excavations, Deep narrow. and
our upon slid We turned. be to had masses sloping there; and here
Canadian's the and dexterity Conseil's But along. crawled and knees
the feet 31 about of height a At obstacles. all surmounted strength
the To practicable. more becoming without changed ground the of nature
in dispread first the basalt, black succeeded trachyte and conglomerate
like placed prisms, regular forming latter the bubbles, of full layers
admirable an vault, immense the of spring the supporting colonnade a
wound basalt of blocks the Between architecture. natural of specimen
bituminous with encrusted cold, grown since long lava, of streams long
A sulphur. of carpets large spread were there places some in and rays;
vague a shedding crater, upper the through shone light powerful more
of bosom the in buried ever for depressions volcanic these over glimmer
a at stopped soon was march upward our But mountain. extinguished this
obstacles. impassable by feet fifty and hundred two about of height
was ascent our and us, overhanging arch vaulted complete a was There
to began life vegetable change last the At walk. circular a to changed
from grew trees, some even and shrubs, Some mineral. the with struggle
the with euphorbias, some recognised I walls. the of fractures the
of incapable quite heliotropes, them; from coming sugar caustic
both flowers, of clusters their drooped sadly name, their justifying
chrysanthemums some there and Here gone. half perfume and colour their
leaves. sickly-looking long, with aloe an of foot the at timidly grew
still violets little some saw I lava, of streams the between But
Perfume delight. with them smelt I that admit I and perfumed, slightly
soul. no have sea-flowers and flower, the of soul the is

had which dragon-trees, sturdy some of foot the at arrived had We
exclaimed: Land Ned when roots, strong their with rocks the aside pushed

hive!" a hive! a sir, "Ah!

incredulity. of gesture a with replied, I hive!" "A

it." round humming bees "and Canadian, the repeated hive," a "Yes,

hole a at There eyes. own my believe to bound was and approached, I
ingenious these of thousands some were dragon-trees the of one in bored
much so is produce whose and Canaries, the all in common so insects,
honey, the gather to wished Canadian the enough, Naturally esteemed.
mixed leaves, dry of quantity A wish. his oppose well not could I and
smoke to began he and flint, his from spark a with lit he sulphur, with
eventually hive the and degrees, by ceased humming The bees. the out
Land Ned which with honey, sweetest the of pounds several yielded
haversack. his filled

said bread-fruit," the of paste the with honey this mixed have I "When
cake." succulent a you offer to able be shall "I he,

for substituted been has 'bread-fruit' Note: [Transcriber's
ed.] this in 'artocarpus'

gingerbread." be will "it Conseil, said word," my "'Pon

interesting our continue us "let I; said gingerbread," the mind "Never
walk."

all in appeared lake the following, were we path the of turn every At
peaceable its of whole the up lit lantern The breadth. and length its
remained Nautilus The wave. nor ripple neither knew which surface,
ship's the mountain, the on and platform, the On immovable. perfectly
the against carved clearly shadows black like working were crew
the of crest highest the round going now were We atmosphere. luminous
were bees that saw then I roof. the upheld which rock of layers first
of interior the in kingdom animal the of representatives only the not
or shadows, the in there and here hovered prey of Birds volcano. this
sparrow were There rocks. the of top the on nests their from fled
scampered, slopes the down and kestrels, and breasts, white with hawks,
to anyone leave I bustards. fat fine several legs, long their with
savoury this of sight the at Canadian the of covetousness the imagine
best his did he But gun. no having regret not did he whether and game,
attempts, fruitless several after and, stones, by lead the replace to
his risked he that say To bird. magnificent a wounding in succeeded he
managed he but truth; the but is it reaching before times twenty life
were We bag. his in honey-cakes the joined creature the that well so
becoming crest the shore, the toward descend to obliged now
a of mouth the like gape to seemed crater the us Above impracticable.
clouds, and seen, clearly be could sky the place this From well.
of summit the on even them, behind leaving wind, west the by dissipated
only were they that proof remnants--certain misty their mountain, the
hundred eight than more rise not did volcano the for high, moderately
Canadian's the after hour an Half ocean. the of level the above feet
was flora the Here shore. inner the regained had we exploit last
umbelliferous little a crystal, marine of carpets large by represented
pierce-stone of name the bears also which pickle, to good very plant
fauna, the to As it. of bundles some gathered Conseil sea-fennel. and
lobsters, sorts, all of crustacea of thousands by counted be might it
shells, of number large a and shrimps, chameleon spider-crabs, crabs,
finished had we later hour an of Three-quarters limpets. and rockfish,
finished just had crew The board. on were and walk circuitous our
But instant. that left have could Nautilus the and sodium, the loading
leave and night, until wait to wish he Did order. no gave Nemo Captain
the be, might it Whatever so. Perhaps secretly? passage submarine the
land all of clear steered port, its left having Nautilus, the day, next
Atlantic. the of waves the beneath yards few a at



XI CHAPTER

SEA SARGASSO THE

Ocean. Atlantic the of part singular a crossed Nautilus the day That
water warm of current a of existence the of ignorant be can one No
of Gulf the leaving After Stream. Gulf the of name the by known
entering before But Spitzbergen. of direction the in went we Florida,
into divides current this lat., N. of 45 about Mexico, of Gulf the
and Ireland of coast the towards going one principal the arms, two
the of height the about south the to bends second the whilst Norway,
lengthened a describing and shore, African the touching then, Azores;
collar a rather is arm--it second This Antilles. the to returns oval,
of portion that water warm of circles its with arm--surrounds an than
perfect a Sea, Sargasso the called ocean immovable quiet, cold, the
the for years three than less no takes it Atlantic: open the in lake
was Nautilus the region the was Such it. round pass to current great
and fucus, seaweed, of carpet close a meadow, perfect a visiting, now
vessel a of stem the that compact so and thick so berries, tropical
to wishing not Nemo, Captain And it. through way its tear hardly could
the beneath yards some kept mass, herbaceous this in screw his entangle
word Spanish the from comes Sargasso name The waves. the of surface
the is berry-plant, or kelp, This kelp. signifies which "sargazzo"
why reason the is this And bank. immense this of formation principal
only The Atlantic. the of basin peaceful the in unite plants these
the from result to me to seems says, he given, be can which explanation
of fragments some vase a in Place world. the all to known experience
a vase the in water the to give and body, floating other or cork
the in group a in unite will fragments scattered the movement, circular
least part the in say, to is that surface, liquid the of centre
the is Atlantic the considering, are we phenomenon the In agitated.
the Sea Sargasso the and current, circular the Stream Gulf the vase,
unite. bodies floating the which at point central

the in phenomenon the study to able was I and opinion, Maury's share I
products floated us Above penetrate. rarely vessels where midst, very
trees of trunks plants; brownish these among up heaped kinds, all of
Amazon the by floated and Mountains, Rocky the or Andes the from torn
ships' or keels, of remains wrecks, numerous Mississippi; the or
and shells with weighted so and in, stove side-planks bottoms,
will time And surface. the to rise again not could they that barnacles
thus substances these that opinion, other Maury's justify day one
water the of action the by petrified become will ages for accumulated
reserve precious coal-mines--a inexhaustible form then will and
have shall men when moment the for Nature far-seeing by prepared
continents. of mines the exhausted

I weed, sea and plants of mass inextricable this of midst the In
long their with actiniae, and halcyons pink charming some noticed
blue. and red, green, medusae, and them, after trailing tentacles

Sea, Sargasso the in passed we February of 22nd the of day the All
abundant find plants marine to partial are as fish such where
accustomed its to returned had ocean the next, The nourishment.
to February of 23rd the from days, nineteen for time this From aspect.
Atlantic, the of middle the in kept Nautilus the March, of 12th the
twenty-four in leagues hundred a of speed constant a at us carrying
submarine his accomplishing intended evidently Nemo Captain hours.
Horn, Cape doubling after intended, he that imagined I and programme,
cause had Land Ned Pacific. the of seas Australian the to return to
attempt not could we islands, of void seas, large these In fear. for
Nemo's Captain opposing of means any we had Nor boat. the leave to
by gain neither could we what but submit; to was course only Our will.
persuasion. by obtained be might think to liked I cunning, nor force
under liberty, our restore to consent not he would ended, voyage This
we which honour of oath existence?--an his reveal to never oath an
delicate that consider must we But kept. religiously have should
Had liberty? this claim to free I was But Captain. the with question
the that manner, firmest the in beginning, the from said himself not he
board on imprisonment lasting our him from exacted life his of secret
a him to appear silence months' four my not would And Nautilus? the
the to return a not would And situation? our of acceptance tacit
our to hurtful be might which suspicions raising in result subject
to offered opportunity favourable a time future some at if projects,
them? to return

kind any of incident no above, mentioned days nineteen the During
was he Captain; the of little saw I voyage. our signalise to happened
especially open, left books his found often I library the In work. at
by over conned depths, submarine on work My history. natural on those
theories my contradicting often notes, marginal with covered was him,
my purging thus with himself contented Captain the but systems; and
I Sometimes me. with it discuss to him for rare very was it work;
the in night, at only but organ; his of tones melancholy the heard
the upon slept Nautilus the when obscurity, deepest the of midst
on days whole sailed we voyage our of part this During ocean. deserted
few A abandoned. seemed sea The waves. the of surface the
Good of Cape the for making were India, to road the on sailing-vessels,
no who, whaler, a of boats the by followed were we day One Hope.
Nemo Captain but price; great of whale enormous some for us took doubt,
so trouble, and time their lose to fellows worthy the wish not did
continued navigation Our water. the under plunging by chase the ended
taking in employed was Nautilus the day that March; of 13th the until
13,000 about made then had We me. interested greatly which soundings,
The Pacific. the of seas high the from departure our since leagues
was It long. W. 53' 37 and lat., S. 37' 45 us gave bearings
7,000 sounded Herald the of Denham Captain which in water same the
of Parker, Lieutenant too, There, bottom. the finding without fathoms
15,140 with bottom the touch not could Congress, frigate American the
a by ocean the of bottom the seeking intended Nemo Captain fathoms.
at placed planes lateral of means by lengthened sufficiently diagonal
the Then Nautilus. the of water-line the with 45 of angle an
the beating blades four its speed, maximum its at work to set screw
the pressure, powerful this Under force. describable in with waves
regularly sank and chord sonorous a like quivered Nautilus the of hull
water. the under

the of midst the from rising tops blackish some saw I fathoms 7,000 At
the like mountains high to belong might summits these but waters;
abyss the of depth the and higher; even Blanc, Mont or Himalayas
of spite in lower, still descended Nautilus The incalculable. remained
fastenings the at tremble plates steel the felt I pressure. great the
the of windows the groaned; partitions its bent, bars its bolts; the of
firm this And waters. the of pressure the under curve to seemed saloon
it said, had Captain its as if, yielded, have doubtless would structure
attained had We block. solid a like resistance of capable been not had
Nautilus the of sides the and leagues), (four yards 16,000 of depth a
lb. 3,200 say, to is that atmospheres, 1,600 of pressure a bore then
surface. its of inch an of two-fifths square each to

deep these overrun "To exclaimed. I in!" be to situation a "What
these at look Captain, Look, trod! never has man where regions
receptacles lowest these grottoes, uninhabited these rocks, magnificent
sights unknown What possible! longer no is life where globe, the of
them?" of remembrance a preserve to unable be we should Why here! are

Captain said remembrance?" the than more away carry to like you "Would
Nemo.

words?" those by mean you do "What

view photographic a make to than easier is nothing that say to mean "I
region." submarine this of

at when, proposition, new this at surprise my express to time not had I
Through saloon. the into brought was objective an call, Nemo's Captain
electricity, with bright was mass liquid the panel, widely-opened the
a not shadow, a not that uniformity such with distributed was which
Nautilus The light. manufactured our in seen be to was gradation,
inclination the by subdued screw its of force the motionless, remained
oceanic the of bottom the on propped was instrument the planes: its of
negative. perfect a obtained had we seconds few a in and site,

we up; go us "Let said, Nemo Captain over, being operation the But,
such to long too Nautilus the expose nor position, our abuse not must
pressure." great

exclaimed. I again!" up "Go

on." well "Hold

I when thus, me cautioned Captain the why understand to time not had I
its Captain, the from signal a At carpet. the to on forward thrown was
shot Nautilus the vertically; raised blades its and shipped, was screw
cutting and rapidity, stunning with rising balloon, a like air the into
and visible; was Nothing agitation. sonorous a with waters of mass the
it separated which leagues four the through shot had it minutes four in
making fell, flying-fish, a like emerging after and, ocean, the from
height. enormous an to rebound waves the



XII CHAPTER

WHALES AND CACHALOTS

returned Nautilus the March, of 14th and 13th the of nights the During
Cape with level a on when that, fancied I course. southerly its to
Pacific the beat to order in westward, helm the turn would he Horn,
the of nothing did He world. the of tour the complete so and seas,
he was Where regions. southern the to way his on continued but kind,
the that think to began I madness! was It pole? the To to? going
the past time some For fears. Land's Ned justified temerity Captain's
less was he flight; of projects his of me to spoken not had Canadian
lengthened this that see could I silent. almost communicative,
burning was rage that felt I and him, upon weighing was imprisonment
suppressed with up lit eyes his Captain, the met he When him. within
some into him lead would violence natural his that feared I and anger;
my in me to came he and Conseil March, of 14th the day, That extreme.
visit. their of cause the inquired I room.

Canadian. the replied sir," you, ask to question simple "A

Ned." "Speak,

think?" you do Nautilus, the board on there are men many "How

friend." my tell, cannot "I

crew." large a require not does working its that say should "I

to ought most, the at men, ten conditions, existing under "Certainly,
enough." be

more?" any be there should why "Well,

easy was meaning whose Land, Ned at fixedly looking replied, I "Why?"
I if and correct, are surmises my "if added, I "Because," guess. to
only not is Nautilus the existence, Captain's the understood well have
its like who, those for refuge of place a also is it vessel: a
earth." upon tie every broken have commander,

only can Nautilus the case, any in "but, Conseil; said so," "Perhaps
their estimate sir, you, not Could men. of number certain a contain
maximum?"

Conseil?" "How,

and sir, know, you which vessel, the of size the given calculation; "By
much how also knowing contains, it air of quantity the consequently
fact the with results these comparing and breath, a at expends man each
twenty-four every surface the to go to obliged is Nautilus the that
hours."

driving was he what saw I before sentence the finished not had Conseil
at.

enough, simple though calculation, that "but I; said understand," "I
result." uncertain very a but give can

urgently. Land Ned said mind," "Never

oxygen the consumes man each hour one "In I. said then," is, it "Here
contained that twenty-four, in and air; of gallons twenty in contained
of gallons 480 times many how find therefore must, We gallons. 480 in
contains." Nautilus the air

Conseil. said so," "Just

one and tons; 1,500 being Nautilus the of size "the continued, I "Or,"
which, air, of gallons 300,000 contains it gallons, 200 holding ton
strictly say, to means Which 625. of quotient a gives 480, by divided
625 for suffice would Nautilus the in contained air the that speaking,
hours." twenty-four for men

Ned. repeated twenty-five!" and hundred "Six

officers and sailors, passengers, us, of all that remember "But
number." that of part tenth a form not would included,

Conseil. murmured men," three for many too "Still

and forehead, his across hand his passed head, his shook Canadian The
answering. without room the left

"Poor Conseil. said sir?" observation, one make to me allow you "Will
is life past His have. not can he that everything for longing is Ned
regrets. he forbidden are we that everything him; to present always
him. understand must we And recollections. old of full is head His
and sir; you, like learned not is he Nothing; here? do to he has What
He have. we that sea the of beauties the for taste same the not has
his in tavern a into more once go to able be to everything risk would
country." own

Canadian, the to intolerable seem must board on monotony the Certainly
were Events activity. and liberty of life a to was he as accustomed
event an day that but spirit; of show any to him rouse could which rare
About harpooner. the of days bright the recalled which happen did
Nautilus the ocean, the of surface the on being morning, the in eleven
me, astonish not did which encounter whales--an of troop a with in fell
high in refuge taken had death, to hunted creatures, these that knowing
latitudes.

October of month The sea. quiet a with platform, the on seated were We
the was It days. autumnal lovely some us gave latitudes those in
the on whale a signalled mistaken--who be not could Canadian--he
back black its see might one attentively, Looking horizon. eastern
Nautilus. the from miles five waves the with fall and rise

a such now whaler, a board on was I "if Land, Ned exclaimed "Ah!"
with See size. large of one is It pleasure. me give would meeting
steam! an air of columns up throw blow-holes its strength what
plates?" steel these to bound I am why it, Confound

fishing?" of ideas old your forgotten not have "you I, said Ned," "What,

tire ever he Can sir? trade, old his forget ever whale-fisher a "Can
chase?" a such by caused emotions the of

Ned?" seas, these in fished never have "You

Davis in as Behring in much as and only, northern the in sir; "Never,
Straits."

Greenland the is It you. to unknown still is whale southern the "Then
passing risk not would that and time, this to up hunted have you whale
localised, are Whales equator. the of waters warm the through
And leave. never they which seas certain in kinds, their to according
must it Straits, Davis to Behring from went creatures these of one if
either other, the to sea one from passage a is there because simply be
side." Asiatic the or American the on

the know not do I seas, these in fished never have I as case, that "In
them!" frequenting whale of kind

Ned." you, told have "I

Conseil. said acquaintance," their making for reason greater "A

aggravate they approach: "they Canadian, the exclaimed look!" "Look!
them!" at get cannot I that know they me;

imaginary an grasped he as trembled, hand His feet. his stamped Ned
harpoon.

he. asked seas?" northern the of those as large as cetaceans these "Are

Ned." nearly, "Very

hundred a measuring whales sir, whales, large seen have I "Because
of Umgallick, and Hullamoch of those that told been even have I feet.
long." feet fifty and hundred a sometimes are Islands, Aleutian the

only are creatures These exaggeration. me to seems "That
are cachalots, the like and, fins; dorsal with provided balaeaopterons,
whale." Greenland the than smaller much generally

ocean, the left never had eyes whose Canadian, the exclaimed "Ah!"
Nautilus." the as water same the in are they nearer; coming are "they

said: he conversation, the to returning Then,

of heard have I creature. small a as cachalot the of spoke "You
that some of said is It cetacea. intelligent are They ones. gigantic
for taken are then and fucus, and seaweed with themselves cover they
fire----" a lights there; settle and them, upon encamp People islands.

Conseil. said houses," build "And

plunges, creature the day fine one "And Land. Ned said joker," "Yes,
sea." the of bottom the to inhabitants the all it with carrying

laughing. replied, I Sailor," the Sinbad of travels the like "Something

are there whale; one not is "it Land, Ned exclaimed suddenly "Ah!"
do to able not I And troop! whole a is twenty--it are ten--there
tied!" feet and hands anything!

Nemo's Captain ask not you do "why Conseil, said Ned," friend "But,
them?" chase to permission

himself lowered had Land Ned when sentence his finished not had Conseil
the afterwards minutes few A Captain. the seek to panel the through
platform. the on together appeared two

a about waters the on playing cetacea of troop the watched Nemo Captain
Nautilus. the from mile

whole a of fortune the goes "there he; said whales," southern are "They
whalers." of fleet

to only if them, chase not I "can Canadian, the asked sir," "Well,
harpooner?" of trade old my of me remind

have We destroy! to "only Nemo; Captain replied purpose?" what to "And
board." on whale-oil the with do to nothing

to us allowed you Sea Red the "in Canadian, the continued sir," "But,
dugong." the follow

be would it Here crew. my for meat fresh procure to was it "Then
for reserved privilege a is that know I sake. killing's for killing
the destroying In pastime. murderous such of approve not do I but man,
creature), inoffensive an whale, Greenland the (like whale southern
already have They Land. Master action, culpable a do traders your
of class a annihilating are and Bay, Baffin's of whole the depopulated
plenty have They alone. cetacea unfortunate the Leave animals. useful
you sawfish--without and swordfish, enemies--cachalots, natural of
them." troubling

these of greed inconsiderate and barbarous The right. was Captain The
the in whale last the of disappearance the cause day one will fishermen
his thrust teeth, his between "Yankee-doodle" whistled Land Ned ocean.
Nemo Captain But us. upon back his turned and pockets, his into hands
said: me, addressing and, cetacea, of troop the watched

without enough, enemies natural had whales that saying in right was "I
see, you Do long. before do to plenty have will These man. counting
points?" moving blackish those leeward, to miles eight about Aronnax, M.

replied. I Captain," "Yes,

of troops in met have I which animals, cachalots--terrible are "Those
mischievous cruel, are they those, to As hundred. three or two
them." exterminating in right be would they creatures;

words. last the at quickly turned Canadian The

the of interest the in time, still is "it he, said Captain," "Well,
whales."

will Nautilus The Professor. self, one's expose to useless is "It
Land's Master as good as spur steel a with armed is It them. disperse
imagine." I harpoon,

shoulders. his shrug to enough out himself put not did Canadian The
a such of heard ever had Who spur! a of blows with cetacea Attack
thing?

you something you show will "We Nemo. Captain said Aronnax," M. "Wait,
creatures. ferocious these for pity no have We seen. yet never have
teeth." and mouth but nothing are They

macrocephalous the describe better could one No teeth! and Mouth
Its long. feet seventy-five than more sometimes is which cachalot,
than armed Better body. entire its of one-third occupies head enormous
is it whalebone, with only furnished is jaw upper whose whale, the
long, inches eight about tusks, large twenty-five with supplied
in is It pounds. two weighing each top, the at conical and cylindrical
by divided cavities great in head, enormous this of part upper the
of pounds hundred eight to six from found be to is that cartilages,
disagreeable a is cachalot The spermaceti. called oil precious that
description. Fredol's to according fish, than tadpole more creature,
say may we (if being side left its of whole the formed, badly is It
But eye. right its with see to able only being and "failure," a it),
were and whales the seen had They us. nearing was troop formidable the
the that beforehand judge could One them. attack to preparing
built better were they because only not victorious, be would cachalots
they because also but adversaries, inoffensive their than attack for
There surface. the to coming without water under longer remain could
went Nautilus The whales. the of help the to go to time just only was
the before places our took I and Land, Ned Conseil, water. under
to cage his in pilot the joined Nemo Captain and saloon, the in window
the felt I Soon destruction. of engine an as apparatus his work
battle The increased. speed our and quicken, screw the of beatings
the when begun already had whales the and cachalots the between
of sight the at fear any show first at not did They arrived. Nautilus
guard to had soon they But conflict. the in joining monster new this
a but nothing was Nautilus The battle! a What blows. its against
hurled It Captain. its of hand the by brandished harpoon, formidable
the to part one from through passing mass, fleshy the against itself
could It animal. the of halves quivering two it behind leaving other,
the nor sides, its upon tails their from blows formidable the feel not
ran it killed, cachalot One more. much itself, produced it which shock
going prey, its miss not might it that spot the on tacked next, the at
the when plunging helm, its to answering backwards, and forwards
returned it when it with up coming waters, deep the into dived cetacean
in tearing or cutting sideways, or front it striking surface, the to
spur. terrible its with it piercing pace, any at and directions all
sharp What waves! the of surface the on noise a What carnage! What
the In animals! enraged these to peculiar snorting what and hissing,
perfect made tails their peaceful, so generally waters, these of midst
which from continued, massacre wholesale this hour one For billows.
united twelve or ten times Several escape. not could cachalots the
could we window the From weight. their by Nautilus the crush to tried
formidable their and tusks, with studded mouths, enormous their see
at swore and threatened he himself; contain not could Land Ned eyes.
a worrying dogs like vessel our to clinging them feel could We them.
carried screw, its working Nautilus, the But copse. a in boar wild
without ocean, the of levels upper the to or there, and here them
the on strain powerful the nor weight, enormous their for caring
became waves the up, broke cachalots of mass the length At vessel.
panel The surface. the to rising were we that felt I and quiet,
with covered was sea The platform. the to on hurried we and opened,
and divided have not could explosion formidable A bodies. mutilated
amid floating were We violence. more with mass fleshy this torn
with covered underneath, white and back the on bluish bodies, gigantic
towards flying were cachalots terrified Some protuberances. enormous
the and miles, several for red dyed were waves The horizon. the
us. joined Nemo Captain blood: of sea a in floated Nautilus

he. said Land?" Master "Well,

somewhat had enthusiasm whose Canadian, the replied sir," "Well,
a not am I But certainly. spectacle, terrible a is "it calmed;
butchery." a this call I and hunter, a am I butcher.

"and Captain; the replied creatures," mischievous of massacre a is "It
knife." butcher's a not is Nautilus the

Canadian. the said better," harpoon my like "I

Ned at fixedly looking Captain, the answered own," his to one "Every
Land.

sad in end would which violence, of act some commit would he feared I
which whale a of sight the by turned was anger his But consequences.
escaped quite not had creature The with. up come just had Nautilus the
flat its by whale southern the recognised I teeth. cachalot's the from
from distinguished is it Anatomically, black. entirely is which head,
cervical seven the by whale Cape North the and whale white the
The congeners. its than ribs more two has it and vertebrae,
the from holes with riddled side, its on lying was cetacean unfortunate
whale young a hung still fin mutilated its From dead. quite and bites,
the let mouth open Its massacre. the from save not could it which
shore. the on breaking waves the like murmuring out, and in flow water
his of Two creature. the of corpse the to close steered Nemo Captain
were they that surprise, without not saw, I and side, its mounted men
to is that contained, they which milk the all breasts its from drawing
the of cup a me offered Captain The tons. three or two about say,
to repugnance my showing help not could I warm. still was which milk,
be to not and excellent, was it that me assured he but drink; the
opinion. his of was and it, tasted I milk. cow's from distinguished
or butter salt of shape the in for us, to reserve useful a was It
From food. ordinary our from variety agreeable an form would it cheese
towards ill-will Land's Ned that uneasiness with noticed I day that
gestures Canadian's the watch to resolved I and increased, Nemo Captain
closely.



XIII CHAPTER

ICEBERG THE

the following course, southerly its pursuing steadily was Nautilus The
the reach to wish he Did speed. considerable with meridian fiftieth
had point that reach to attempt every for so, think not did I pole?
the in for advanced, far was season the Again, failed. hitherto
of 13th the with corresponds March of 13th the regions Antarctic
season. equinoctial the at begin which regions, northern of September
merely 55, latitude in ice floating saw I March of 14th the On
banks forming long, feet twenty-five to twenty from debris of bits pale
the of surface the on remained Nautilus The curled. sea the which over
with familiar was Seas, Arctic the in fished had who Land, Ned ocean.
In time. first the for them admired I and Conseil but icebergs; its
dazzling white a stretched horizon southern the towards atmosphere the
However blink." "ice of name the it given have whalers English band.
the announces and visible, always is it be, may clouds the thick
soon blocks larger Accordingly, bank. or pack ice an of presence
Some fog. the of caprices the with changed brilliancy whose appeared,
had lines undulating long if as veins, green showed masses these of
enormous resembled others copper; of sulphate with traced been
the reflected Some them. through shining light the with amethysts
vivid with shaded Others facets. crystal thousand a upon day of light
we more The marble. of town perfect a resembled reflections calcareous
in both increased islands floating these more the south the neared
importance. and number

carefully, seeking But, disappeared. had pass every lat. 60 At
boldly he which through opening, narrow a found soon Nemo Captain
Thus, him. behind close would it that however, knowing, slipped,
ice the all through passed Nautilus the hand, clever this by guided
mountains, or icebergs Conseil; charmed quite which precision a with
or drift-ice limits, no have to seeming plains, smooth or ice-fields
are they when palchs called up, broken plains ice-packs, floating
The strips. long of up made are they when streams and circular,
2 marked air the to exposed thermometer the low; very was temperature
the at fur, with clad warmly were we but zero, below 3 or deg.
warmed Nautilus, the of interior The seal. and sea-bear the of expense
cold. intense most the defied apparatus, electric its by regularly
the beneath yards some go to necessary been have only would it Besides,
we earlier months Two temperature. bearable more a find to waves
we already but latitudes; these in daylight perpetual had have should
six be would there by and by and night, of hours four or three had had
March of 15th the On regions. circumpolar these in darkness of months
Captain The Orkney. South and Shetland New of latitude the in were we
that but them; inhabited seals of tribes numerous formerly that me told
massacred destruction, for rage their in whalers, American and English
they animation, and life once was there where thus, young; and old both
death. and silence left had

Nautilus, the March of 16th the of morning the on o'clock eight About
circle. polar Antarctic the cut meridian, fifty-fifth the following
Captain But horizon. the closed and sides, all on us surrounded Ice
cannot I higher. going still another, to opening one from went Nemo
ice The regions. new these of beauties the at astonishment my express
town, oriental an formed grouping the Here forms. surprising most took
to thrown city fallen a there minarets; and mosques innumerable with
aspect whole The nature. of convulsion some by were, it as earth, the
the in lost or sun, the of rays oblique the by changed constantly was
were falls and Detonations snow. of hurricanes amidst fog greyish
the altered which icebergs, of overthrows great sides, all on heard
we thought I exit, no seeing Often diorama. a like landscape whole
slightest the at him guiding instinct but, prisoners; definitely were
never was He pass. new a discover would Nemo Captain indication,
along trickling water bluish of threads thin the saw he when mistaken
into ventured already had he that doubt no had I and ice-fields; the
March, of 16th the On before. seas Antarctic these of midst the
the not was It road. our blocked absolutely ice-fields the however,
this But cold. the by cemented fields vast but yet, as itself, iceberg
with it against himself hurled he Nemo: Captain stop not could obstacle
a like mass brittle the entered Nautilus The violence. frightful
ram battering the was It crackings. frightful with it split and wedge,
in high thrown ice, The strength. infinite by hurled ancients the of
our impulsion of power own its By us. around hail like fell air, the
own its by away carried times some itself; for canal a made apparatus
and weight, its with it crushing ice-field, the on lodged it impetus,
movement, pitching simple a by it dividing it, beneath buried sometimes
time, this at us assailed gales Violent it. in rents large producing
platform the of end one from which, through fogs, thick by accompanied
all from sharply blew wind The nothing. see could we other, the to
had we that heaps hard such in lay snow the and compass, the of parts
5 at always was temperature The pickaxe. a of blows with it break to
with covered was Nautilus the of part outward every zero; below deg.
up blocked the in entangled been have would vessel rigged A ice.
power, motive its for electricity with sails, without vessel A gorges.
length, At latitudes. high such brave alone could coal, no wanting and
was Nautilus the assaults, useless many after March, of 18th the on
or packs, streams, either longer no was It blocked. positively
by formed barrier, immovable and interminable an but ice-fields,
together. soldered mountains

me. to Canadian the said iceberg!" "An

had who navigators other all to as well as Land, Ned to that knew I
an for appearing sun The obstacle. inevitable an was this us, preceded
possible, as near as observation an took Nemo Captain noon, at instant
S. of 39' 67 and long. 30' 51 at situation our gave which
the Of region. Antarctic this in more degree one advanced had We lat.
the Under glimpse. a longer no was there sea the of surface liquid
with entangled plain, vast a stretched lay Nautilus the of spur
needles slender and points sharp there and Here blocks. confused
it as hewn shore, steep a on further feet; 200 of height a to rising
mirrors, huge tints; greyish with clothed and axe an with were
over And fog. the in drowned half sunshine, of rays few a reflecting
broken scarcely reigned, silence stern a nature of face desolate this
was Everything puffins. and petrels of wings the of flapping the by
its in stop to obliged then was Nautilus The noise. the frozen--even
efforts, our of spite In ice. of fields these amid course adventurous
the ice, the up break to employed means powerful the of spite in
no proceed can we when Generally, immovable. remained Nautilus
as was return here but us; to open still return have we further,
the for and us; behind closed had pass every for advance, as impossible
entirely be to likely were we stationary, were we when moments few
afternoon, the in o'clock two about happen indeed did which blocked,
I rapidity. astonishing with sides its around forming ice fresh the
was I imprudent. than more was Nemo Captain that admit to obliged was
our observing been had Captain The moment. that at platform the on
me: to said he when past, time some for situation

this?" of think you do what sir, "Well,

Captain." caught, are we that think "I

disengage cannot Nautilus the that think really you Aronnax, M. "So,
itself?"

advanced far too already is season the for Captain; difficulty, "With
ice." the of breaking the on reckon to you for

be always will "you tone, ironical an in Nemo, Captain said sir," "Ah!
affirm I obstacles. and difficulties but nothing see You same. the
can it that also but itself, disengage Nautilus the can only not that
still." further go

Captain. the at looking asked, I South?" the to "Further

pole." the to go shall it sir; "Yes,

incredulity. of gesture a repress to unable exclaimed, I pole!" the "To

that pole--to Antarctic the "to coldly, Captain, the replied "Yes,"
You globe. the of meridian every springs whence from point unknown
Nautilus!" the with please I as do can I whether know

rashness. to even bold, was man this that knew I that. knew I Yes,
Pole, South the round bristled which obstacles those conquer to But
been yet not had which North, the than inaccessible more it rendering
one enterprise, mad a not it navigators--was boldest the by reached
to head my into came then It conceived? have would maniac a only which
never had which pole that discovered ever had he if Nemo Captain ask
creature? human a by trodden been yet

others Where together. it discover will we "but replied; he sir," "No,
far so Nautilus my led yet never have I fail. not will I failed, have
yet." further go shall it repeat, I but, seas; southern into

tone. ironical slightly a in I, said Captain," you, believe well can "I
Let us! for obstacles no are There ahead! go us Let you! believe "I
us let resists, it if and, up; it blow us Let iceberg! this smash us
it!" over fly to wings Nautilus the give

under but it, over not "no, quietly; Nemo, Captain said sir!" it, "Over
it!"

projects Captain's the of idea sudden a exclaimed, I it!" "Under
the of qualities wonderful the understood; I mind. my upon flashing
enterprise. superhuman this in us serve to going were Nautilus

the said sir," another, one understand to beginning are we see "I
say should possibility--I the see to begin "You smiling. half Captain,
ordinary an for impossible is which That attempt. this success--of the
pole, the before lies continent a If Nautilus. the to easy is vessel
is pole the contrary, the on if, but continent; the before stop must it
pole." the to even go will it sea, open by washed

the "if reasoning; Captain's the by away carried I, said "Certainly,"
free are depths lower the ice, the by solidified is sea the of surface
the of density of maximum the placed has which law Providential the by
am I if and, freezing-point; than higher degree one ocean the of waters
is water the above is which iceberg this of portion the mistaken, not
below." is which that to four to one as

are there sea the above iceberg of foot one for sir; nearly, "Very
feet 300 than more not are mountains ice these If it. below three
are what And beneath. 900 than more not are they surface, the above
Nautilus?" the to feet 900

sir." "Nothing,

of temperature uniform that depths greater at seek even could "It
of degrees forty or thirty the impunity with brave there and sea-water,
cold." surface

animated. getting replied, I so," sir--just so, "Just

remaining of that "is Nemo, Captain continued difficulty," only "The
air." of provision our renewing without days several

and them, fill can we reservoirs; vast has Nautilus The all? that "Is
want." we oxygen the all with us supply will they

not "But, smiling. Captain, the replied Aronnax," M. of, thought "Well
my all you give first will I rashness, of me accuse to you wishing
objections."

make?" to more any you "Have

that Pole, South the at exists sea the if possible, is It one. "Only
the to come to unable be shall we consequently, and, covered; be may it
surface."

a with armed is Nautilus the that forget you do but sir! "Good,
fields these against diagonally it send not we could and spur, powerful
shocks." the at open would which ice, of

to-day." ideas of full are you sir, "Ah!

find not we should "why enthusiastically, added, I Captain," "Besides,
frozen The North? the at as well as Pole South the at open sea the
the in or southern the in either coincide, not do earth the of poles
may we contrary, the to proved is it until and, regions; northern
two these at ice from free ocean an or continent a either suppose
globe." the of points

you wish only "I Nemo. Captain replied Aronnax," M. too, so think "I
project, my to objections many so made having after that, observe to
favour!" its in arguments with me crushing now are you

powerful The began. now attempt audacious this for preparations The
storing and reservoirs the into air working were Nautilus the of pumps
the announced Nemo Captain o'clock, four About pressure. high at it
the at look last one threw I platform. the on panels the of closing
clear, was weather The cross. to going were we which iceberg massive
below 12 being great, very cold the enough, pure atmosphere the
so not was temperature this down, gone having wind the but, zero;
armed Nautilus, the of sides the mounted men ten About unbearable.
free. soon was which vessel, the around ice the break to pickaxes with
very still was ice fresh the for performed, quickly was operation The
the with filled were reservoirs usual The below. went all We thin.
my taken had I descended. soon Nautilus the and water, newly-liberated
see could we window open the through saloon; the in Conseil with place
the up, went thermometer The Ocean. Southern the of beds lower the
as feet, 900 about At dial. the on deviated compass the of needle
undulating the beneath floating were we foreseen, had Nemo Captain
to went still--it lower went Nautilus the But iceberg. the of bottom
the at water the of temperature The fathoms. hundred four of depth the
two. gained had we ten; only now was it degrees, twelve showed surface
its by raised was Nautilus the of temperature the say not need I
was manoeuvre every degree; higher much a to apparatus heating
precision. wonderful with accomplished

Conseil. said sir," please, you if it, pass shall "We

conviction. firm of tone a in said, I shall," we believe "I

pole, the to direct course its taken had Nautilus the sea, open this In
90 to 30' 67 From meridian. fifty-second the leaving without
travel; to remained latitude of half a and degrees twenty-two deg.,
speed mean a up kept Nautilus The leagues. hundred five about is, that
that If train. express an of speed hour--the an miles twenty-six of
pole. the reach should we hours forty in up, kept was

the at us kept situation the of novelty the night the of part a For
was it but lantern; electric the with lit was sea The window.
only they waters; imprisoned these in sojourn not did fishes deserted;
open the to Ocean Antarctic the from them take to passage a there found
of quivering the by it feel could we rapid; was pace Our sea. polar
hours' some took I morning the in two About body. steel long the
meet not did I waist the crossing In same. the did Conseil and repose,
next The cage. pilot's the in be to him supposed I Nemo: Captain
saloon. the in more once post my took I March, of 19th the morning,
been had Nautilus the of speed the that me told log electric The
prudently but surface; the towards going then was It slackened.
we Were fast. beat heart My slowly. very reservoirs its emptying
shock A No! atmosphere? polar open the regain and emerge to going
still iceberg, the of bottom the struck had Nautilus the that me told
"struck," deed in had We sound. deadened the from judging thick, very
thousand a at and sense, inverse an in but expression, sea a use to
one us; above ice of feet thousand three give would This deep. feet
than higher then was iceberg The water-mark. the above being thousand
the day that times Several fact. reassuring very a borders--not its at
like lay which wall the struck it time every and again, tried Nautilus
of 200 only yards, 900 but with met it Sometimes it. above ceiling a
the when was it height the twice was It surface. the above rose which
different the noted carefully I waves. the under gone had Nautilus
was it as chain the of profile submarine a obtained thus and depths,
our in place taken had change no night That water. the under developed
It depth! in yards hundred five and four between ice Still situation.
and us between thickness a what still, but, diminishing, evidently was
daily the to According eight. then was It ocean! the of surface the
four renewed been have should air its Nautilus, the board on custom
yet not had Nemo Captain although much, suffer not did I but ago; hours
that painful was sleep My oxygen. of reserve his upon demand any made
The times. several rose I turns: by me besieged fear and hope night;
I morning, the in three About continued. Nautilus the of groping
feet fifty about only was iceberg the of surface lower the that noticed
of surface the from us separated now feet fifty and hundred One deep.
the ice-field, an becoming degrees by was iceberg The waters. the
still were We manometer. the left never eyes My plain. a mountain
electric the under sparkled which surface, the to diagonally rising
into beneath and above both stretching was iceberg The rays.
length, At thinner. getting was it mile after mile slopes; lengthening
the March, of 19th the day, memorable that of morning the in six at
appeared. Nemo Captain and opened, saloon the of door

said. he all was open!!" is sea "The



XIV CHAPTER

POLE SOUTH THE

few a but with sea, open the Yes! platform. the to on rushed I
a sea; of stretch long icebergs--a moving and ice of pieces scattered
waters, those under fishes of myriads and air, the in birds of world
bottom. the to according green, olive to blue intense from varied which
comparatively was It zero. above C. 3 marked thermometer The
mass lengthened whose iceberg, this behind were we as up shut spring,
horizon. northern our on seen dimly was

heart. beating a with Captain, the asked I pole?" the at we "Are

bearings." our take will I noon "At replied. he know," not do "I

at looking I, said fog?" this through himself show sun the will "But
sky. leaden the

Captain. the replied enough," be will it shows, it little "However

hundred one of height a to rose island solitary a south miles ten About
be might sea the for carefully, but it, for made We yards. four and
hours two it, reached had we afterwards hour One banks. with strewn
in miles five or four measured It it. of round the made had we later
stretch considerable a from it separated canal narrow A circumference.
The limits. its see not could we for continent, a perhaps land, of
theory. Maury's to colour some give to seemed land this of existence
and Pole South the between that, remarked has American ingenious The
enormous of ice floating with covered is sea the parallel, sixtieth the
he fact this From Atlantic. North the in with met never is which size,
encloses Circle Antarctic the that conclusion the drawn has
only but sea, open in form cannot icebergs as continents, considerable
ice of mass the calculations, these to According coasts. the on
of circumference the cap, vast a forms pole southern the surrounding
of fear for Nautilus, the But miles. 2,500 least, at be, must which
strand a from cable-lengths three about stopped had aground, running
the launched; was boat The rocks. of heap superb a reared which over
were myself and Conseil, instruments, bearing men, his of two Captain,
Doubtless Land. Ned seen not had I morning. the in ten was It it. in
A Pole. South the of presence the admit to wish not did Canadian the
ashore. ran we where sand, the to us brought oar the of strokes few
back. him held I when land, the to on jump to going was Conseil

first of honour the belongs you "to Nemo, Captain to I said "Sir,"
land." this on foot setting

this tread to hesitate not do I if "and Captain, the said sir," "Yes,
a left has being human no time, this to up because, is it Pole, South
there." trace

with beat heart His sand. the to on lightly jumped he this, Saying
there, and promontory, little a to sloping rock, a climbed He emotion.
he look, eager an with and motionless, and mute crossed, arms his with
five After regions. southern these of possession take to seemed
us. to turned he ecstasy, this in passed minutes

sir." like, you "When

a For boat. the in men two the leaving Conseil, by followed landed, I
like something stone, sandy reddish a of composed was soil the way long
could One pumice-stones. and lava, of streams scoriae, brick, crushed
smoke of curls slight parts, some In origin. volcanic its mistake not
lost had fires internal the that proving smell, sulphurous a emitted
high a climbed having though, powers, expansive their of nothing
We miles. several of radius a for volcano no see could I acclivity,
craters, two found Ross James countries, Antarctic those in that know
meridian, 167th the on activity, full in Terror, and Erebus the
seemed continent desolate this of vegetation The 32'. 77 latitude
some rocks; black the upon lay lichens Some restricted. much me to
placed cells of kind a diatomas, rudimentary plants, microscopic
on supported weed, scarlet and purple long shells; quartz two between
to brought waves the of breaking the which bladders, swimming little
The region. this of flora meagre the constituted These shore. the
also I limpets. and mussels, little molluscs, with strewn was shore
which of long, inches one-and-a-quarter clios, northern of myriads saw
perfect some and mouthful; a at world whole a swallow would whale a
shore. the of skirts the on waters the animating sea-butterflies,

kind the of shrubs, coral some bottoms high the on appeared There
depth the to seas Antarctic the in live Ross, James to according which,
and kingfishers little were there Then yards. 1,000 than more of
the in was most abounded life where But soil. the studding starfish
kinds, all of flew and fluttered birds of thousands There air.
us at looking rock, the crowded others cries; their with us deafening
our by close familiarly pressing and fear, without by passed we as
as awkward and heavy water, the in agile so penguins, were There feet.
large a cries, harsh uttering were they ground; the on are they
Albatrosses clamour. in extravagant but gesture, in sober assembly,
yards four least at being wings their of expanse the air, the in passed
gigantic some ocean; the of vultures the called justly and half, a and
whose of underpart the duck, small of kind a damiers, some and petrels,
petrels, of series whole a were there then white; and black is body
the to peculiar blue, others wings, brown-bordered with whitish, some
of inhabitants the that Conseil, told I as oily, so and seas, Antarctic
a put to but them lighting before do to nothing had Islands Ferroe the
in. wick

After lamps! perfect be would they "and Conseil, said more," little "A
with them furnished previously have to Nature expect cannot we that,
wicks!"

a nests, ruffs' with riddled was soil the on farther mile a half About
Captain issuing. were birds many which of out laying-ground, of sort
of braying the like cry a uttered They hunted. hundreds some had Nemo
white body, the on slate-colour goose, a of size the about were ass, an
allowed they throats; their round line yellow a with beneath,
the But escape. to trying never stone, a with killed be to themselves
Its itself. shown yet not had sun the eleven at and lift, not did fog
possible. were observations no it Without uneasy. me made absence
I When pole? the reached had we whether decide we could then, How,
silently rock, of piece a on leaning him found I Nemo, Captain rejoined
be to was what But vexed. and impatient seemed He sky. the watching
did he as sun the command not could man powerful and rash This done?
an for itself showing day of orb the without arrived Noon sea. the
of curtain the behind position its tell even not could We instant.
snow. to turned fog the soon and fog;

the to returned we and quietly, Captain, the said to-morrow," "Till
disturbances. atmospheric these amid Nautilus

to impossible was It day. next the till continued snow of tempest The
of notes taking was I where saloon, the From platform. the on remain
I continent, polar the to excursion this during happening incidents
midst the in sporting albatrosses and petrels of cries the hear could
but motionless, remain not did Nautilus The storm. violent this of
the in south the to more miles ten advancing coast, the skirted
The horizon. the of edge the skirted it as sun the by left half-light
a was cold The ceased. had snow the March, of 20th the day, next
fog The zero. below 2 showing thermometer the greater, little
taken. be might observations our day that that hoped I and rising, was
myself and Conseil took boat the appeared, yet having not Nemo Captain
everywhere nature; volcanic same the of still was soil The land. to
had which crater the but basalt; and scoriae, lava, of traces were
was continent this down, lower as Here, see. not could I them vomited
large with divided now was rule their But birds. of myriads with alive
were There eyes. soft their with us at looking sea-mammals, of troops
of flakes on some earth, the on stretched some seals, of kinds several
our at flee not did They sea. the of out and in going many ice,
that reckoned I and man; with do to anything had having never approach,
vessels. of hundreds for there provisions were there

creatures?" these of names the me tell you "will Conseil, said "Sir,"

morses." and seals are "They

the before us to remained hours Four morning. the in eight now was It
a towards steps our directed I advantage. with observed be could sun
earth that aver can I There, shore. granite steep the in cut bay vast
them, covering sea-mammals of numbers the by sight to lost were ice and
shepherd mythological the Proteus, old for sought involuntarily I and
seals more were There Neptune. of flocks immense these watched who
the female, and male groups, distinct forming else, anything than
ones, little her suckling mother the family, his over watching father
to wished they When steps. few a go to enough strong already some
of contraction the by made jumps, little took they place, their change
fin, imperfect their by enough awkwardly helped and bodies, their
I forearm. perfect a forms cousins, their lamantin, the with as which,
of spine element--the their is which water, the in that, say should
webbed and skin close and smooth with flexible; is creatures these
most the take they earth the on resting In admirably. swim feet--they
and soft their observing ancients, the Thus attitudes. graceful
look beautiful most the by surpassed be cannot which looks, expressive
charming their eyes, voluptuous clear their give, can woman a
the them, metamorphosed manners, their of poetry the and positions,
Conseil made I mermaid. a into female the and triton a into male
these in brain the of lobes the of development considerable the notice
of quantity a such has man, except mammal, No cetaceans. interesting
of amount certain a receiving of capable also are they matter; brain
other with think, I and domesticated, easily are education,
as service great of be would they taught properly if that naturalists,
the on or rocks the on slept them of part greater The fishing-dogs.
external no have which called, so properly seals, these Amongst sand.
I prominent), are ears whose otter, the from differ they which (in ears
white a with long, yards three about seals of varieties several noticed
at incisors four jaws, both in teeth with armed heads, bulldog coat,
shape the in teeth canine large two and bottom, the at four and top the
seal, of kind a sea-elephants, glided them Amongst fleur-de-lis. a of
measured species this of giants The trunks. flexible short, with
not did they but length; in half a and yards ten and round feet twenty
approached. we as move

Conseil. asked dangerous?" not are creatures "These

young their defend to have they When them. attack you unless not "No;
the break to them for uncommon not is it and terrible, is rage their
pieces." to fishing-boats

Conseil. said right," quite are "They

not." are they say not do "I

shelters which promontory the by stopped were we on farther miles Two
bellowings loud heard we it Beyond winds. southerly the from bay the
produce. would ruminants of troop a as such

bulls!" of concert "a Conseil; said "Good!"

morses." of concert a "No;

fighting!" are "They

playing." or fighting either are "They

and stumbles, unforeseen amid rocks, blackish the climb to began now We
over rolled I once than More slippery. made ice the which stones over
did steady, more or prudent more Conseil, loins. my of expense the at
saying: up, me helped and stumble, not

would you steps, wider take to kindness the have would you sir, "If,
better." equilibrium your preserve

plain white vast a saw I promontory, the of ridge upper the at Arrived
we what and themselves, amongst playing were They morses. with covered
anger. of not pleasure, of bellowings were heard

for leisurely, them examine could I animals curious these passed I As
yellowish a of rugged, and thick were skins Their move. not did they
them of Some scant. and short was hair their red; to approaching tint,
their than timid less and Quieter long. quarter a and yards four were
round sentinels place them, like not, did they north, the of cousins
of city this examining After encampment. their of outskirts the
if and, o'clock, eleven was It returning. of think to began I morses,
wished I observations, for favourable conditions the found Nemo Captain
running pathway narrow a followed We operation. the at present be to
had we eleven half-past At shore. steep the of summit the along
bringing aground, run had boat The landed. we where place the reached
instruments his basalt, of block a on standing him saw I Captain. the
sun the which near horizon, northern the on fixed eyes his him, near
him, beside place my took I curve. lengthened a describing then was
did sun the before, as and, arrived, Noon speaking. without waited and
If wanting. still were Observations fatality. a was It appear. not
We any. taking of idea all up give must we to-morrow, accomplished not
would 21st, the To-morrow, March. of 20th the at exactly indeed were
six for horizon the behind disappear would sun the equinox; the be
begin. would night polar long the disappearance its with and months,
horizon, northern the from emerged had it equinox September the Since
this At December. of 21st the to up spirals lengthened by rising
to begun had it regions, northern the of solstice summer the period,
I them. upon rays last its shed to was to-morrow and descend;
Nemo. Captain to observations and fears my communicated

the take cannot I to-morrow "if he; said Aronnax," M. right, are "You
But months. six for it do to able be not shall I sun, the of altitude
of 21st the on seas these into me led has chance because precisely
the see can we twelve at if take, to easy be will bearings my March,
sun."

Captain?" "Why,

it that curves lengthened such described day of orb the then "Because
grave and horizon, the above height its exactly measure to difficult is
instruments." with made be may errors

then?" do you will "What

"If Nemo. Captain replied chronometer," my use only shall "I
for allowing sun, the of disc the March, of 21st the to-morrow,
I that show will it horizon, northern the by cut exactly is refraction,
Pole." South the at am

correct, mathematically not is statement this "But I. said so," "Just
noon." at begin necessarily not does equinox the because

do we and yards hundred a be not will error the but sir; likely, "Very
then!" to-morrow, Till more. want not

the survey to remained I and Conseil board. on returned Nemo Captain
bed, to went I Then o'clock. five until studying and observing shore,
the of favour the Indian, the like invoking, without however, not,
morning, the in five at March, of 21st the day, next The orb. radiant
there. Nemo Captain found I platform. the mounted I

hope. some have "I he. said little," a lightening is weather "The
observation." for post a choose and shore on go will we breakfast After

me. with him take to wanted I Land. Ned sought I settled, point That
and taciturnity his that saw I and refused, Canadian obstinate the But
his for sorry not was I all, After day. by day grew humour bad his
seals many too were there Indeed, circumstances. the under obstinacy
unreflecting this in temptation such lay to not ought we and shore, on
had Nautilus The shore. on went we over, Breakfast way. fisherman's
from league whole a was It night. the in up further miles some gone
yards hundred five about peak sharp a reared which above coast, the
the and crew, the of men two Nemo, Captain me with took boat The high.
a and telescope, a chronometer, a of consisted which instruments,
the to belonging whales numerous saw I crossing, While barometer.
English the or whale, the seas; southern the to peculiar kinds three
reeved with "humpback," the fin; dorsal no has which whale," "right
form not do name, its of spite in which, fins, whitish large, and chest
the all of liveliest the brown, yellowish a of fin-back, the and wings;
throws he when off way long a heard is creature powerful This cetacea.
whirlwinds like look which vapour, and air of columns height great a to
troops in themselves disporting were mammals different These smoke. of
Antarctic the of basin this that see could I and waters; quiet the in
by tracked closely too cetacea the to refuge of place a as serves Pole
reeds. the between floating medusae large noticed also I hunters. the

to flying were clouds the brightening, was sky the landed; we nine At
the of surface cold the leaving be to seemed fog the and south, the
meant doubtless he which peak, the towards went Nemo Captain waters.
and lava sharp the over ascent painful a was It observatory. his be to
sulphurous a with impregnated often atmosphere an in pumice-stones, the
land, on walk to unaccustomed man a For cracks. smoking the from smell
saw never I agility an with slopes steep the climbed Captain the
hours two were We envied. have would hunter a which and equalled
half and porphyry half was which peak, this of summit the to getting
the towards which, sea vast a upon looked we thence From basalt.
feet our At sky. the upon line boundary its traced distinctly north,
free azure, pale a heads our Over whiteness. dazzling of fields lay
fire, of ball a like seemed sun the of disc the north the To fog. from
the of bosom the From horizon. the of cutting the by horned already
the lay distance the In hundreds. by jets liquid of sheaves rose water
south the to us, Behind water. the on asleep cetacean a like Nautilus
the ice, and rocks of heap chaotic a and country immense an east, and
Captain summit the at arriving On visible. not were which of limits
have would he for barometer, the of height mean the took carefully Nemo
twelve to quarter a At observations. his taking in that consider to
disc golden a like looked refraction, by only seen then sun, the
which seas and continent deserted this upon rays last its shedding
lenticular a with furnished Nemo, Captain ploughed. yet had man never
watched refraction, the corrected mirror, a of means by which, glass
lengthened a following degrees, by horizon the below sinking orb the
the If fast. beat heart My chronometer. the held I diagonal.
o'clock twelve with coincided sun the of half-disc the of disappearance
itself. pole the at were we chronometer, the on

exclaimed. I "Twelve!"

me handing voice, grave a in Nemo, Captain replied Pole!" South "The
the by parts equal exactly in cut orb the showed which glass, the
horizon.

mounting shadows the and peak, the crowning rays last the at looked I
with resting Nemo, Captain moment that At slopes. its up degrees by
said: shoulder, my on hand his

the reached have 1868, March, of day 21st this on Nemo, Captain "I,
part this of possession take I and degree; ninetieth the on Pole South
continents." known the of one-sixth to equal globe, the of

Captain?" name, whose "In

sir!" own, my "In

in "N" an bearing banner, black a unfurled Nemo Captain which, Saying
day, of orb the towards turning Then, bunting. its on quartered gold
exclaimed: he sea, the of horizon the lapped rays last whose

sea, open this beneath rest orb! radiant thou Disappear, sun! "Adieu,
domains!" new my over shadows its spread months six of night a let and



XV CHAPTER

INCIDENT? OR ACCIDENT

preparations morning, the in six at March, of 22nd the day, next The
melting were twilight of gleams last The begun. were departure for
with shone constellations the great, was cold The night. into
Southern wondrous that glittered zenith the In intensity. wonderful
120 showed thermometer The regions. Antarctic of bear polar Cross--the
of Flakes biting. most was it freshened wind the when and zero, below
alike. everywhere seemed sea The water. open the on increased ice
formation the showing surface, the on spread patches blackish Numerous
six the during frozen basin, southern the Evidently ice. fresh of
whales the of became What inaccessible. absolutely was months, winter
more seeking icebergs, the beneath went they Doubtless time? that in
a in live to accustomed morses, and seals the to As seas. practicable
have creatures These shores. icy these on remained they climate, hard
To open. them keep to and ice-field the in holes break to instinct the
the by away driven birds, the when breath; for come they holes these
sole remain mammals sea these north, the to emigrated have cold,
with filling were reservoirs the But continent. polar the of masters
it deep feet 1,000 At descending. slowly was Nautilus the and water,
the towards straight advanced it and waves, the beat screw its stopped;
was it night Towards hour. an miles fifteen of speed a at north
in three At iceberg. the of body immense the under floating already
and bed my in up sat I shock. violent a by awakened was I morning the
the of middle the into thrown was I when darkness, the in listened
I violently. rebounded had struck, having after Nautilus, The room.
which saloon, the to staircase the by and partition, the along groped
Fortunately upset. was furniture The ceiling. luminous the by lit was
the on pictures The fast. held had and set, firmly were windows the
the to clinging were vertical, longer no being from side, starboard
from foot a least at hanging were side port the of those whilst paper,
perfectly side starboard its on lying was Nautilus The wall. the
Captain but voices; of confusion a and footsteps, heard I motionless.
Conseil and Land Ned saloon, the leaving was I As appear. not did Nemo
entered.

once. at I, said matter?" the is "What

Conseil. replied sir," you, ask to came "I

The enough! well know "I Canadian, the exclaimed it!" "Confound
think not do I lies, she way the by judging and, struck; has Nautilus
Straits." Torres in time first the did she as herself right will she

sea?" the of surface the to come least at she "has asked, I "But,"

Conseil. said know," not do "We

my To manometer. the consulted I answered. I decide," to easy is "It
does "What fathoms. 180 than more of depth a showed it surprise, great
exclaimed. I mean?" that

Conseil. said Nemo," Captain ask must "We

Land. Ned said him?" find we shall where "But

companions. my to I, said me," "Follow

centre the At library. the in one no was There saloon. the left We
I one. no was there crew, ship's the of berths the by staircase,
to best was It cage. pilot's the in be must Nemo Captain that thought
remained we minutes twenty For saloon. the to returned all We wait.
board on made be might which noise slightest the hear to trying thus,
his us; see to not seemed He entered. Nemo Captain when Nautilus, the
watched He uneasiness. of signs showed impassive, so generally face,
the to going and, manometer; the then silently, compass the
southern the representing spot a on finger his placed planisphere,
he when later, minutes some but, him; interrupt not would I seas.
the in expressions own his of one using said, I me, towards turned
Straits: Torres

Captain?" incident, "An

time." this accident an sir; "No,

"Serious?"

"Perhaps."

immediate?" danger the "Is

"No."

stranded?" has Nautilus "The

"Yes."

happened--how?" has this "And

a Not man. of ignorance the from not nature, of caprice a "From
prevent cannot we But working. the in made been has mistake
but laws, human brave may We effects. its producing from equilibrium
ones." natural resist cannot we

this uttering for moment strange a chosen had Nemo Captain
little. me helped answer his whole, the On reflection. philosophical

accident?" this of cause the sir, ask, I "May

he over," turned has mountain, whole a ice, of block enormous "An
water warmer by base their at undermined are icebergs "When replied.
thing whole the and rises, gravity of centre their shocks reiterated or
it as blocks, these of one happened; has what is This over. turns
with it raised hull, its under gliding then, Nautilus, the struck fell,
where thick, so not are which beds into it bringing force, irresistible
side." its on lying is it

that reservoirs, its emptying by off Nautilus the get not we can "But
equilibrium?" its regain might it

pump the hear can You moment. this at done being is sir, "That,
the that shows it manometer; the of needle the at Look working.
and, it; with floating is ice of block the but rising, is Nautilus
be cannot position our motion, ascending its stops obstacle some until
altered."

starboard; to position same the held still Nautilus the Indeed,
this at But stopped. block the when itself right would it doubtless
two the between crushed frightfully be not may we if knows who moment
position. our of consequences the all on reflected I surfaces? glassy
of fall the Since manometer. the off eyes his took never Nemo Captain
but feet, fifty and hundred a about risen had Nautilus the iceberg, the
slight a Suddenly perpendicular. the with angle same the made still it
little. a righting was it Evidently hold. the in felt was movement
normal their to returning sensibly were saloon the in hanging Things
spoke. one No upright. the nearing were partitions The position.
boards The straightening. the felt and watched we hearts beating With
passed. minutes Ten feet. our under horizontal became

exclaimed. I righted!" have we last "At

saloon. the of door the to going Nemo, Captain said "Yes,"

asked. I floating?" we are "But

when and, empty; not are reservoirs the "since replied; he "Certainly,"
sea." the of surface the to rise must Nautilus the empty,

either on yards, ten about of distance a at but sea; open in were We
beneath and Above ice. of wall dazzling a rose Nautilus, the of side
iceberg the of surface lower the because Above, wall. same the
the because Beneath, ceiling. immense an like us over stretched
on resting-place a found had degrees, by slid having block, overturned
was Nautilus The position. that in it kept which walls, lateral the
in yards twenty than more ice of tunnel perfect a in imprisoned really
by it of out get to easy was It water. quiet with filled breadth,
under passage free a make then and backward, or forward either going
had ceiling luminous The deeper. yards of hundreds some iceberg, the
intense with resplendent still was saloon the but extinguished, been
sent partition glass the from reflection powerful the was It light.
the describe cannot I lantern. the of sheets the to back violently
cut; capriciously so blocks great the upon rays voltaic the of effect
different a thrown was facet every ridge, every angle, every upon
a ice; the through running veins the of nature the to according light,
rays blue their sapphires, of particularly gems, of mine dazzling
opal were there and Here emerald. the of green the with crossing
like spots bright through running softness, wonderful of shades
The bear. not could eye the which of brilliancy the fire, of diamonds
lamp a like hundredfold, a increased seemed lantern the of power
lighthouse. first-class a of plates lenticular the through

Conseil. cried beautiful!" how beautiful! "How

Ned?" not, it Is sight. wonderful a is "it said, I "Yes,"

mad am I superb! is "it Land, Ned answered Yes," it! confound "Yes,
it; like anything seen ever has one No it. admit to obliged being at
are we think I all, say must I if And, dear. us cost may sight the but
see." to man intended never God which things here seeing

made Conseil from cry a Suddenly beautiful. too was it right, was Ned
turn. me

asked. I it?" is "What

Conseil which, Saying sir!" look, not Do sir! eyes, your "Shut
eyes. his over hands his clapped

boy?" my matter, the is what "But

blinded." dazzled, am "I

stand not could I but glass, the towards involuntarily turned eyes My
happened. had what understood I them. devour to seemed which fire the
the of lustre quiet the All speed. full on put had Nautilus The
from fire The lightning. of flashes into changed once at was ice-walls
calm to time some required It blinding. was diamonds of myriads these
down. taken were hands the last At looks. troubled our

Conseil. said it," believed have never should I "Faith,

at felt was shock a moment that at and morning; the in five then was It
of block a struck had spur its that knew I Nautilus. the of bows the
tunnel, submarine this for manoeuvre, false a been have must It ice.
that thought I navigation. easy very not was blocks, by obstructed
obstacles these turn either would course, his changing by Nemo, Captain
road the case, any In tunnel. the of windings the follow else or
my to contrary But, blocked. entirely be not could us before
motion. retrograde decided a took Nautilus the expectations,

Conseil. said backwards?" going are "We

egress." no have can tunnel the of end "This replied. I "Yes,"

then?" "And

go and again, back go must We easy. is working "the I, said "Then,"
all." is That opening. southern the at out

was. really I than confident more appear to wished I thus, speaking In
and, increasing; was Nautilus the of motion retrograde the But
speed. great at us carried it screw, the reversing

Ned. said hindrance," a be will "It

at out get we provided less, or more hours some matter, it does "What
last?"

last!" at out get do we "provided Land, Ned repeated "Yes,"

My library. the to saloon the from walked I time short a For
a took and ottoman, an on myself threw soon I silent. were companions
after, hour an of quarter A mechanically. overran eyes my which book,
very reading are you what "Is said, me, approaching Conseil,
sir?" interesting,

replied. I interesting!" "Very

reading." are you book own your is It sir. so, think should "I

book?" "My

Submarine Great the on work the hand my in holding was I indeed And
to returned and book the closed I it. of dream even not did I Depths.
go. to rose Conseil and Ned walk. my

remain us "Let them. detaining I, said friends," my here, "Stay
block." this of out are we until together

replied. Conseil sir," please, you "As

the from hanging instruments the at looked often I passed. hours Some
constant a at kept Nautilus the that showed manometer The partition.
to pointed still compass the yards; hundred three than more of depth
in which, hour, an miles twenty of speed a indicated log the south;
he that knew Nemo Captain But great. very was space, cramped a such
At us. to ages worth were minutes that and much, too hasten not could
time this place, took shock second a eight past minutes twenty-five
I side. my by close were companions My pale. turned I behind. from
than better feelings our expressed looks Our hand. Conseil's seized
to up went I saloon. the entered Captain the moment this At words.
him.

asked. I southward?" barred is course "Our

outlet." every closed and shifted has iceberg The sir. "Yes,

then?" up blocked are "We

"Yes."



XVI CHAPTER

AIR OF WANT

of wall impenetrable an was below, and above Nautilus, the around Thus
His Captain. the watched I iceberg. the to prisoners were We ice.
imperturbability. habitual its resumed had countenance

the in dying of ways two are "there calmly, said he "Gentlemen,"
the had person puzzling (This placed." are we which in circumstances
is first "The pupils.) his to lecturing professor mathematical a of air
of speak not do I suffocation. of die to is second the crushed; be to
the in provisions of supply the for hunger, of dying of possibility the
then, us, Let shall. we than longer last certainly will Nautilus
chances." our calculate

feared, be to not is "that replied, I Captain," suffocation, to "As
full." are reservoirs our because

for Now, air. of supply days' two yield only will they but so; "Just
the already and water, the under hidden been have we hours thirty-six
forty-eight In renewal. requires Nautilus the of atmosphere heavy
exhausted." be will reserve our hours

hours?" forty-eight before delivered be we can Captain, "Well,

us." surrounds that wall the piercing by least, at it, attempt will "We

side?" which "On

the on aground Nautilus the run to going am I us. tell will "Sound
is that side the on iceberg the attack will men my and bank, lower
thick." least

the that noise hissing a by discovered I Soon out. went Nemo Captain
and slowly, sank Nautilus The reservoirs. the entering was water
lower the which at depth the yards, 350 of depth a at ice the on rested
immersed. was bank

your on rely I but serious, is situation "our said, I friends," "My
energy." and courage

general the for anything do to ready am "I Canadian, the replied "Sir,"
safety."

Canadian. the to hand my out held I and Ned," "Good!

as pickaxe the with handy as being "that, continued, he add," will "I
my command can he Captain, the to useful be can I if harpoon, the with
services."

Ned!" Come, help. your refuse not will "He

on putting were Nautilus the of crew the where room the to him led I
he which proposal, Ned's of Captain the told I cork-jackets. their
soon as ready was and sea-costume, his on put Canadian The accepted.
the re-entered I dressed, was Ned When companions. his as
near posted and, open, were glass of panes the where drawing-room,
Some Nautilus. the supported that beds ambient the examined I Conseil,
ice, of bank the on foot set crew the of dozen a saw we after, instants
was Nemo Captain stature. his by known easily Land, Ned them among and
soundings, the took he walls, the dig to proceeding Before them. with
were lines sounding Long direction. right the in working of sure be to
stopped again were they yards fifteen after but walls, side the in sunk
ceiling-like the on it attack to useless was It wall. thick the by
in yards 400 than more measured itself iceberg the since surface,
yards ten There surface. lower the sounded then Nemo Captain height.
the of thickness the was great so water, the from us separated wall of
in equal piece a it from cut to therefore, necessary, was It ice-field.
cubic 6,000 about were There Nautilus. the of waterline the to extent
the to descend could we which by hole a dig to as so detach, to yards
with on carried and immediately begun had work The ice-field.
which Nautilus the round digging of Instead energy. indefatigable
immense an had Nemo Captain difficulty, greater involved have would
to set men the Then port-quarter. the from yards eight at made trench
its of points several on screws their with simultaneously work
matter compact this attacked pickaxe the Presently circumference.
curious a By mass. the from detached were blocks large and vigorously,
so fled, water, than lighter blocks, these gravity, specific of effect
at thickness in increased that tunnel, the of vault the to speak, to
mattered that But base. the at diminished it as proportion in top the
hard hours' two After thinner. grew part lower the as long so little,
by replaced were comrades his and He exhausted. in came Land Ned work,
the of lieutenant second The joined. I and Conseil whom workers, new
I but cold, singularly seemed water The us. superintended Nautilus
enough, free were movements My pickaxe. the handling warm got soon
I When atmospheres. thirty of pressure a under made were they although
I rest, and food some take to hours, two working after re-entered,
the which with fluid pure the between difference perceptible a found
Nautilus, the of atmosphere the and me supplied engine Rouquayrol
for renewed been not had air The acid. carbonic with charged already
considerably were qualities vivifying its and hours, forty-eight
raised only had we hours, twelve of lapse a after However, enfeebled.
about was which surface, marked the on thick, yard one ice of block a
accomplish to hours twelve took it that Reckoning yards! cubic 600
this bring to days four and nights five take would it much this
days! four and nights Five conclusion. satisfactory a to enterprise
"Without reservoirs! the in days two for enough air only have we And
this of out get we if even "that, Ned, said account," into taking
shut iceberg, the under imprisoned be also shall we prison, infernal
enough! True atmosphere." the with communication possible all from out
our for necessary time of minimum the foresee then could Who
regain could Nautilus the before suffocated be might We deliverance?
ice-tomb, this in perish to destined it Was waves? the of surface the
everyone But terrible. was situation The enclosed? it those all with
his do to determined was each and face, the in danger the looked had
last. the to duty

carried was square yard a block new a night the during expected, I As
morning the in But hollow. immense the sank further still and away,
a at mass slushy the traversed I cork-jacket, my in dressed when,
the that remarked I zero, below degrees seven or six of temperature
from farthest water of beds The in. closing gradually were walls side
tendency a showed work, men's the by warmed not were that trench, the
what danger, imminent and new this of presence In solidification. to
the hinder how and safety, of chances our of become would
partitions the burst would that medium, liquid this of solidification
glass? like Nautilus the of

of good the was What danger. new this of companions my tell not did I
But escape? of work painful the in displayed they energy the damping
grave this of Nemo Captain told I again, board on went I when
complication.

most the counteract could which tone calm that in said, he it," know "I
of way no see I but more; danger one is "It apprehensions. terrible
than quicker go to is safety of chance only the it; escaping
all." is that it, with beforehand be must We solidification.

work The vigorously. pickaxe my used I hours several for day this On
breathe and Nautilus, the quit to was work to Besides, up. me kept
our by supplied and reservoirs, the from drawn air pure the directly
atmosphere. vitiated and impoverished the quit to and apparatus,
on returned I When deeper. yard one dug was trench the evening Towards
air the which with acid carbonic the by suffocated nearly was I board,
this away drive to means chemical the only had we if filled--ah! was
a contained water this all oxygen; of plenty had We gas. deleterious
it piles, powerful our with it dissolving by and quantity, considerable
of but it; over well thought had I fluid. vivifying the restore would
respiration our by produced acid carbonic the since that, was good what
necessary was it it, absorb To vessel? the of part every invaded had
incessantly. them shake to and potash, caustic with jars some fill to
it. replace could nothing and board, on wanting was substance this Now
reservoirs, his of taps the open to ought Nemo Captain evening, that On
this without Nautilus; the of interior the into air pure some let and
next The suffocation. of sense the of rid get not could we precaution
yard. fifth the beginning in work miner's my resumed I 26th, March day,
visibly. thickened iceberg the of surface lower the and walls side The
to able was Nautilus the before meet would they that evident was It
nearly pickaxe my instant; an for me seized Despair itself. disengage
be must I if digging of good the was What hands. my from fell
stone?--a into turning was that water the by crushed suffocated,
have not would even savages the of ferocity the that punishment
hand his touched I me. near passed Nemo Captain then Just invented!
advanced had port to wall The prison. our of walls the him showed and
Captain The Nautilus. the of hull the from yards four least at to
took I board. on went We him. follow to me signed and me, understood
drawing-room. the into him accompanied and cork-jacket my off

be shall we or means, desperate some attempt must we Aronnax, "M.
cement." in as water solidified this in up sealed

done?" be to is what but "Yes;

without pressure this bear to enough strong were Nautilus my if "Ah!
crushed!" being

idea. Captain's the catching not asked, I "Well?"

water of congelation this "that replied, he understand," not you "Do
would it solidification, its by that see not you Do us? help will
freezes, it when as, us, imprisons that ice of field this through burst
an be would it that perceive not you Do stones? hardest the bursts it
destruction?" of instead safety of agent

the crushing to resistance whatever But, perhaps. Captain, "Yes,
and pressure, terrible this support not could it possesses, Nautilus
plate." iron an like flattened be would

nature, of aid the on reckon not must we Therefore sir. it, know "I
only Not solidification. this stop must We exertions. own our on but
of feet ten not is there but together; pressed be walls side the will
on us on gains congelation The Nautilus. the behind or before water
sides." all

on breathe to us for last reservoirs the in air the will long "How
board?"

empty!" be will they to-morrow "After face. my in looked Captain The

at astonished been have to I ought However, me. over came sweat cold A
We seas. polar open the in was Nautilus the 22, March On answer? the
board. on reserve the on lived had we days five For 26. at were
workers. the for kept be must air respirable the of left was what And
an that vivid so still is recollection my write, I as now, Even
air. without be to seem lungs my and me seizes terror involuntary
had idea an evidently and silently, reflected Nemo Captain Meanwhile,
escaped words these last, At it. reject to seemed he but him; struck
lips: his

muttered. he water!" "Boiling

cried. I water?" "Boiling

confined. relatively is that space a in enclosed are We sir. "Yes,
pumps, the by injected constantly water, boiling of jets not Would
congelation?" the stay and part this in temperature the raise

resolutely. said I it," try us "Let

Professor." it, try us "Let

to me took Nemo Captain outside. 7 at stood then thermometer The
furnished that stood machines distillatory vast the where galleys, the
and water, with these filled They evaporation. by water drinkable the
worms the through thrown was piles the from heat electric the all
It 100. reached water this minutes few a In liquid. the in bathed
in it replaced water fresh while pumps, the towards directed was
cold that such was troughs the by developed heat The proportion.
the through gone having only after sea the from up drawn water,
was injection The pump. the of body the into boiling came machines,
zero below 6 marked thermometer the after hours three and begun,
only thermometer the later hours Two gained. was degree One outside.
4. marked

anxiously having after Captain, the to said I succeed," shall "We
operation. the of result the watched

more no have We crushed. be not shall we "that answered, he think," "I
fear." to suffocation

below 1 to rose water the of temperature the night the During
as But, point. higher a to it carry not could injections The zero.
at was I 2, least at produces sea-water the of congelation the
solidification. of dangers the against reassured least

twelve cleared, been had ice of yards six 27th, March day, next The
forty-eight yet was There away. cleared be to remaining only feet
the of interior the in renewed be not could air The work. hours'
weight intolerable An worse. it make would day this And Nautilus.
rose feeling this evening the in o'clock three Towards me. oppressed
as panted lungs My jaws. my dislocated Yawns degree. violent a to
more. and more rarefied became which fluid, burning this inhaled they
unconscious. almost powerless, was I me. of hold took torpor moral A
in suffering and symptoms same the exhibiting though Conseil, brave My
and me, encouraged and hand my took He me. left never manner, same the
leave to as so breathe, not only could I if "Oh! murmur, him heard I
master!" my for air more

to situation our If thus. speak him hearing on eyes my into came Tears
would gladness and haste what with interior, the in intolerable was all
on sounded Pickaxes turn! our in work to cork-jackets our on put we
hands. our off torn was skin the ached, arms Our ice-beds. frozen the
air Vital matter? wounds the did what fatigues, these were what But
breathed! we breathed! We lungs! the to came

prescribed the beyond task voluntary his prolonged one no time this All
panting his to turn in handed one each accomplished, task His time.
set Nemo Captain life. with him supplied that apparatus the companions
the When discipline. severe this to first submitted and example, the
the to returned and another to apparatus his up gave he came, time
unmurmuring. unflinching, calm, board, on air vitiated

vigour. unusual with accomplished was work ordinary the day that On
only yards Two surface. the from raised be to remained yards two Only
emptied nearly were reservoirs the But sea. open the from us separated
not workers; the for kept be to ought remained that little The air. of
half was I board, on back went I When Nautilus. the for particle a
next The it. describe to how not know I night! a What suffocated.
my in pain the accompanied Dizziness oppressed. was breathing my day
same the showed companions My man. drunken a like me made and head
throat. the in rattling had crew the of Some symptoms.

the finding Nemo, Captain imprisonment, our of sixth the day, that On
still that ice-bed the crush to resolved slowly, too work pickaxes
energy and coolness man's This sheet. liquid the from us separated
force. moral by pains physical his subdued He him. forsook never

the from raised say, to is that lightened, was vessel the orders his By
it towed they floated it When gravity. specific of change a by ice-bed
the of level the on made trench immense the above it bring to as so
and descended he water, of reservoirs his filling Then, water-line.
hole. the in up himself shut

of door double the and board, on came crew the all then Just
ice, of bed the on rested then Nautilus The shut. was communication
had leads sounding the which and thick, yard one not was which
then were reservoirs the of taps The places. thousand a in perforated
the increasing in, let was water of yards cubic hundred a and opened,
listened, we waited, We tons. 1,800 to Nautilus the of weight
last this on depended safety Our hope. in sufferings our forgetting
the heard soon I head, my in buzzing the Notwithstanding chance.
a with cracked ice The Nautilus. the of hull the under sound humming
sank. Nautilus the and paper, tearing like noise, singular

ear. my in Conseil murmured off!" are "We

it pressed and hand, his seized I him. answer not could I
overcharge, frightful its by away carried once, at All convulsively.
it say, to is that waters, the under bullet a like sank Nautilus the
on put was force electric the all Then vacuum. a in was it if as fell
reservoirs. the of out water the let to began soon that pumps, the
manometer the too, Soon, stopped. was fall our minutes, some After
made speed, full at going screw, The movement. ascending an indicated
north. the towards us drew and bolts very its to tremble hull iron the
we before day another last to is iceberg the under floating this if But
first. dead be shall I sea, open the reach

face My suffocating. was I library, the in divan a upon stretched Half
nor saw neither I suspended. faculties my blue, lips my purple, was
not could muscles My mind. my from gone had time of notion All heard.
was I but thus, passed hours many how know not do I contract.
was I if as felt I me. over coming was that agony the of conscious
my penetrated air of breaths Some to. came I Suddenly die. to going
the of free we Were waves? the of surface the to risen we Had lungs.
sacrificing were friends, brave two my Conseil, and Ned No! iceberg?
the at remained still air of particles Some me. save to themselves
me, for it kept had they it, using of Instead apparatus. one of bottom
drop. by drop life, me gave they suffocated, being were they while and,
some for and hands, my held they thing; the back push to wanted I
the in eleven was it clock; the at looked I freely. breathed I moments
a at went Nautilus The March. of 28th the be to ought It morning.
the through tore literally It hour. an miles forty pace, frightful
companions his Were succumbed? he Had Nemo? Captain was Where water.
not were we that indicated manometer the moment the At him? with dead
separated ice of plate mere A surface. the from feet twenty than more
case any In Perhaps. it? break not we Could atmosphere. the from us
oblique an in was it that felt I it. attempt to going was Nautilus the
introduction The bows. the raising and stern, the lowering position,
Then, equilibrium. its disturbing of means the been had water of
beneath from ice-field the attacked it screw, powerful its by impelled
then and backing by it broke It battering-ram. formidable a like
at and way; gave gradually which field, the against forward rushing
that ice-field, the on forwards shot it, against suddenly dashing last,
torn say might opened--one was panel The weight. its beneath crushed
Nautilus. the of parts all to abundance in in came air pure the off--and



XVII CHAPTER

AMAZON THE TO HORN CAPE FROM

had Canadian the perhaps idea; no have I platform, the to on got I How
My sea-air. vivifying the inhaled I breathed, I But there. me carried
other The particles. fresh the with drunk getting were companions two
with not could they that food, without long so been had men unhappy
on We, them. given were that aliments simplest the in indulge impunity
air this draw could we ourselves; restrain to end no had contrary, the
that alone, breeze the breeze, the was it and lungs, our into freely
enjoyment. keen this with us filled

not need Master is! oxygen this delightful "how Conseil, said "Ah!"
everybody." for enough is There it. breathe to fear

frighten to enough wide jaws his opened he but speak, not did Land Ned
I me, round looked I when and, returned, soon strength Our shark. a
Nautilus the in seamen foreign The platform. the on alone were we saw
of none interior; the in circulated that air the with contented were
air. open the in drink to come had them

my to thankfulness and gratitude of words were spoke I words first The
last the during life my prolonged had Conseil and Ned companions. two
such repay not could gratitude my All agony. long this of hours
devotion.

am I and ever, for other the to one bound are "we I, said friends," "My
you." to obligations infinite under

Canadian. the exclaimed of," advantage take shall I "Which

Conseil. said mean?" you do "What

infernal this leave I when me with you take shall I that mean "I
Nautilus."

right?" going we are this, all "after Conseil, said "Well,"

the here and sun, the of way the going are we "for replied, I "Yes,"
north." the in is sun

will he whether seen be to remains it "but Land; Ned said doubt," "No
into is, that Ocean, Atlantic the or Pacific the into ship the bring
seas." deserted or frequented

would Nemo Captain that feared I and question, that answer not could I
and Asia of coasts the touches that ocean vast the to us take rather
the round tour the complete thus would He time. same the at America
could Nautilus the which in waters those to return and world, submarine
point. important this settle to long, before ought, We freely. sail
passed, soon was circle polar The pace. rapid a at went Nautilus The
point, American the off were We Horn. Cape for shaped course the and
past our all Then evening. the in o'clock seven at 31st, March
the in imprisonment that of remembrance The forgotten. were sufferings
future. the of thought only We minds. our from effaced was ice
the on or drawing-room the in either again appear not did Nemo Captain
by marked and, planisphere, the on day each shown point The platform.
on Now, Nautilus. the of direction exact the me showed lieutenant, the
were we that satisfaction, great my to, evident, was it evening, that
when 1st, April day, next The Atlantic. the by North the to back going
we noon, before minutes some surface the to ascended Nautilus the
first the which Fuego, del Terra was It west. the to land sighted
from rose that smoke of quantity the seeing from thus named navigators
distance the in but me, to low seemed coast The huts. natives' the
Mount of glimpse a had I thought even I mountains. high rose
a with sea, the of level the above yards 2,070 rises that Sarmiento,
a is clear, or misty is it as according which, summit, pointed very
clearly was peak the moment this At weather. wet of or fine of sign
water, the under again diving Nautilus, The sky. the against defined
the From off. miles few some only was which coast, the approached
gigantic and seaweeds long saw I drawing-room, the in windows glass
many so contains sea polar open the which of varech, and fuci
300 about measured they filaments; polished sharp their with specimens,
having and, thumb; one's than thicker cables, length--real in yards
weed Another vessels. for ropes as used often are they tenacity, great
coral the in buried long, feet four leaves with velp, as known
for food and nest as served It bottom. the at hung concretions,
seals There cuttlefish. and crabs, molluscs, and crustacea of myriads
with fish of flesh the eating repasts, splendid had otters and
fertile this Over fashion. English the to according sea-vegetables,
Towards rapidity. great with passed Nautilus the ground luxuriant and
I which of summits rough the group, Falkland the approached it evening
On moderate. was sea the of depth The day. following the recognised
and weed, sea of specimens beautiful in brought nets our shores the
the with filled were which of roots the fucus, certain a particularly
the on dozens by fell ducks and Geese world. the in mussels best
board. on pantry the in places their took soon and platform,

the from disappeared had Falklands the of heights last the When
and yards, twenty-five and twenty between to sank Nautilus the horizon,
Until himself. show not did Nemo Captain coast. American the followed
sometimes Patagonia, of shores the quit not did we April of 3rd the
beyond passed Nautilus The surface. the at sometimes ocean, the under
northwards, was direction Its Uraguay. the by formed estuary large the
had We America. South of coast the of windings long the followed and
Japan. of seas the in embarkation our since miles 1,600 made then
crossed was Capricorn of Tropic the morning the in o'clock eleven About
to out standing Frio Cape passed we and meridian, thirty-seventh the on
the like not did displeasure, great Land's Ned to Nemo, Captain sea.
giddy a at went we for Brazil, of coasts inhabited the of neighbourhood
us, follow could kind swiftest the of bird a not fish, a Not speed.
observation. all escaped seas these of curiosities natural the and

9th the of evening the in and days, several for up kept was speed This
forms that America South of point westerly most the sighted we April of
the sought and again, swerved Nautilus the then But Roque. San Cape
and Cape this between is which valley submarine a of depth lowest
the to bifurcates valley This coast. African the on Leone Sierra
enormous the by mouth the at terminates and Antilles, the of parallel
the of basin geological the place, this In yards. 9,000 of depression
half a and three to cliff a Antilles, Lesser the as far as forms, ocean
Verde Cape the of parallel the at and, height, in perpendicular miles
all thus encloses that considerable, less not wall other an Islands,
valley immense this of bottom The Atlantic. the of continent sunk the
a places submarine these to give that mountains, some with dotted is
that charts manuscript the from moreover, speak, I aspect. picturesque
Captain to due evidently Nautilus--charts the of library the in were
days two For observations. personal his after made and hand, Nemo's
inclined the of means by visited were waters deep and desert the
which broadsides diagonal long with furnished was Nautilus The planes.
rose it April of 11th the on But elevations. all to it carried
vast a River, Amazon the of mouth the at appeared land and suddenly,
freshens it that considerable so is which of embouchure the estuary,
leagues. several of distance the for sea-water the

a Guianas, the were west the to miles Twenty crossed. was equator The
a but refuge; easy an found have could we which on territory, French
allowed have not would waves furious the and blowing, was breeze stiff
he for doubt, no that, understood Land Ned them. face to boat single a
his to allusion no made I part, my For it. about word a not spoke
that attempt an make to him urge not would I for flight, of schemes
interesting by pleasantly pass time the made I fail. inevitably must
not did Nautilus the 12th, and 11th April of days the During studies.
haul marvellous a in brought net the and sea, the of surface the leave
by up fished been had zoophytes Some reptiles. and fish Zoophytes, of
beautiful part most the for were they nets; the of chain the
other among and family, actinidian the to belonging phyctallines,
ocean, the of part that to peculiar protexta, phyctalis the species
lines, vertical With ornamented trunk, cylindrical little a with
tentacles. of blossoming marvellous a crowning dots, red with speckled
already had I some of consisted they molluscs, the to As
lines regular with porphyras, olive observed--turritellas,
flesh; the against plainly out standing spots red with intercrossed,
hyaleas, translucid scorpions; petrified like pteroceras, odd
of species certain and eating), (excellent cuttle-fish argonauts,
the amongst classed have antiquity of naturalists that calmars
had I cod-fishing. for bait for principally serve that and flying-fish,
shores. these on fish of species several studying of opportunity an now
eel, of sort a petromyzons-pricka, ones, cartilaginous the Amongst
back, grey-blue fins, violet head, greenish a with long, inches fifteen
eye the of pupil the spots, bright with sown and silvered belly, brown
Amazon the of current the that animal, curious gold--a with encircled
waters--tuberculated fresh inhabit they for sea, the to drawn had
long a with armed tail, loose long a and snouts, pointed with streaks,
and skin, whitish and grey long, yard a sharks, little sting; jagged
name the by known generally are that back, bent teeth, of rows several
a half triangle, isosceles red of kind a vespertilios, pantouffles; of
that prolongations fleshy by attached are pectorals which to long, yard
near situated appendage, horny their that but bats, like look them make
some lastly, sea-unicorns; of name the them given has nostrils, the
brilliant a of were spots whose curassavian, the balistae, of species
shades varying with and violet, clear of capriscus the and colour, gold
throat. pigeon's a like

very but perhaps, dry somewhat is which catalogue, this here end I
belonging passing in observed I that fish bony of series a with exact,
a of body the snow, as white is snout whose and apteronotes, the to
strip; fleshy loose long very a with marked black, beautiful
glittering long, inches nine sardines spikes; with armed odontognathes,
two with provided mackerel of species a light; silver bright a with
with for fished are that tint, blackish a of centronotes fins; anal
and white flesh, fat with length, in yards two fish, long torches,
like dry, when and eel, like taste fresh, arc they when which, firm,
bottom the at only scales with covered red, half labres, salmon; smoked
silver and gold which on chrysoptera, fins; anal and dorsal the of
golden-tailed topaz; and ruby the of that with brightness their blend
whose and delicate, extremely is which of flesh the spares,
waters; the of midst the in them betray properties phosphorescent
caudal gold with maigres, tongues; long with spares orange-coloured
etc. Surinam, of anableps thorn-tails, dark fins,

that fish mention to omit not must I cetera," "et this Notwithstanding
had nets our of One reason. good with and remember, long will Conseil
off, cut tail the with which, fish, ray flat very of sort a up hauled
white was It ounces. twenty weighed and disc, perfect a formed
encircled blue dark of spots round large with above, red underneath,
on out Laid fin. bilobed a in terminating skin, glossy very black, with
convulsive by itself turn to tried struggled, it platform, the
sent nearly had turn last one that efforts, many so made and movements,
to rushed go, fish the let to wishing not Conseil, But sea. the into it
In hands. both with it seized had him, prevent could I before and, it,
body his half and air, the in legs his overthrown, was he moment a
crying-- paralysed,

me!" help master! master, "Oh!

The familiarly. so me to spoken had boy poor the time first the was It
he till arms contracted his rubbed and up, him took I and Canadian
of cramp-fish a attacked had Conseil unfortunate The sensible. became
medium a in animal, odd This cumana. the kind, dangerous most the
great so distance, yards' several at fish strikes water, like conductor
which of surfaces principal two the organ, electric its of power the is
April day, next The feet. square twenty-seven than less measure not do
the of mouth the near coast, Dutch the approached Nautilus the 12th,
were they together; herded sea-cows of groups several There Maroni.
skenian the to belong stellera, the and dugong the like that, manatees,
from inoffensive, and peaceable animals, beautiful These order.
sixteen least at weigh length, in feet twenty-one to eighteen
had nature provident that Conseil and Land Ned told I hundredweight.
the like they, Indeed, mammalia. these to role important an assigned
thus and prairies, submarine the on graze to designed are seals,
rivers. tropical the obstructs that weed of accumulation the destroy

have men since result the been has "what added, I know," you do "And
weeds putrefied the That race? useful this annihilated entirely almost
fever, yellow the causes air poisoned the and air, the poisoned have
are vegetations Enormous countries. beautiful these desolates that
irresistibly is evil the and seas, torrid the under multiplied
are we If Florida. to Plata la de Rio the of mouth the from developed
the if be would it what to nothing is plague this Toussenel, believe to
poulps, with infested Then, seals. and whales of cleaned were seas
of centres immense become would they cuttle-fish, and medusae,
stomachs vast 'these possess not would waves their since infection,
seas.'" the of surface the infest to charged had God that



XVIII CHAPTER

POULPS THE

coast. American the from off kept Nautilus the days several For
of or Mexico of Gulf the of tides the risk to wish not did it Evidently
and Martinique sighted we 16th, April Antilles. the of sea the
tall their saw I miles. thirty about of distance a from Guadaloupe
his out carrying on counted who Canadian, The instant. an for peaks
numerous the of one hailing or landing either by Gulf, the in projects
disheartened. quite was another, to island one from coast that boats
to able been had Land Ned if practicable, quite been have would Flight
in But knowledge. Captain's the without boat the of possession take
I and Conseil, Canadian, The of. thought be not could it sea open the
been had we months six For subject. this on conversation long a had
and, leagues; 17,000 travelled had We Nautilus. the board on prisoners
We end. an to come should it why reason no was there said, Land Ned as
from only but Nautilus, the of Captain the from nothing hope could
more graver, become had he past time some for Besides, ourselves.
rarely. him met I me. shun to seemed He sociable. less retired,
he now me; to marvels submarine the explain to pleased was he Formerly
had change What saloon. the to more no came and studies, my to me left
bury to wish not did I part, my For cause? what For him? over come
the write to power the now had I studies. novel and curious my me with
see to wished I later, or sooner book, this and sea; the of book true
Bahamas. the of archipelago the was us nearest land The daylight.
was It weeds. large with covered cliffs submarine high rose There
formidable a to attention my drew Land Ned when o'clock eleven about
of means by produced was which ant, an of sting the like pricking,
seaweeds. large

not should I and poulps, for caverns proper are "these said, I "Well,"
monsters." these of some see to astonished be

cephalopod the of cuttlefish real "cuttlefish, Conseil; said "What!"
class?"

dimensions." huge of "poulps said, I "No,"

Ned. said exist," animals such that believe never will "I

"I world, the in air serious most the with Conseil, said "Well,"
by waves the under drawn vessel large a seen have to perfectly remember
arm." octopus's an

Canadian. the said that?" saw "You

Ned." "Yes,

eyes?" own your "With

eyes." own my "With

be?" that might pray, "Where,

Conseil. answered Malo," St. "At

ironically. Ned, said port?" the "In

Conseil. replied church," a in "No;

Canadian. the cried church!" a "In

question." in poulp the representing picture a In Ned. friend "Yes;

laughing. out bursting Land, Ned said "Good!"

the but picture; this of heard have "I said. I right," quite is "He
think to what know you and legend, a from taken is represented subject
a is it when Besides, history. natural of matter the in legends of
is only Not wild. run to apt is imagination the monsters, of question
certain a but vessels, down draw can poulps these that supposed it
an like more is that long mile a octopus an of speaks Magnus Olaus
was Nidros of Bishop the that said also is It animal. an than island
to began rock the finished, Mass rock. immense an on altar an building
Bishop, Another poulp. a was rock The sea. the to returned and walk,
cavalry of regiment a which on poulp a of also speaks Pontoppidan,
monsters of speak naturalists ancient the Lastly, manoeuvre. could
through pass to large too were which and gulfs, like were mouths whose
Gibraltar." of Straits the

Conseil. asked stories?" these of true is much how "But

truth of limit the passes which that of least at friends; my "Nothing,
for ground some be must there Nevertheless, legend. or fable to get to
and poulps that deny cannot One story-tellers. the of imagination the
the to however, inferior, species, large a of exist cuttlefish
five as cuttlefish a of dimensions the stated has Aristotle cetaceans.
some see frequently fishermen Our inches. two feet nine or cubits,
are poulps of skeletons Some long. feet four than more are that
two measure that Montpelier, and Trieste of museums the in preserved
some of calculations the to according Besides, length. in yards
have would long feet six only animals these of one naturalists,
a make to suffice would That long. feet twenty-seven tentacles
monster." formidable

Ned. asked days?" these in them for fish they "Do

my of One least. at them see sailors them, for fish not do they "If
one met he that affirmed often has Havre, of Bos Paul Captain friends,
the But seas. Indian the in dimensions colossal of monsters these of
the of denial the of permit not does which and fact, astonishing most
1861." in ago, years some happened animals, gigantic these of existence

Land. Ned asked fact?" the is "What

in nearly very Teneriffe, of north-east the to 1861, In it. is "This
Alector despatch-boat the of crew the now, in are we latitude same the
Captain waters. the in swimming cuttlefish monstrous a perceived
guns, and harpoon with it attacked and animal, the to near went Bouguer
soft the over glided harpoons and balls for success, much without
a pass to tried crew the attempts fruitless several After flesh.
as far as slipped noose The mollusc. the of body the round slip-knot
board, on it haul to then tried They stopped. there and fins tail the
cord the of tightness the that considerable so was weight its but
he ornament, this of deprived and, body, the from tail the separated
water." the under disappeared

fact?" a that is "Indeed!

poulp this name to proposed They Ned. good my fact, indisputable "An
cuttlefish.'" `Bouguer's

Canadian. the asked it?" was length "What

the at posted who, Conseil, said yards?" six about measure not it "Did
cliff. the of windings irregular the again examining was window,

replied. I "Precisely,"

tentacles, eight with crowned not it "was Conseil, rejoined head," "Its
serpents?" of nest a like water the beat that

"Precisely."

considerable head, its of back the at placed eyes, its not "Had
development?"

Conseil." "Yes,

beak?" parrot's a like mouth its not was "And

Conseil." "Exactly,

not is this "if quietly; replied, he master," to offence no well! "Very
brothers." its of one least, at is, it cuttlefish, Bouguer's

window. the to hurried Land Ned Conseil. at looked I

cried. he beast!" horrible a "What

disgust. of gesture a repress not could and turn, my in looked I
legends the in figure to worthy monster horrible a was eyes my Before
yards eight being cuttlefish, immense an was It marvellous. the of
great with Nautilus the of direction the in crossways swam It long.
eight Its eyes. green staring enormous its with us watching speed,
of name the given have that head, its to fixed feet, rather or arms,
were and body, its as long as twice were animals, these to cephalopod
the on holes air 250 the see could One hair. furies' the like twisted
a like beak horned a mouth, monster's The tentacles. the of side inner
substance, horned a tongue, Its vertically. shut and opened parrot's,
from quivering out came teeth, pointed of rows several with furnished
beak bird's a nature, of freak a What shears. of pair veritable this
might that mass fleshy a formed body spindle-like Its mollusc! a on
great with changing colour varying the, lb.; 5,000 to 4,000 weigh
passed animal, the of irritation the to according rapidity,
this irritated What brown. reddish to grey livid from successively
than formidable more Nautilus, the of presence the doubt No mollusc?
what Yet, hold. no had jaws its or suckers its which on and itself,
them! given has Creator the vitality what are! poulps these monsters
Chance hearts! three possess they and movements! their in vigour what
to wish not did I and cuttlefish, this of presence in us brought had
of specimen this studying carefully of opportunity the lose
a taking and, me, inspired that horror the overcame I cephalopods.
it. draw to began pencil,

Conseil. said saw," Alector the which same the is this "Perhaps

lost had other the and whole, is this "for Canadian; the replied "No,"
tail." its

animals these of tails and arms "The replied. I reason," no is "That
Bouguer's of tail the years seven in and renewal; by re-formed are
grow." to time had doubt no has cuttlefish

seven. counted I light. port the at appeared poulps other time this By
beaks their heard I and Nautilus, the after procession a formed They
monsters These work. my continued I hull. iron the against gnashing
immovable. seemed they that precision such with water the in kept
plate. every in tremble it made shock A stopped. Nautilus the Suddenly

asked. I anything?" struck we "Have

are we for free, be shall "we Canadian, the replied case," any "In
floating."

minute A move. not did it but doubt, no floating, was Nautilus The
the entered lieutenant, his by followed Nemo, Captain passed.
dull. seemed He time. some for him seen not had I drawing-room.
the at looked panel, the to went he us, to speaking or noticing Without
out. went latter The lieutenant. his to something said and poulps,
towards went I lighted. was ceiling The shut. were panels the Soon
Captain. the

said. I poulps?" of collection curious "A

fight to going are we "and replied; he Naturalist," Mr. indeed, "Yes,
beast." to man them,

aright. heard not had I thought I him. at looked I

repeated. I beast?" to "Man

one of jaws horny the that think I stopped. is screw The sir. "Yes,
prevents what is That blades. the in entangled is cuttlefish the of
moving." our

do?" to going you are "What

vermin." this slaughter and surface, the to "Rise

enterprise." difficult "A

soft the against powerless are bullets electric The indeed. "Yes,
we But off. go to enough resistance find not do they where flesh,
hatchet." the with them attack shall

my refuse not do you "if Canadian, the said sir," harpoon, the "And
help."

Land." Master it, accept will "I

went we Nemo, Captain following and, said, I you," follow will "We
staircase. central the towards

attack. the for ready were boarding-hatchets with men ten about There,
The harpoon. a seized Land Ned hatchets; two took I and Conseil
on posted sailors, the of One surface. the to risen then had Nautilus
were hardly But panels. the of bolts the unscrewed ladderstep, top the
evidently violence, great with rose panel the when loosed, screws the
arms these of one Immediately arm. poulp's a of suckers the by drawn
above. were others twenty and opening the down serpent a like slid
tentacle, formidable this cut Nemo Captain axe, the of blow one With
on one pressing were we as Just ladder. the down wriggling slid that
came air, the lashing arms, other two platform, the reach to other the
with up him lifted and Nemo, Captain before placed seaman the on down
We out. rushed and cry, a uttered Nemo Captain power. irresistible
him. after hurried

the to fixed and tentacle the by seized man, unhappy The scene! a What
trunk. enormous this of caprice the at air the in balanced was suckers,
help!" "Help! cried, he stifled, was he throat, his in rattled He
fellow-countryman a had I me! startled French, in spoken words, These
it hear shall I cry! heart-rending That several! perhaps board, on
from him rescue could Who lost. was man unfortunate The life. my all
poulp, the to rushed had Nemo Captain However, pressure? powerful that
lieutenant His arm. one through cut had axe the of blow one with and
of flanks the on crept that monsters other against furiously struggled
Conseil, Canadian, The axes. their with fought crew The Nautilus. the
musk of smell strong a masses; fleshy the in weapons our buried I and
horrible! was It atmosphere. the penetrated

poulp, the with entangled man, unhappy the thought I instant, one For
had arms eight the of Seven suction. powerful its from torn be would
victim the brandishing air, the in wriggled only One off. cut been
threw lieutenant his and Nemo Captain as just But feather. a like
were We liquid. black of stream a ejected animal the it, on themselves
had cuttlefish the dispersed, cloud the When it. with blinded
twelve or Ten it. with countryman unfortunate my and disappeared,
rolled We Nautilus. the of sides and platform the invaded now poulps
the on wriggled that serpents, of nest this of midst the into pell-mell
these though as seemed It ink. and blood of waves the in platform
harpoon, Land's Ned heads. hydra's the like up sprang tentacles slimy
fish. cuttle the of eyes staring the into plunged was stroke, each at
a of tentacles the by overturned suddenly was companion bold my But
avoid. to able been not had he monster

of beak formidable The horror! and emotion with beat heart my how Ah!
in cut be would man unhappy The Land. Ned over open was cuttlefish a
axe his me; before was Nemo Captain But succour. his to rushed I two.
the saved, miraculously and, jaws, enormous two the between disappeared
the of heart triple the into deep harpoon his plunged rising, Canadian,
poulp.

Canadian. the to Captain the said revenge!" this myself owed "I

an of quarter a lasted had combat The replying. without bowed Ned
and last, at us left mutilated, and vanquished monsters, The hour.
nearly blood, with covered Nemo, Captain waves. the under disappeared
his of one up swallowed had that sea the upon gazed exhausted,
eyes. his in gathered tears great and companions,



XIX CHAPTER

STREAM GULF THE

I forget. ever can us of none April of 20th the of scene terrible This
I then Since emotion. violent of influence the under it written have
the to and Conseil to it read have I recital; the revised have
to as insufficient but facts, to as exact it found They Canadian.
most the of pen the have must one pictures, such paint To effect.
Deep. the of Toilers The of author the poets, our of illustrious

grief his waves; the watching while wept Nemo Captain that said have I
arrival our since lost had he companion second the was It great. was
by bruised stifled, crushed, friend, That death! a what and board, on
rest not would jaws, iron his by pounded poulp, a of arms dreadful the
the of midst the In cemetery! coral peaceful the in comrades his with
that man unfortunate the by uttered cry despairing the was it struggle,
conventional his forgetting Frenchman, poor The heart. my torn had
appeal! last a utter to tongue, mother own his to taken had language,
of soul and body the with associated Nautilus, the of crew the Amongst
a had I men, with contact all from him like recoiling Captain, the
mysterious this in France represent alone he Did fellow-countryman.
nationalities? divers of individuals of composed evidently association,
before unceasingly up rose that problems insoluble these of one was It
mind! my

time. some for more no him saw I and room, his entered Nemo Captain
which of vessel, the by see could I irresolute and sad was he that But
Nautilus The impressions. his all received which and soul, the was he
corpse a like about floated it course; settled its in on keep not did
tear not could He random. at went It waves. the of will the at
that sea this from struggle, last the of scene the from away himself
till not was It thus. passed days Ten men. his of one devoured had
after course, northerly its resumed Nautilus the that May of 1st the
were We Canal. Bahama the of mouth the at Bahamas the sighted having
has that sea, the to river largest the from current the following then
Gulf the mean I temperatures. proper its and fish, its banks, its
the of middle the to freely flows that river, a really is It Stream.
a is It waters. ocean the with mix not do waters whose and Atlantic,
1,500 is depth mean Its sea. surrounding the than salter river, salt
current the places certain In miles. ten breadth mean its fathoms,
its of body The hour. an half a and miles two of speed the with flows
globe. the in rivers the all of that than considerable more is waters
sailed. then Nautilus the that river ocean this on was It

the of waters phosphorescent the night, the during that, add must I
especially watch-light, our of power electric the rivalled Stream Gulf
we 8th, May frequently. so us threatened that weather stormy the in
Caroline. North the of height the at Hatteras, Cape crossing still were
depth its and miles, seventy-five is there Stream Gulf the of width The
seemed supervision all random; at went still Nautilus The yards. 210
be would escape circumstances, these under that, thought I abandoned.
easy an anywhere offered shores inhabited the Indeed, possible.
ply that steamers the by ploughed incessantly was sea The refuge.
and day overrun and Mexico, of Gulf the and Boston or York New between
the of parts several the about coasting schooners little the by night
favourable a was It up. picked be to hope could We coast. American
the separated that miles thirty the notwithstanding opportunity,
circumstance unfortunate One Union. the of coasts the from Nautilus
were We bad. very was weather The plans. Canadian's the thwarted
of country that frequent, so are tempests where shores those nearing
Gulf the of current the by engendered actually cyclones and waterspouts
Ned destruction. certain was boat frail a in sea the tempt To Stream.
flight that nostalgia with seized fretted, He himself. this owned Land
cure. could only

must I end. an to come must "this me, to day that said he "Master,"
to up going and land leaving is Nemo This it. of breast clean a make
South the of enough had have I that you to declare I But north. the
North." the to him follow not will I and Pole,

now?" just impracticable is flight since Ned, done, be to is "What

were we when nothing said "you he; said Captain," the to speak must "We
think I When mine. in are we now speak, will I seas. native your in
there that and Scotia, Nova by be will Nautilus the long before that
Lawrence St. the bay that into and bay, large a is foundland New near
by river the river, my is Lawrence St. the that and itself, empties
makes it furious, feel I this, of think I town--when native my Quebec,
sea! the into myself throw rather would I Sir, end. on stand hair my
stifled!" am I here! stay not will I

nature vigorous His patience. all losing evidently was Canadian The
daily; altered face His imprisonment. prolonged this stand not could
was I for suffer, must he what knew I surly. more became temper his
passed had months seven Nearly myself. home-sickness with seized
isolation, Nemo's Captain land; from news any had having our without
his poulps, the with fight the since especially spirits, altered his
light. different a in things view me made all taciturnity,

reply. not did I seeing Ned, said sir?" "Well,

intentions his Nemo Captain ask to me wish you do Ned, "Well,
us?" concerning

sir." "Yes,

known?" them made already has he "Although

you if only, name my in me, for Speak finally. settled it wish I "Yes;
like."

me." avoids He him. meet seldom so I "But

him." see to go to you for reason more the all is "That

It Nemo's. Captain to go to meant I thence From room. my to went I
at knocked I slip. him meeting of opportunity this let to do not would
The handle. the turned then again, knocked I answer. No door. the
his over Bending there. was Captain The in. went I opened, door
having without go to not Resolved me. heard not had he work-table,
and frowned, quickly, head his raised He him. approached I spoken,
want?" you do What here! "You roughly, said

Captain." you, to speak "To

shut to liberty at you leave I working. am I sir; busy, am I "But
same?" the allowed be I cannot up; yourself

and hear to determined was I but encouraging; not was reception This
everything. answer

admits that matter a on you to speak to have "I coldly, said I "Sir,"
delay." no of

discovered you "Have ironically. replied, he sir?" that, is "What
new any up delivered sea the has or me, escaped has that something
secrets?"

an me showed he reply, could I before But, cross-purposes. at were We
"Here, tone, serious more a in said, and table, his on manuscript open
contains It languages. several in written manuscript a is Aronnax, M.
not shall it God, please it if and, sea; the of studies my of sum the
with complete name, my with signed manuscript, This me. with perish
The case. floating little a in up shut be will life, my of history the
case this throw will Nautilus the board on us of all of survivor last
waves." the by borne is it whither go will it and sea, the into

would mystery His himself! by written history his name! man's This
day. some revealed be then

act you makes that idea the of approve but can "I said, I "Captain,"
you means the But lost. be not must studies your of result The thus.
will winds the where knows Who primitive. be to me to seem employ
use not you Could fall? will it hands whose in and case, this carry
yours----" of one or you, not Could means? other some

me. interrupting hastily said, he sir!" "Never,

store; in manuscript this keep to ready are companions my and I "But
liberty----" at us put will you if and,

rising. Captain, the said liberty?" "At

For you. question to wish I which on subject the is that sir; "Yes,
the in to-day, you ask I and board, on here been have we months seven
us keep to is intention your if own, my in and companions my of name
always?" here

ago: months seven did I as to-day you answer will I Aronnax, "M.
it." quit never must Nautilus, the enters Whoever

us!" upon slavery actual impose "You

please." you name what it "Give

liberty." his regain to right the has slave the everywhere "But

an with you chain to tried ever I Have right? this you denies "Who
oath?"

crossed. arms his with me at looked He

neither be will subject this to time second a return "to said, I "Sir,"
go us let it, upon entered have we as but, taste; my to nor your to
concerns. it whom myself only not is it repeat, I it. with through
me make could that passion a diversion, a relief, a me to is Study
the in obscure, live to willing am I you, Like everything. forget
my of result the time, future to day, one bequeathing of hope frail
the of worthy man, Every Land. Ned with otherwise is it But labours.
of love that thought you Have consideration. some deserves name,
a in revenge of schemes to rise give can slavery, of hatred liberty,
try----" and attempt, think, could he that Canadian's; the like nature

rose. Nemo Captain silenced; was I

matter it does what tries, or attempts, of, thinks Land Ned "Whatever
him keep I that pleasure my for not is It him! seek not did I me? to
can who those of one are you Aronnax, M. you, for As board! on
to say to more nothing have I silence. even everything, understand
the be subject this of treat to come have you time first this Let you.
you." to listen not will I time second a for last,

to conversation my related I critical. was situation Our retired. I
companions. two my

man. this from nothing expect can we "that Ned, said now," know "We
the whatever escape, will We Island. Long nearing is Nautilus The
be." may weather

hurricane a of Symptoms threatening. more and more became sky the But
the On misty. and white becoming was atmosphere The manifest. became
of masses by succeeded were clouds cirrhous of streaks fine horizon
in rose sea swollen The by. swiftly passed clouds low Other cumuli.
petrels, the of exception the with disappeared birds The billows. huge
indicated and sensibly, fell barometer The storm. the of friends those
glass storm the of mixture The vapours. the of extension extreme an
the pervaded that electricity the of influence the under decomposed was
Nautilus the as just May, of 18th the on burst tempest The atmosphere.
I York. New of port the from miles some Island, Long off floating was
to fleeing of instead for, elements! the of strife this describe can
would caprice, unaccountable an by Nemo, Captain sea, the of depths the
first. at south-west the from blew wind The surface. the at it brave
platform. the on place his taken had squalls, the during Nemo, Captain
the by overboard washed being prevent to fast, himself made had He
also, fast myself made and up, myself hoisted had I waves. monstrous
man extraordinary this and tempest the between admiration my dividing
cloud-drifts, huge by swept was sea raging The it. with coping was who
sometimes Nautilus, The waves. the with saturated actually were which
and rolled mast, a like up standing sometimes side, its on lying
that fell, rain of torrent a o'clock five About terribly. pitched
leagues forty nearly blew cane hurri The wind. nor sea neither lulled
breaks houses, overturns it that conditions these under is It hour. an
in Nautilus, the However, pounders. twenty-four displaces gates, iron
engineer, clever a of words the confirmed tempest, the of midst the
was This sea." the defy cannot that hull well-constructed no is "There
movable, and obedient spindle, steel a was it rock; resisting a not
However, impunity. with fury its braved that masts, or rigging without
feet fifteen measured They attentively. waves raging these watched I
propagation of speed their and long, yards 175 to 150 and height, in
the with increased power and bulk Their second. per feet thirty was
have Hebrides, the at these, as waves Such water. the of depth
the in which, they are They lb. 8,400 weighing mass a displaced
in Yeddo, of town the destroying after 1864, 23rd, December of tempest
of intensity The America. of shores the on day same the broke Japan,
at 1860 in as barometer, The night. the with increased tempest the
saw I day. of close the at seven-tenths fell cyclone, a during Reunion
trying was She painfully. struggling horizon the pass vessel large a
was It waves. the above up keep to steam, half under to lie to
or Liverpool, to York New from line the of steamers the of one probably
the in o'clock ten At gloom. the in disappeared soon It Havre.
vivid with streaked was atmosphere The fire. on was sky the evening
captain, the while it; of brightness the bear not could I lightning.
terrible A tempest. the of spirit the envy to seemed it, at looking
the of howls the of up made noise, complex a air, the filled noise
The thunder. of claps the and wind, the of roaring the waves, crushed
cyclone, the and horizon; the of points all to suddenly veered wind
and west, north, the by passing after returned east, the in rising
the of storm circular the by pursued course inverse the in south,
of name its deserves It Stream! Gulf that Ah, hemisphere. southern
formidable those causes which that is It Tempests. of King the
its and air its between temperature of difference the by cyclones,
water of drops The rain. the succeeded had fire of shower A currents.
Nemo Captain that thought have would One spikes. sharp to changed were
the As lightning. by death a himself, of worthy death a courting was
it air, the in spur steel its raised dreadfully, pitching Nautilus,
it. from burst sparks long saw I and conductor, a as act to seemed
and it, opened panel, the to crawled I strength without and Crushed
was It height. its at then was storm The saloon. the to descended
Captain Nautilus. the of interior the in upright stand to impossible
by filling reservoirs the heard I twelve. about down came Nemo
the Through waves. the beneath slowly sank Nautilus the and degrees,
like passing terrified, fish large saw I saloon the in windows open
Nautilus The eyes. my before struck were Some water. the in phantoms
we deep fathoms eight about at that thought I descending. still was
agitated violently too were beds upper the no! But calm. a find should
in fathoms twenty-five than more at repose seek to had We that. for
what silence, what quiet, what there, But deep. the of bowels the
on loose let been had hurricane a such that told have could Who peace!
ocean? that of surface the



XX CHAPTER

28' 17 LONGITUDE TO 24' 47 LATITUDE FROM

more. once eastward thrown been had we storm, the of consequence In
faded had Lawrence St. or York New of shores the on escape of hope All
Nemo. Captain like himself isolated had despair, in Ned, poor and away;
the that said I other. each left never however, I, and Conseil
more be (to said have should I east. the to aside gone had Nautilus
surface, the on first wandered it days, some For north-east. the exact)
What sailors. by dreaded so fogs those amid it, beneath then and
reefs these upon shocks What fogs! thick these to due are accidents
collisions What waves! the of breaking the drowns wind the when
alarm and whistles, lights, warning their of spite in vessels, between
battle, of field a like look seas these of bottoms the And bells!
already and old some ocean; the of conquered the all lie still where
copper and bands iron their from reflecting and fresh others encrusted,
lantern. our of brilliancy the plates

of Bank the of south extreme the at were we May of 15th the On
organic of heaps large or alluvia, of consists bank This Newfoundland.
the from or Stream, Gulf the by Equator the from either brought matter,
the skirts which water cold of counter-current the by Pole North
which blocks erratic those up heaped are also There coast. American
charnel-house vast a by, close and ice; broken the by along carried are
is sea the of depth The millions. by here perish which molluscs, of
but fathoms; of hundreds some than more Newfoundland--not at great not
Gulf the There fathoms. 1,500 of depression a is south the towards
temperature, its of some and speed its of some loses It widens. Stream
sea. a becomes it but

a at Content, Heart's from miles 500 about May, of 17th the on was It
lying cable electric the saw I that fathoms, 1,400 than more of depth
at thought it, mentioned not had I whom to Conseil, bottom. the on
worthy the undeceived I But sea-serpent. gigantic a was it that first
the in particulars several related consolation of way by and fellow,
and 1857 years the in laid was one first The cable. this of laying
any act not would telegrams, 400 about transmitting after but, 1858;
measuring one, other an constructed engineers the 1863 In longer.
on embarked was which tons, 4,500 weighing and length, in miles 2,000
failed. also attempt This Eastern. Great the

1,918 than more of depth a at being Nautilus, the May of 25th the On
which occurred rupture the where spot precise the on was fathoms,
of coast the of miles 638 within was It enterprise. the ruined
that discovered they afternoon the in two half-past at and Ireland;
board on electricians The ceased. had Europe with communication
o'clock eleven at and up, it fishing before cable the cut to resolved
point another made They part. damaged the recovered had they night at
it after days some But submerged. more once was it and it, spliced and
recaptured. be not could ocean the of depths the in and again, broke
bold the Field, Cyrus discouraged. not were however, Americans, The
a set fortune, own his all sunk had he as enterprise, the of promoter
cable another and answered, once at was which foot, on subscription new
wires conducting of bundles The principles. better on constructed was
of wadding a by protected and gutta-percha, in enveloped each were
on sailed Eastern Great The covering. metallic a in contained hemp,
incident one But well. worked operation The 1866. July, of 13th the
that observed they cable the unrolling in times Several occurred.
of motive the with evidently it, into forced been recently had nails
consulted engineers and officers, the Anderson, Captain it. destroying
on surprised was offender the if that, up posted it had and together,
From sea. the into trial further without thrown be would he board,
repeated. never was attempt criminal the time that

from miles 500 than more not was Eastern Great the July of 23rd the On
the of news the Ireland from telegraphed they when Newfoundland,
the On Sadowa. after Austria and Prussia between concluded armistice
Heart's of port the reached they fogs, heavy of midst the in 27th,
first its for and terminated; successfully was enterprise The Content.
wisdom, of words these in Europe old addressed America young despatch,
earth on and highest, the in God to "Glory understood: rarely so
men." towards goodwill peace,

state, primitive its in cable electric the find to expect not did I
covered serpent, long The manufactory. the leaving on was it as such
encrusted was foraminiferae, with bristling shells, of remains the with
boring all against protection a as served which coating strong a with
and sea, the of motions the from sheltered quietly lay It molluscs.
spark electric the of transmission the for pressure favourable a under
this Doubtless second. a of .32 in America to Europe from passes which
the that find they for time, of length great a for last will cable
this on Besides, sea-water. the by improved is covering gutta-percha
to as submerged deeply so never is cable the chosen, well so level,
which depth, lowest the to it followed Nautilus The break. to it cause
anchorage; any without lay it there and fathoms, 2,212 than more was
in place taken had accident the where spot the reached we then and
miles 100 about valley a formed then ocean the of bottom The 1863.
summit its without placed been have might Blanc Mont which in broad,
a by east the at closed is valley This waves. the above appearing
the on there arrived We high. yards 2,000 than more wall perpendicular
from miles 120 than more not then was Nautilus the and May, of 28th
Ireland.

great my To No. Isles? British the on land to going Nemo Captain Was
European towards back coming more once south, the for made he surprise
of sight caught I instant one for Isle, Emerald the rounding In seas.
leaving vessels of thousands the guides which light the and Clear, Cape
mind. my in arose then question important An Liverpool. or Glasgow
had who Land, Ned Manche? the in itself entangle dare Nautilus the Did
question to cease not did land, nearing been had we since re-appeared
After invisible. remained Nemo Captain answer? I could How me.
to going he was shores, American of glimpse a Canadian the shown having
France? of coast the me show

it May, of 30th the On southward. going still was Nautilus the But
and England of point extreme the between End, Land's of sight in passed
enter to wished we If starboard. to left were which Isles, Scilly the
so. do not did He east. the to straight go must he Manche, the

of series a described Nautilus the May, of 31st the of whole the During
be to seemed It me. interested greatly which water, the on circles
Nemo Captain noon, At finding. in trouble some had it spot a seeking
but me, to word no spoke He log. ship's the work to came himself
his it Was thus? him sadden could What ever. than gloomier seemed
his of recollections some he Had shores? European to ity proxim
For regret? or Remorse feel? he did what not, If country? abandoned
of kind a had I and mind, my haunted thought this while long a
secrets. captain's the betray would chance long before that presentiment

process. same the continued Nautilus the June, of 1st the day, next The
Captain ocean. the in spot particular some seeking evidently was It
sea The before. day the done had he as altitude sun's the took Nemo
large a east, the to miles eight About clear. sky the beautiful, was
from fluttered flag No horizon. the on discerned be could vessel steam
minutes Some nationality. its discover not could I and mast, its
and sextant, his took Nemo Captain meridian, the passed sun the before
greatly water the of rest perfect The attention. great with watched
rolled neither it motionless; was Nautilus The operation. the helped
pitched. nor

Captain the and taken, was altitude the when platform the on was I
here." is "It words: these pronounced

changing was which vessel the seen he Had below. went and turned He
returned I tell. not could I us? nearing be to seemed and course its
in water the of hissing the heard I closed, panels The saloon. the to
line, vertical a following sink, to began Nautilus The reservoirs. the
it later minutes Some it. to motion no communicated screw its for
ground. the on resting fathoms, 420 than more of depth a at stopped
and opened, were panels the then darkened, was ceiling luminous The
of rays the by illuminated brilliantly sea the saw I glass the through
us. round mile a half least at for lantern our

quiet of immensity an but nothing saw and side, port the to looked I
protuberance, large a appeared bottom the on starboard, to But waters.
ruin a it thought have would One attention. my attracted once at which
of covering a resembling much shells, white of coating a under buried
the recognise could I attentively, mass the examining Upon snow.
have must which masts, its of bare vessel a of form ever-thickening
thus be to wreck, This times. past to belonged certainly It sunk.
count to able be already must water, the of lime the with encrusted
ocean. the of bottom the at passed years many

it Could tomb? its visit Nautilus the did Why vessel? this was What
I water? the under it drawn had which shipwreck a but aught been have
Captain heard I voice slow a in me near when think, to what not knew
say: Nemo

carried It Marseillais. the called was ship this time one "At
of 13th the 1778, In 1762. in launched was and guns, seventy-four
the against boldly fought it trieux, Poype-Ver La by commanded August,
Grenada, of taking the at was it July, of 4th the on 1779, In Preston.
of 5th the on 1781, In Estaing. Admiral of squadron the with
Chesapeake in Grasse, de Comte of battle the in part took it September,
of 16th the On name. its changed Republic French the 1794, In Bay.
at Joyeuse, Villaret of squadron the joined it year, same the in April,
from coming corn of cargo a of escort the with entrusted being Brest,
12th and 11th the On Stebel. Van Admiral of command the under America,
English an with in fell squadron this year, second the of Prairal
It 1868. June, of first the Prairal, 13th the is to-day Sir, vessel.
in spot, very this on day for day ago, years seventy-four now is
after vessel, this that 28', 17 longitude 24', 47 latitude
its in water the with masts, three its losing heroically, fighting
its with sinking preferred disabled, crew its of third the and hold,
poop, the to colours its nailing and, surrendering; to sailors 356
Republic!'" the live `Long of cry the to waves the under disappeared

exclaimed. I Avenger!" "The

crossing Nemo, Captain muttered name!" good A Avenger! the sir, "Yes,
arms. his



XXI CHAPTER

HECATOMB A

the of history the scene, unlooked-for this describing of way The
this which with emotion the and coldly, so first at told ship, patriot
the Avenger, the of name the words, last the pronounced man strange
deeply itself impressed all me, escape not could which of significance
hand his with who, Captain, the leave not did eyes My mind. my on
glorious the eye glowing a with watching was sea, to out stretched
or came, he whence from was, he who know to never was I Perhaps wreck.
the from apart and move, man the saw I but to, going was he where
and Nemo Captain shut had which misanthropy common no was It _savant_.
or monstrous either hatred, a but Nautilus, the within companions his
for seek still hatred this Did weaken. never could time which sublime,
was Nautilus the But that. me teach soon would future The vengeance?
Avenger the of form the and sea, the of surface the to slowly rising
me told rolling slight a Soon sight. my from degrees by disappeared
I heard. was boom dull a moment that At air. open the in were we that
move. not did He Captain. the at looked

I. said "Captain?"

and Conseil platform. the mounted and him left I answer. not did He
there. already were Canadian the

asked. I from?" come sound that did "Where

Land. Ned replied gunshot," a was "It

was It seen. already had I vessel the of direction the in looked I
steam. on putting was it that see could we and Nautilus, the nearing
us. of miles six within was It

Ned?" ship, that is "What

Canadian, the said masts," lower its of height the and rigging, its "By
sink necessary, if and, us; reach it May ship-of-war. a is she bet "I
Nautilus." cursed this

Nautilus? the to do it can harm "what Conseil, replied Ned," "Friend
bottom the at us cannonade its Can waves? the beneath it attack it Can
sea?" the of

to?" belongs she country what recognise you "can I, said Ned," me, "Tell

up screwed and eyelids, his dropped eyebrows, his knitted Canadian The
look piercing a fixed moments few a for and eyes, his of corners the
vessel. the upon

for to, belongs she nation what tell cannot "I replied; he sir," "No,
a for man-of-war, a is she declare can I But colours. no shows she
mast." main her from flutters pennant long

towards steaming was which ship the watched we hour an of quarter a For
from Nautilus the see could she that believe however, not, could I us.
submarine this what know could she that less still and distance; that
large, a was she that me informed Canadian the Soon was. engine
two her from pouring was smoke black thick A ram. two-decker armoured,
She yards. her to stopped were sails closely-furled Her funnels.
from us prevented distance The mizzen-peak. her at flag no hoisted
thin a like floated which pennant, her of colours the distinguishing
to her allowed Nemo Captain If rapidly. advanced She ribbon.
us. for salvation of chance a was there approach,

I us of mile a within passes vessel that "if Land, Ned said "Sir,"
the do to you advise should I and sea, the into myself throw shall
same."

watching continued but suggestion, Canadian's the to reply not did I
be would she Russian, or American, French, English, Whether ship. the
smoke white a Presently her. reach only could we if in us take to sure
water, the after, seconds some vessel; the of part fore the from burst
the of stern the splashed body, heavy a of fall the by agitated
ear. my struck explosion loud a afterwards shortly and Nautilus,

exclaimed. I us!" at firing are they "What!

and unicorn, the recognised have "they Ned, said sir," you, please "So
us." at firing are they

the in men are there that see can they "surely exclaimed, I "But,"
case?"

me. at looking Land, Ned replied that," of because perhaps, is, "It

how now knew they Doubtless mind. my upon burst light of flood whole A
board on doubt, No monster. pretended the of stories the believe to
harpoon, the with it struck Canadian the when Lincoln, Abraham the
submarine a narwhal supposed the in recognised had Farragut Commander
have must it Yes, cetacean. supernatural a than dangerous more vessel,
of engine this seeking now were they sea every on and so; been
Nemo Captain supposed, we as if, indeed! Terrible destruction.
were we when night the On vengeance. of works in Nautilus the employed
not he had Ocean, Indian the of midst the in cell, that in imprisoned
not he had cemetery, coral the in buried man The vessel? some attacked
it, repeat I Yes, Nautilus? the by caused shock the to victim a been
Nemo Captain of existence mysterious the of part One so. be must it
at recognised, been not had identity his if and, unveiled; been had
a hunting longer no were him against united nations the least,
against hatred deadly a vowed had who man a but creature, chimerical
meeting of Instead me. before rose past formidable the All them.
pitiless expect only could we ship, approaching the board on friends
sea the struck them of Some us. about rattled shot the But enemies.
touched none But distance. the in themselves losing ricochetted, and
In us. from miles three than more not was vessel The Nautilus. the
the on appear not did Nemo Captain cannonade, serious the of spite
shell the struck had projectiles conical the of one if but, platform;
said, then Canadian The fatal. been have would it Nautilus, the of
signal us Let dilemma. this of out get to can we all do must we "Sir,
folks." honest are we that understand perhaps, then, will They them.

scarcely had he but air; the in wave to handkerchief his took Land Ned
in fell, and hand, iron an by down struck was he when it, displayed
deck. the upon strength, great his of spite

spur the by pierced be to wish you "do Captain, the exclaimed "Fool!"
vessel?" this at hurled is it before Nautilus the of

see. to terrible more still was he hear; to terrible was Nemo Captain
it instant an For heart. his at spasm a with pale, deadly was face His
He contracted. fearfully were pupils His beat. to ceased have must
wrung he forward, thrown body his with as, roared, he speak, not did
ship the to turning and him, leaving Then, shoulders. Canadian's the
a with exclaimed, he him, around raining still was shot whose war, of
I am! I who know you nation, accursed an of ship "Ah, voice, powerful
you show will I and Look! by! you know to colours your want not do
mine!"

black a unfurled Nemo Captain platform the of part fore the on And
that At Pole. South the at placed had he one the to similar flag,
without obliquely, Nautilus the of shell the struck shot a moment
He sea. the in lost was Captain, the near rebounding and, it; piercing
you down, "Go shortly, said me, addressing and, shoulders; his shrugged
down!" go companions, your and

vessel?" this attack to going you "are cried, I "Sir,"

it." sink to going am I "Sir,

that?" do not will "You

me, judge to not you advise I "And coldly. replied he it," do shall "I
attack The seen. have to not ought you what you shown has Fate sir.
down." go begun; has

vessel?" this is "What

to nationality Its better! the much so well! Very know? not do "You
down!" Go secret. a be will least, at you,

the surrounded sailors the of fifteen About obey. but could We
them. nearing vessel the at hatred implacable with looking Captain,
soul. every animated vengeance of desire same the that feel could One
I and Nautilus, the struck projectile another moment the at down went I
exclaim: Captain the heard

not will you then, And shot! useless your Shower vessel! mad "Strike,
shall you that here not is it But Nautilus. the of spur the escape
Avenger!" the of those with mingle ruins your have not would I perish!

the on remained had second his and Captain The room. my reached I
with moving Nautilus, the and motion, in set was screw The platform.
pursuit the But guns. ship's the of reach the beyond soon was speed,
distance. his keeping with himself contented Nemo Captain and continued,

my contain to able longer no being afternoon, the in four About
I and open, was panel The staircase. central the to went I impatience,
down and up walking still was Captain The platform. the to on ventured
or five was which ship, the at looking was He step. agitated an with
leeward. to miles six

he eastward, it drawing and, beast, wild a like it round going was He
still he Perhaps attack. not did he But pursue. to them allowed
spoken, scarcely had I But more. once mediate to wished I hesitated?
saying: silence, imposed Nemo Captain when

is there and oppressed, the am I judge! the am I and law, the am "I
cherished, loved, I that all lost have I him Through oppressor! the
all saw I mother. and father, children, wife, venerated--country, and
more!" no Say there! is hate I that All perish!

and steam, on putting was which man-of-war, the at look last a cast I
Conseil. and Ned rejoined

exclaimed. I fly!" will "We

vessel?" this is "What Ned. said "Good!"

In night. before sunk be will it is, it whatever but, know; not do "I
a in accomplices made be than it, with perish to better is it case, any
judge." cannot we which of justice the retaliation

for wait us "Let coolly. Land, Ned said too," opinion my is "That
night."

that showed compass The board. on reigned silence Deep arrived. Night
surface, the on was It course. its altered not had Nautilus the
vessel the when fly to resolved I and companions My slightly. rolling
moon, the for us; see to or us hear to either enough near be should
on Once brightly. shone days, three or two in full be would which
it, threatened which blow the prevent not could we if ship, the board
allow. would circumstances that all do would, we least at could, we
but attack; for preparing was Nautilus the thought I times Several
approach, to adversary his allowing with himself contented Nemo Captain
it. before more once fled then and

the watched We incident. any without passed night the of Part
moved. much too were we for little, spoke We action. for opportunity
to him forced I but sea, the into himself thrown have would Land Ned
her at ship the attack would Nautilus the idea, my to According wait.
fly. to easy but possible, be only not would it then and waterline,

platform. the mounted I uneasiness, of full morning, the in three At
near part fore the at standing was He it. left not had Nemo Captain
not did He head. his above displayed breeze slight a which flag, his
to seemed look his of intensity The vessel. the from eyes his take
had he if than surely more onward it draw and fascinate, and attract,
was Jupiter meridian. the passing then was moon The it. towing been
ocean and sky nature, of scene peaceful this Amid east. the in rising
of orbs the to offering sea the tranquillity, in other each rivalled
their reflect to which in have ever could they mirror finest the night
with compared elements, these of calm deep the of thought I As image.
I Nautilus, the within imperceptibly brooding passions those all
shuddered.

that nearing ever was It us. of miles two within was vessel The
I Nautilus. the of presence the showed which light phosphorescent
from hanging lantern white its and lights, red and green its see could
its through quivered vibration indistinct An foremast. large the
uttermost. the to heated were furnaces the that showing rigging,
the in shining funnels, the from flew ashes red and sparks of Sheaves
stars. like atmosphere

noticing Nemo Captain without morning, the in six until thus remained I
first the with and us, from half a and mile a about stood ship The me.
off far be not could moment The afresh. began firing the day of dawn
myself and companions my adversary, its attacking Nautilus the when,
remind to down go to preparing was I man. this leave ever for should
several by accompanied platform, the mounted second the when them,
Some them. see not would or not did either Nemo Captain sailors.
They action. for signal the called be might which taken were steps
lowered, was platform the around balustrade iron The simple. very were
they until shell the within pushed were cages pilot and lantern the and
no cigar steel the of surface long The deck. the with flush were
to returned I manoeuvres. its check to point single a offered longer
were light of streaks some floated; still Nautilus The saloon. the
waves the of undulations the With beds. liquid the through filtering
and sun, rising the of streaks red the by brightened were windows the
dawned. had June of 2nd the of day dreadful this

was Nautilus the of speed the that showed log the o'clock, five At
nearer. draw to them allowing was it that knew I and slackening,
projectiles, the and distinctly, more heard were reports the Besides,
strange a with extinguished were water, ambient the through labouring
noise. hissing

and hand, the of grasp One come. is moment "the I, said friends," "My
us!" protect God may

not knew I that nervous so myself calm, Conseil resolute, was Land Ned
moment the but library; the into passed all We myself. contain to how
the heard I staircase, central the to on opening door the pushed I
I but stairs, the to on rushed Canadian The sharply. close panel upper
was water the that me told noise hissing well-known A him. stopped
some was Nautilus the minutes few a in and reservoirs, the into running
manoeuvre. the understood I waves. the of surface the beneath yards
the at strike to wish not did Nautilus The act. to late too was It
metallic the where water-line, the below but cuirass, impenetrable
it. protected longer no covering

drama dreadful the of witnesses unwilling imprisoned, again were We
in refuge taking reflect; to time scarcely had We preparing. was that
had stupor deep A speaking. without other each at looked we room, my
that in was I still. stand to seemed thought mind: my of hold taken
I waited, I report. dreadful a preceding expectation of state painful
the of speed The hearing! of that in merged was sense every listened,
ship whole The rush. to preparing was It accelerated. was Nautilus
comparatively but shock, the felt I screamed. I Suddenly trembled.
heard I spur. steel the of power penetrating the felt I light.
its by along carried Nautilus, the But scrapings. and rattlings
needle a like vessel the of mass the through passed power, propelling
sailcloth! through

room my from rushed I mind, my of out Mad, longer. no it stand could I
he implacable; gloomy, mute, there, was Nemo Captain saloon. the into
the on shadow a cast mass large A panel. port the through looking was
was Nautilus the agony, her of nothing lose might it that and, water;
open the saw I me from yards Ten her. with abyss the into down going
thunder, of noise the with rushing was water the which through shell,
covered was bridge The netting. the and guns of line double the then
shadows. agitated black, with

ratlines, the crowding were creatures poor The rising. was water The
human a was It water. the under struggling masts, the to clinging
my anguish, with stiffened Paralysed, sea. the by overtaken ant-heap
and breath, without panting, open, wide eyes with end, on standing hair
me glued attraction irresistible An watching! was too I voice, without
air compressed The place. took explosion an Suddenly glass! the to
the Then fire. caught had magazines the if as decks, her up blew
victims, with laden topmast, Her rapidly. more sank vessel unfortunate
and, men; of weight the under bending spars, her then appeared; now
disappeared, mass dark the Then mainmast. her of top the all, of last
eddy. strong the by down drawn crew, dead the it with and

archangel perfect a avenger, terrible That Nemo. Captain to turned I
his to turned he over, was all When looking. still was hatred, of
On eyes. my with him followed I entered. and door, the opened room,
still woman, a of portrait the saw I heroes, his beneath wall end the
some for them at looked Nemo Captain children. little two and young,
burst down, kneeling and, them, towards arms his stretched moments,
sobs. deep into



XXII CHAPTER

NEMO CAPTAIN OF WORDS LAST THE

not had light but vision, dreadful this on closed had panels The
the within darkness and silence was all saloon: the to returned
was it water, the beneath feet hundred a speed, wonderful At Nautilus.
or north the To going? it was Whither spot. desolate this leaving
I retaliation? dreadful such after to flying man the was Where south?
silent remained had Conseil and Ned where room, my to returned had
he Whatever Nemo. Captain for horror insurmountable an felt I enough.
thus. punish to right no had he men, these of hands the at suffered had
his of witness a least at accomplice, an not if me, made had He
the into passed I reappeared. light electric the eleven At vengeance.
The instruments. different the consulted I deserted. was It saloon.
hour, an miles twenty-five of rate the at northward flying was Nautilus
the taking On it. below feet thirty now and surface, the on now
the of mouth the passing were we that saw I chart, the by bearings
seas northern the towards us hurrying was course our that and Manche,
of leagues hundred two crossed had we night That speed. frightful a at
darkness with covered was sea the and fell, shadows The Atlantic. the
sleep. not could but room, my to went I moon. the of rising the until
of scene horrible The nightmare. dreadful with troubled was I
could who day, that From eyes. my before continually was destruction
take would Nautilus the basin Atlantic North the of part what into tell
these of midst the in Still speed. unaccountable with Still us?
Nova of shores the on or Spitzbergen, at touch it Would fogs. northern
Sea the Sea, White the seas, unknown those explore we Should Zembla?
unknown the and Liarrov, of Archipelago the Obi, of Gulf the Kara, of
time the of judge longer no could I say. not could I Asia? of coast
as seemed, It board. on stopped been had clocks The passing. was that
regular their followed longer no day and night that countries, polar in
the where region strange that into drawn being myself felt I course.
fabulous the Like will. at roamed Poe Edgar of imagination foundered
human veiled "that see to expected I moment every at Pym, Gordon
the of inhabitant any of those than proportions larger of figure,
the to approach the defends which cataract the across thrown earth,
estimated mistaken)--I be may I perhaps, (though, estimated I pole."
or fifteen lasted have to Nautilus the of course adventurous this
had lasted, have might it longer much how not know I And days. twenty
Captain Of voyage. this ended which catastrophe the for been not it
the of man a Not second. his of nor now, whatever nothing saw I Nemo
incessantly almost was Nautilus The instant. an for visible was crew
panels the air, the renew to surface the to came we When water. under
the on marks more no were There mechanically. shut and opened
his too, Canadian, the And were. we where not knew I planisphere.
not could Conseil more. no appeared end, an at patience and strength
madness, of fit dreadful a in that, fearing and, him; from word a draw
morning One devotion. constant with him watched himself, kill might he
sleep heavy a into fallen had I say) not could I was it date (what
I when unhealthy, and painful both sleep a hours, early the towards
voice, low a in saying, me, over leaning was Land Ned awoke. suddenly
up. sat I fly." to going are "We

asked. I go?" we shall "When

ceased. have to seems Nautilus the board on inspection All "To-night.
sir?" ready, be will You stupefied. be to appear All

we?" are where "Yes;

the in morning this reckoning the took I land. of sight "In
east." the to miles fog--twenty

it?" is country "What

there." refuge take will we is, it whatever but, know; not do "I

swallow should sea the if even to-night, fly will We yes. Ned, "Yes,
up." us

boat light that in miles twenty but violent, wind the bad, is sea "The
been have I crew, the to Unknown me. frighten not does Nautilus the of
water." of bottles some and food procure to able

you." follow will "I

defend will I surprised, am I "if Canadian, the continued "But,"
me." kill to them force will I myself;

Ned." friend together, die will "We

the reached I me. left Canadian The all. to mind my up made had I
the against myself support difficulty with could I which on platform,
those in was land as but, threatening; was sky The waves. the of shock
fearing saloon, the to returned I fly. must we shadows, brown thick
see to wishing not yet and wishing Nemo, Captain see to hoping yet and
involuntary the hide I Could him? to said have I could What him.
not should I that better was It No. me? inspired he which with horror
long How yet---- And him. forget to better face; to face him meet
I Nautilus. the in pass should I that last the day, that seemed
of fear for speaking, avoided Conseil and Land Ned alone. remained
forced I hungry; not was I but dined, I six At themselves. betraying
myself. weaken not might I that disgust, my of spite in eat to myself
see not shall "We saying, room, my to came Land Ned six half-past At
be not will moon the ten At departure. our before again other each
and Conseil boat; the to Come darkness. the by profit will We risen.
you." for wait will I

to Wishing answer. to time me giving without out went Canadian The
were We saloon. the to went I Nautilus, the of course the verify
I deep. yards fifty than more and speed, frightful at N.N.E. running
art of riches the on nature, of wonders these on look last a cast
to destined collection unrivalled the upon museum, this in up heaped
wished I it. formed had who him with sea, the of bottom the at perish
hour an remained I mind. my in it of impression indelible an fix to
in passing and ceiling, luminous that of light the in bathed thus,
to returned I Then glasses. their under shining treasures those review
room. my

placing notes, my collected I clothing. sea strong in myself dressed I
its check not could I loudly. beat heart My me. about carefully them
me betrayed have would agitation and trouble my Certainly pulsations.
listened I moment? this at doing he was What eyes. Nemo's Captain to
He there. was Nemo Captain steps. heard I room. his of door the at
appear, him see to expected I moment every At rest. to gone not had
My alert. the on constantly was I fly. to wished I why me ask and
so last at became impression The everything. magnified imagination
the to go to better be not would it if myself asked I that poignant
and look with him brave and face, to face him see room, Captain's
gesture.

desire, the resisted I fortunately madman; a of inspiration the was It
nerves My agitation. bodily my quiet to bed my on myself stretched and
my all again over saw I brain excited my in but calmer, somewhat were
or happy either incident, every Nautilus; the board on existence
Abraham the from disappearance my since happened had which unfortunate,
Papua, of savages the Straits, Torres the hunt, submarine Lincoln--the
Island the Suez, of passage the cemetery, coral the ashore, running the
the iceberg, the Atlantis, Bay, Vigo diver, Cretan the Santorin, of
poulps, the among fight the ice, the in imprisonment the Pole, South
of scene horrible the and Avenger, the Stream, Gulf the in storm the
my before passed events these All crew. her all with sunk vessel the
grow to seemed Nemo Captain Then drama. a in scenes like eyes
no was He proportions. superhuman assume to features his enormously,
sea. the of genie the waters, the of man a but equal, my longer

it keep to hands my between head my held I nine. half-past then was It
There longer. any think not would I eyes; my closed I bursting. from
which nightmare, a of half-hour another wait, to half-hour another was
mad. me drive might

harmony sad a organ, the of strains distant the heard I moment that At
these break to longing soul a of wail the chant, undefinable an to
breathing; scarcely sense, every with listened I bonds. earthly
drawing was which ecstasy, musical that in Nemo, Captain like plunged,
life. of end the to spirit in him

room. his left had Nemo Captain me. terrified thought sudden a Then
meet should I There fly. to cross must I which saloon, the in was He
A me. to speak perhaps me, see would He time. last the for him
board. on me chain word single a me, destroy might his of gesture

my leave to me for come had moment The strike. to about was ten But
companions. my join and room,

before rise should himself Nemo Captain if even hesitate, not must I
its on turned it as then, even and carefully; door my opened I me.
only it Perhaps noise. dreadful a make to me to seemed it hinges,
imagination. own my in existed

to step each at stopping Nautilus, the of stairs dark the along crept I
and saloon, the of door the reached I heart. my of beating the check
of strains The darkness. profound in plunged was It gently. it opened
me. see not did He there. was Nemo Captain faintly. sounded organ the
entirely so me, noticed have would he think not do I light full the In
ecstasy. the in absorbed he was

might which sound slightest the avoiding carpet, the along crept I
at door, the reaching minutes five least at was I presence. my betray
library. the into opening side, opposite the

the to me nailed Nemo Captain from sigh a when it, open to going was I
light the for him, see even could I rising. was he that knew I spot.
me towards came He saloon. the to through came library the from
than rather spectre a like gliding crossed, arms his with silently,
murmur him heard I and sobs; with swelling was breast His walking.
ear): my struck ever which last (the words these

enough!" enough! God! "Almighty

man's this from escaped thus which remorse of confession a it Was
conscience?

central the mounted library, the through rushed I desperation, In
crept I boat. the reached flight, upper the following and, staircase,
companions. two my admitted already had which opening, the through

exclaimed. I go!" us let go! us "Let

Canadian. the replied "Directly!"

and closed, first was Nautilus the of plates the in orifice The
provided had Land Ned which with key, false a of means by down fastened
began Canadian The closed. also was boat the in opening the himself;
boat. submarine the to us held still which bolts the loosen to

loudly. other each answering were Voices heard. was noise a Suddenly
Land Ned felt I flight? our discovered they Had matter? the was What
hand. my into dagger a slipping

die!" to how know "we murmured, I "Yes,"

times many word one But work. his in stopped had Canadian The
agitation the of cause the revealed word, dreadful a repeated,
looking were crew the we not was It Nautilus. the board on spreading
after!

more a in word dreadful more a Could maelstrom!" the maelstrom! "The
the upon then were We ears! our in sounded have situation dreadful
gulf this into drawn being Nautilus the Was Norway. of coast dangerous
at that knew We sides? its leave to going was boat our moment the at
Loffoden and Ferroe of islands the between waters pent-up the tide the
no which from whirlpool a forming violence, irresistible with rush
waves enormous horizon the of point every From escapes. ever vessel
Ocean," the of "Navel the called justly gulf a forming meeting, were
miles. twelve of distance a to extends attraction of power whose
white as well as sacrificed, are whales but vessels, only not There,
regions. northern the from bears

been had involuntarily, or voluntarily Nautilus, the that thither is It
Captain. the by run

by lessening was which of circumference the spiral, a describing was It
was side, its to fastened still was which boat, the and degrees,
which giddiness sickly that felt I speed. giddy with along carried
round. whirling long-continued from arises

had circulation height, its at was horror Our dread. in were We
covered were we and annihilated, was influence nervous all stopped,
our around noise what And agony! of sweat a like sweat, cold with
an What away! miles echo the by repeated roarings What bark! frail
bottom, the at rocks sharp the on broken waters the of that was uproar
all "with away, worn trees and crushed, are bodies hardest the where
phrase! Norwegian the to according off," rubbed fur the

Nautilus The frightfully. rocked We in! be to situation a What
cracked. muscles steel Its being. human a like itself defended
it! with we and upright, stand to seemed it Sometimes

still may We bolts. the after look "and Ned, said on," hold must "We
Nautilus." the to stick we if saved be

the noise, crashing a heard we when words, the finished not had He
a like hurled was groove, its from torn boat, the and way, gave bolts
whirlpool. the of midst the into sling a from stone

lost I shock violent the with and iron, of piece a on struck head My
consciousness. all



XXIII CHAPTER

CONCLUSION

that during passed What seas. the under voyage the ends Thus
Ned maelstrom--how the of eddies the from escaped boat the night--how
tell. cannot I gulf, the of out came ever myself and Conseil, Land,

hut, fisherman's a in lying was I consciousness, to returned I when But
me near were sound, and safe companions, two My Isles. Loffoden the on
heartily. other each embraced We hands. my holding

of means The France. to returning of think not could we moment that At
And rare. are south the and Norway of north the between communication
from monthly running steamboat the for wait to obliged therefore am I
North. Cape

revise I us, received kindly so have who people worthy the among And,
omitted, been has fact a Not more. once adventures these of record my
this of narrative faithful a is It exaggerated. detail a not
which to but man, to inaccessible element an in expedition incredible
road. a open day one will Progress

all. after little, matters it And know. not do I believed? be I Shall
under seas, these of speak to right a have I that is, affirm now I What
that in leagues 20,000 crossed have I months, ten than less in which,
wonders. many so revealed has which world, the of tour submarine

the of pressure the resist it Did Nautilus? the of become has what But
follow still he does And live? still Nemo Captain Does maelstrom?
after stop he did Or, retaliations? frightful those ocean the under
hecatomb? last the

the containing manuscript this him to carry day one waves the Will
the Will man? this of name the know ever I Shall life? his of history
Nemo? Captain of that nationality its by us tell vessel missing

the conquered has vessel powerful his that hope also I And so. hope I
where survived has Nautilus the that and gulf, terrible most its at sea
Nemo Captain so--if be it If lost! been have vessels other many so
appeased be hatred may country, adopted his ocean, the inhabits still
wonders many so of contemplation the May heart! savage that in
disappear, judge the May vengeance! of spirit the ever for extinguish
If sea! the of exploration peaceful the continue philosopher the and
it understood not I Have sublime. also is it strange, be destiny his
to And life? unnatural this of months ten lived not I Have myself?
"That ago, years thousand three Ecclesiastes by asked question the
men two out?" it find can who deep, exceeding and off far is which
answer---- an give to right the have living now all of alone

MYSELF. AND NEMO CAPTAIN